===== Internet Archive OCR: vedicreaderforst00macd_djvu.txt =====

This  book  belongs  to 
THE  CAMPBELL  COLLECTION 

purchased  with  the  aid  of 
The  MacDonald-Stewart  Foundation 

and 
The  Canada  Council 


.g-HTBlACKWELLl^ 
®-  "•      HooUsellers  , 

50  and  >>'  ""'.„ 


OvM"-!'*'  ■■ 


s^^ 


f^  of  Med/a^- 


LIBRARY  ' 


x^'l^ 


Of^onto,  on' 


COLLECTION 


A  VEDIC  READER 


BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR 
UNIFORM    WITH   THE   PRESENT  WORK 

A    VEDIC    GRAMMAR 
FOR    STUDENTS 

Including  a  chapter  on  Syntax  and  three 
Appendices  :   List  of  Verbs, 
Metre,  Accent 


Ji 


A  YEDIC   READER 


FOR   STUDENTS 


BY 


ARTHUR  ANTHONY  MACDONELL 

M.A.,  Ph.D. 

BODEN    PROFESSOR    OF   SANSKRIT 

FELLOW    OF    BALLIOL   COLLEGE;     FELLOW    OF   THE    BRITISH    ACADEMY 

FELLOW    OF   THE    ROYAL   DANISH    ACADE31Y 


CONTAINING   THIRTY   HYMNS   OF  THE    RIGVEDA   IN 

THE   ORIGINAL   SAMHITA   AND    PADA    TEXTS,    WITH 

TRANSLITERATION,     TRANSLATION,      EXPLANATORY 

NOTES,   INTRODUCTION,  VOCABULARY 


OXFORD 

AT   THE  CLARENDON    PRESS 

1917 


OXFORD   UNIVERSITY   PRESS 

TORONTO     MELBOURNE     CAPE   TOWN      BOMBAY 

HUMPHREY   MILFOKD 

PUBHSHEK  TO  THE  OKIVKKSITT 


PREFACE 

This  Header  is  meant  to  be  a  companion  volume  to  my  Vedic 
Grammar  for  Students.  It  contains  thirty  hymns  comprising  just 
under  300  stanzas.  These  hymns  have  been  taken  exclusively  from 
the  Rigveda,  not  only  because  that  Yeda  represents  the  earliest  and 
most  important  phase  of  the  sacred  language  and  literature  of  India, 
but  because  the  addition  of  specimens  from  the  later  Vedic  literature 
with  their  divergences  in  speech  and  thought  would  tend  to  confuse 
the  learner  beginning  the  study  of  the  oldest  period.  All  the  books 
of  the  Rigveda  have  been  drawn  upon  except  the  ninth.  The  reason 
of  this  exception  is  that,  though  the  whole  of  the  ninth  book 
practically  consists  of  hymns  addressed  to  Soma  only,  the  hymn 
which  in  my  opinion  represents  that  deity  best  occurs  in  another 
(the  eighth)  book.  All  the  most  important  metres  are  represented, 
though  no  specimens  of  the  rare  and  complex  strophic  measures 
could  be  given  because  none  of  the  hymns  composed  in  them  seemed 
to  be  suitable  for  the  Header.  I  have  also  considered  literary  merit 
as  far  as  possible  in  making  the  selection.  As  regards  subject-matter, 
each  of  the  more  important  deities  is  represented  by  one  hymn,  Agni 
alone  by  two.  There  are  besides  a  few  hymns  of  a  different  type. 
One  is  concerned  with  social  life  (x.  34),  one  with  magical  ideas 
(vii.  103),  two  with  cosmogony  (x.  90.  129),  and  three  with  eschatology 
(x.  14.  15.  135).  The  selection  thus  forms  a  brief  epitome  of  the 
Rigveda,  the  earliest  monument  of  Indian  thought.  The  arrange- 
ment of  the  hymns  follows  their  order  in  the  text  of  the  Rigveda  as 
shown,  together  with  their  respective  deities  and    subjects,  in   the 


vi  PREFACE 

table  of  contents  (p.  ix).  As  the  latter  list  is  so  short,  the  name  of 
the  deity  addressed  in  any  selected  hymn  can  be  found  at  once,  but 
it  also  appears  in  its  alphabetical  order  in  the  General  Index. 

Unlike  all  Sanskrit  and  Vedic  chrestomathies  known  to  me,  the 
present  work  is  intended  primarily  for  students  who,  while  acquainted 
with  Classical  Sanskrit,  are  beginners  of  Vedic  lacking  the  aid  of  a 
teacher  with  an  adequate  knowledge  of  the  earliest  period  of  the 
language  and  literature  of  India.  It  will  moreover,  I  think,  be  found 
to  contain  much  detailed  information  useful  even  to  more  advanced 
students.  Hence  difficult  and  obscure  stanzas  have  never  been 
omitted  from  any  of  the  selected  hymns,  because  the  notes  here 
afford  an  opportunity  of  illustrating  the  methods  of  critical  interpre- 
tation (see,  for  instance,  pages  36,  47,  139-40,  152,  166,  175). 

In  conjunction  with  my  Vedic  Grammar  for  Students,  the  Reader 
aims  at  supplying  all  that  is  required  for  the  complete  understanding 
of  the  selections  without  reference  to  any  other  book.  Each  hymn 
is  preceded  by  a  special  introduction  describing  briefly  the  deity 
or  the  subject  with  which  it  deals.  The  text  of  every  stanza  is 
printed  in  three  different  forms.  The  first  is  the  Samhita  text,  in 
Devajiagarl  characters,  exactly  as  handed  down  by  tradition,  without 
change  or  emendation.  But  each  Pada  or  metrical  line  is  printed 
separately  so  as  to  exhibit  to  the  eye  the  versification  of  the  stanza. 
Then  comes  on  the  right  half  of  the  page  the  traditional  Pada  text  in 
which  each  word  of  the  Samhita  text  is  given  separately  without 
Sandhi,  and  in  which  compounds  and  certain  derivatives  and  case- 
forms  are  analysed.  This  is  an  important  addition  because  the  Pada 
text,  as  nearly  contemporary  in  origin  with  the  Samhita  text,  fur- 
nishes us  with  the  earliest  interpretations,  within  the  sphere  of 
phonetics  and  word-formation,  of  the  Rigveda.  Next  follows  the 
transliterated  Sainhitfi  text,  in  which  by  the  removal  of  vowel- 
contractions,  the  resolution  of  semivowels,  and  the  replacement  of 
a,  the  original  metre  of  the  Rigveda  is  restored  and,  by  the  use  I 
of  punctuation,  the  sense  is  made  clearer.  The  translation,  which 
follows,  is  close,  accounting  for  every  word  of  the  original,  and  is 


PREFACE  vii 

based  on  the  critical  method  of  interpretation.  The  notes  furnish 
minute  explanations  of  all  matters  concerned  with  grammar,  metre, 
accent,  syntax,  and  exegesis.  The  general  introduction  gives  a 
concise  account  of  the  form  and  matter  of  the  Rigveda,  describing  in 
outline  its  arrangement,  its  language  and  metre,  its  religion  and 
mythology,  besides  the  critical  method  here  applied  to  the  inter- 
pretation of  its  hymns.  The  vocabulary  supplements  the  translation 
and  notes  by  giving  the  derivation  of  every  word  and  adding  in 
brackets  the  most  obvious  cognates  from  the  other  Indo-European 
languages  allied  to  Sanskrit,  especially  Avestic,  Greek,  Latin,  and 
English.  I  have  added  a  copious  general  Index  for  the  purpose 
of  enabling  the  student  to  utilize  to  the  full  the  summary  of  Vedic 
philology  which  this  book  contains.  Any  one  who  has  worked  his 
way  carefully  through  the  pages  of  the  Reader  ought  thus  to  have  laid 
a  solid  foundation  in  Vedic  scholarship,  and  to  be  prepared  for 
further  studies  on  independent  lines. 

Freedom  from  serious  misprints  is  a  matter  of  great  importance  in 
a  book  like  this.  Such  freedom  has,  I  trust,  been  achieved  by  the  aid 
of  my  two  friends.  Dr.  James  Morison,  Librarian  of  the  Indian 
Institute,  and  my  former  pupil,  Dr.  A.  .Berriedale  Keith,  Regius 
Professor  of  Sanskrit  and  Comparative  Philology  in  the  University 
of  Edinburgh.  In  the  course  of  this  obliging  task  Prof.  Keith  has 
supplied  me  with  a  number  of  suggestions,  the  adoption  of  which 
has  undoubtedly  improved  the  notes  in  many  points  of  detail. 

Balliol  College,  Oxford. 
Ocloher,  1917. 


CONTENTS 


Preface 

• 

Introduction    . 

* 

Vedic  Hymns    . 

Agni     . 

i.  1 

Savitr  . 

i.  35 

Marutas 

.     i.  85 

Visnu    . 

i.  154 

Dyavaprthivi 

i.  160 

Indra    . 

ii.  12 

Rudra   . 

.     ii.  33 

Apam  napat. 

.     ii.  35 

Mitra   . 

.    iii.  59 

Brhaspati     . 

.     iv.  50 

Usas 

iv.  51 

Agni     . 

V.  11 

Parjanya 

.     V.  83 

Pusan  . 

.     vi.  54 

Apas     . 

vii.  49 

Mitra- Varuna 

,     vii.  61 

Sarya   . 

vii.  63 

Asvina 

vii.  71 

Varuna 

vii.  86 

Mandukas     . 

vii.  103 

Visve  devas  . 

viii.  29 

Soma    . 

viii.  48 

Funeral  Hymn     . 

X.  14 

Pitaras 

X.  15 

PAGES 
v 

xi-xxxi 

1-219 

1-10 

10-21 

21-30 

30-6 

36-41 

41-56 

56-67 

67-78 

78-83 

83-92 

92-9 

100-4 

104-11 

111-15 

115-18 

118-24 

124-28 

128-34 

134-41 

141-7 

147-52 

152-64 

164-75 

176-86 


CONTENTS 

PAGES 

Gambler       .        .     x.  34 186-95 

Purusa          .         .     X.  90 195-203 

Ratri     ...     x.  127 203-7 

Hymn  of  Creation     x.  129 207-11 

Yama   ...     x.  135 212-16 

Vata     ...     x.  168 216-19 

Vocabulary 221-56 

General  Index 257-68 


INTRODUCTION 

1.     Age  of  the  Rigveda. 

The  Rigveda  is  undoubtedly  the  oldest  literary  monument  of  the 
Indo-European  languages.  But  the  exact  period  when  the  hymns 
were  composed  is  a  matter  of  conjecture.  All  that  we  can  say  with 
any  approach  to  certainty  is  that  the  oldest  of  them  cannot  date  from 
later  than  the  thirteenth  century  b.  c.  This  assertion  is  based  on 
the  following  grounds.  Buddhism,  which  began  to  spread  in  India 
about  500  B.C.,  presupposes  the  existence  not  only  of  the  Vedas,  but 
also  of  the  intervening  literature  of  the  Brahmanas  and  Upanishads. 
The  development  of  language  and  religious  thought  apparent  in  the 
extensive  literature  of  the  successive  phases  of  these  two  Vedic 
periods  renders  it  necessary  to  postulate  the  lapse  of  seven  or  eight 
centuries  to  account  for  the  gradual  changes,  linguistic,  religious, 
social,  and  political,  that  this  literature  displays.  On  astronomical 
grounds,  one  Sanskrit  scholar  has  (cf.  p.  146)  concluded  that  the 
•  oldest  Vedic  hymns  date  from  3000  b.  c,  while  another  puts  them  as 
far  back  as  6000  b.  c.  These  calculations  are  based  on  the  assumption 
that  the  early  Indians  possessed  an  exact  astronomical  knowledge  of 
the  sun's  course  such  as  there  is  no  evidence,  or  even  probability, 
that  they  actually  possessed.  On  the  other  hand,  the  possibility  of 
such  extreme  antiquity  seems  to  be  disproved  by  the  relationship 
of  the  hymns  of  the  Rigveda  to  the  oldest  part  of  the  Avesta, 
which  can  hardly  date  earlier  than  from  about  800  b.  c.  That 
relationship  is  so  close  that  the  language  of  the  Avesta,  if  it  were 
known  at  a  stage  some  five  centuries  earlier,  could  scarcely  have 
differed  at  all  from  that  of  the  Rigveda.  Hence  the  Indians  could 
not  have  separated  from  the  Iranians  much  sooner  than  1300  b.  c. 
But,  according  to  Prof.  Jacobi,  the  separation  took  place  before 
4500  B.C.     In  that  case  we  must  assume  that  the  Iranian  and  the 


xii  AGE  OF  THE  RIGVEDA 

Indian  languages  remained  practically  unchanged  for  the  truly 
immense  period  of  over  3000  years.  We  must  thus  rest  content 
with  the  moderate  estimate  of  the  thirteenth  century  b.c.  as  the 
approximate  date  for  the  beginning  of  the  Rigvedic  period.  This 
estimate  has  not  been  invalidated  by  the  discovery  in  1907  of  the 
names  of  the  Indian  deities  Mitra,  Varuna,  Indra,  Nasatya,  in  an 
inscription  of  about  1400  b.  c.  found  in  Asia  Minor.  For  the  phonetic 
form  in  which  these  names  there  appear  may  quite  well  belong  to 
the  Indo-Iranian  period  when  the  Indians  and  the  Persians  were 
still  one  people.  The  date  of  the  inscription  leaves  two  centuries  for 
the  separation  of  the  Indians,  their  migration  to  India,  and  the 
commencement  of  the  Vedic  hymn  literature  in  the  north-west  of 
Hindustan. 

2.     Origin  and  Growth  of  the  Collection. 

When  the  Indo-Aryans  entered  India,  they  brought  with  them 
a  religion  in  which  the  gods  were  chiefly  personified  powers  of 
Nature,  a  few  of  them,  such  as  Dyaus,  going  back  to  the  Indo- 
European,  others,  such  as  Mitra,  Varuna,  Indra,  to  the  Indo-Iranian 
period.  They  also  brought  with  them  the  cult  of  fire  and  of  Soma, 
besides  a  knowledge  of  the  art  of  composing  religious  poems  in 
several  metres,  as  a  comparison  of  the  Rigveda  and  the  Avesta  shows. 
The  purpose  of  these  ancient  hymns  was  to  propitiate  the  gods  by 
praises  accompanying  the  offering  of  melted  butter  poured  on  the 
fire  and  of  the  juice  of  the  Soma  plant  placed  on  the  sacrificial  grass. 
The  hymns  which  have  survived  in  the  Rigveda  from  the  early  period 
of  the  Indo- Aryan  invasion  were  almost  exclusively  composed  by 
a  hereditary  priesthood.  They  were  handed  down  in  different  families 
by  memory,  not  by  writing,  which  could  hardly  have  been  intro- 
duced into  India  before  about  700  b.  c.  These  family  groups  of  hymns 
were  gradually  brought  together  till,  with  successive  additions,  they 
assumed  the  earliest  collected  form  of  the  Rigveda.  Then  followed 
the  constitution  of  the  Samhita  text,  which  appears  to  have  taken 
place  about  600  b.c,  at  the  end  of  the  period  of  the  Brahmanas, 
but  before  the  Upanishads,  which  form  appendages  to  those  works, 
came  into  existence.     The  creators  of  the  Samhita  did  not  in  any 


INTRODUCTION  xiii 

way  alter  the  diction  of  the  hymns  here  collected  together,  but  only 
applied  to  the  text  certain  rules  of  Sandhi  which  prevailed  in  their 
time,  and  by  which,  in  particular,  vowels  are  either  contracted  or 
changed  into  semi-vowels,  and  a  is  often  dropped  after  e  and  o, 
in  such  a  way  as  constantly  to  obscure  the  metre.  Soon  after  this 
work  was  concluded,  extraordinary  precautions  were  taken  to  preserve 
from  loss  or  corruption  the  sacred  text  thus  fixed.  The  earliest 
expedient  of  this  kind  was  the  formation  of  the  Pada  or  '  word ' 
text,  in  which  all  the  words  of  the  Samhita  text  are  separated  and 
given  in  their  original  form  as  unaffected  by  the  rules  of  Sandhi, 
and  in  which  most  compounds  and  some  derivatives  and  inflected 
forms  are  analysed.  This  text,  which  is  virtually  the  earliest  com- 
mentary on  the  Rigveda,  was  followed  by  other  and  more  complicated 
methods  of  reciting  the  text,  and  by  various  works  called  Anukram- 
anis  or  '  Indexes ',  which  enumerate  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end  of  the  Rigveda  the  number  of  stanzas  contained  in  each  hymn, 
the  deities,  and  the  metres  of  all  the  stanzas  of  the  Rigveda.  Thanks 
to  these  various  precautions  the  text  of  the  Rigveda  has  been  handed 
down  for  2,500  years  with  a  fidelity  that  finds  no  parallel  in  any 
other  literature. 

3.     Extent  and  Divisions  of  the  Rigveda. 

The  Rigveda  consists  of  1,017  or,  counting  eleven  others  of  the 
eighth  Book  which  are  recognized  as  later  additions,  1,028  hymns. 
These  contain  a  total  of  about  10,600  stanzas,  which  give  an  average 
of  ten  stanzas  to  each  hymn.  The  shortest  hymn  has  only  one 
stanza,  while  the  longest  has  fifty-eight.  If  printed  continuously  like 
prose  in  Roman  characters,  the  Samhita  text  would  fill  an  octavo 
volume  of  about  600  pages  of  thirty -three  lines  each.  It  has  been 
calculated  that  in  bulk  the  RV.  is  equivalent  to  the  extant  poems 
of  Homer. 

There  is  a  twofold  division  of  the  RV.  into  parts.  One,  which  is 
purely  mechanical,  is  into  Astakas  or  ^  eighths  '  of  about  equal  length, 
each  of  which  is  subdivided  into  eight  Adhyayas  or  '  lessons ',  while 
each  of  the  latter  consists  of  Vargas  or  '  groups '  of  five  or  six  stanzas. 
The  other  division  is  into  ten  Mandalas  or  *  books '  (lit.  ^  cycles ') 


xiv  EXTENT  AND  DIVISIONS  OF  THE  KIGVEDA 

and  Suktas  or  ^  hymns '.  The  latter  method  is  an  historical  one, 
indicating  the  manner  in  which  the  collection  came  into  being. 
This  system  is  now  invariably  followed  by  Western  Scholars  in 
referring  to  or  quoting  from  the  Eigveda. 

4.     Arrangement  of  the  Eigveda. 

Six  of  the  ten  books,  ii  to  vii,  are  homogeneous  in  character.  The 
hymns  contained  in  each  of  them  were,  according  to  native 
Indian  tradition,  composed  or  ^  seen '  by  poets  of  the  same  family, 
which  handed  them  down  as  its  own  collection.  The  tradition  is 
borne  out  by  the  internal  evidence  of  the  seers'  names  mentioned  in 
the  hymns,  and  by  that  of  the  refrains  occurring  in  each  of  these 
books.  The  method  of  arrangement  followed  in  the  '  family  books  ' 
is  uniform,  for  each  of  them  is  similarly  divided  into  groups  addressed 
to  different  gods.  On  the  other  hand,  Books  i,  viii,  and  x  were  not 
composed  each  by  a  distinct  family  of  seers,  while  the  groups  of 
which  they  consist  are  constituted  by  being  the  hymns  composed 
by  different  individual  seers.  Book  ix  is  distinguished  from  the 
rest  by  all  its  hymns  being  addressed  to  one  and  the  same  deity. 
Soma,  and  by  its  groups  being  based  not  on  identity  of  authorship, 
but  of  metre. 

Family  hooks. — In  these  the  first  group  of  hymns  is  invariably 
addressed  to  Agni,  the  second  to  Indra,  and  those  that  follow  to  gods 
of  less  importance.  The  hymns  within  these  deity  groups  are 
arranged  according  to  the  diminishing  number  of  stanzas  contained 
in  them.  Thus  in  the  second  Book  the  Agni  group  of  ten  hymns 
begins  with  one  of  sixteen  stanzas  and  ends  with  one  of  only  six. 
The  first  hymn  of  the  next  group  in  the  same  book  has  twenty-one, 
the  last  only  four  stanzas.  The  entire  group  of  the  family  books  is, 
moreover,  arranged  according  to  the  increasing  number  of  the  hymns 
in  each  of  those  books,  if  allowance  is  made  for  later  additions.  Thus 
the  second  Book  has  forty-three,  the  third  sixty-two,  the  sixth  seventy- 
five,  and  the  seventh  one  hundred  and  four  hymns.  The  homo- 
geneity of  the  family  books  renders  it  highly  probable  that  they 
formed  the  nucleus  of  the  EV.,  which  gradually  assumed  its  final 
shape  by  successive  additions  to  these  books. 


INTRODUCTION  xv 

The  earliest  of  these  additions  appears  to  be  the  second  half  of 
Book  i,  which,  consisting  of  nine  groups,  each  by  a  different  author, 
was  prefixed  to  the  family  books,  the  internal  arrangement  of  which 
it  follows.  The  eighth  is  like  the  family  books  as  being  in  the  main 
composed  by  members  of  one  family,  the  Kanvas  ;  but  it  differs  from 
them  in  not  beginning  with  hymns  to  Agni  and  in  the  prevalence  of 
the  strophic  metre  called  Pragatha.  The  fact  of  its  containing  fewer 
hymns  than  the  seventh  book  shows  that  it  did  not  form  a  unit 
of  the  family  books ;  but  its  partial  resemblance  to  them  caused  it 
to  be  the  first  addition  at  the  end  of  that  collection.  The  first  part 
of  Book  i  (1-50)  is  in  several  respects  like  Book  viii :  Kanvas  seem  to 
have  been  the  authors  of  the  majority  of  these  hymns  ;  their  favourite 
strophic  metre  is  again  found  here  ;  and  both  collections  contain 
many  similar  or  identical  passages.  There  must  have  been  some 
difference  between  the  two  groups,  but  the  reason  why  they  should 
have  been  separated  by  being  added  at  the  beginning  and  the  end  of 
an  older  collection  has  not  yet  been  shown. 

The  ninth  hook  was  added  as  a  consequence  of  the  first  eight  being 
formed  into  a  unit.  It  consists  entirely  of  hymns  addressed  to  Soma 
while  the  juice  was  '  clarifying '  (pavamana) ;  on  the  otlier  hand,  the 
family  books  contain  not  a  single  Soma  hymn,  and  Books  i  and  viii 
together  only  three  hymns  invoking  Soma  in  his  general  character. 
Now  the  hymns  of  Book  ix  were  composed  by  authors  of  the  same 
families  as  those  of  Books  ii  to  vii,  as  is  shown,  for  instance,  by  the 
appearance  here  of  refrains  peculiar  to  those  families.  Hence  it  is  to 
be  assumed  that  all  the  hymns  to  Soma  Pavamana  were  removed 
from  Books  i  to  viii,  in  order  to  form  a  single  collection  belonging  to 
the  sphere  of  the  Udgatr  or  chanting  priest,  and  added  after  Books 
i-viii,  which  were  the  sphere  of  the  Hotr  or  reciting  priest.  The 
diction  and  recondite  allusions  in  the  hymns  of  this  book  suggest 
that  they  are  later  than  those  of  the  preceding  books ;  but  some  of 
them  may  be  early,  as  accompanying  the  Soma  ritual  which  goes 
back  to  the  Indo-Iranian  period.  The  hymns  of  the  first  part  of  this 
book  (1-60)  are  arranged  according  to  the  decreasing  num))er  of  their 
stanzas,  beginning  with  ten  and  ending  with  four.  In  the  second 
part  (61-114),  which  contains  some  very  long  hymns  (one  of  forty-eight 
and  another  of  fifty-eight  stanzas),  this  arrangement  is  not  followed. 


xvi  ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  RIGVEDA 

The  two  parts  also  differ  in'metre :  the  hymns  of  the  first  are,  excepting 
four  stanzas,  composed  in  Gayatrl,  while  the  second  consists  mainly 
of  groups  in  other  metres ;  thus  68-84  form  a  Jagati  and  87-97 
a  Tristubh  group. 

The  tenth  book  was  the  final  addition.  Its  language  and  subject- 
matter  show  that  it  is  later  in  origin  than  the  other  books ;  its 
authors  were,  moreover,  clearly  familiar  with  them.  Both  its 
position  at  the  end  of  the  RV.  and  the  fact  that  the  number  of 
its  hymns  (191)  is  made  up  to  that  of  the  first  book  indicate  its 
supplementary  character.  Its  hymns  were  composed  by  a  large 
number  of  seers  of  different  families,  some  of  which  appear  in  other 
books ;  but  the  traditional  attribution  of  authorship  is  of  little  or 
no  value  in  the  case  of  a  great  many  hymns.  In  spite  of  its  generally 
more  modern  character,  it  contains  some  hymns  quite  as  old  and 
poetic  as  the  average  of  those  in  other  books.  These  perhaps  found 
a  place  here  because  for  some  reason  they  had  been  overlooked  while 
the  other  collections  were  being  formed.  As  regards  language,  we 
find  in  the  tenth  book  earlier  grammatical  forms  and  words  growing 
obsolete,  while  new  words  and  meanings  begin  to  emerge.  As  to 
matter,  a  tendency  to  abstract  ideas  and  philosophical  speculation, 
as  well  as  the  introduction  of  magical  conceptions,  such  as  belong  to 
the  sphere  of  the  Atharvaveda,  is  here  found  to  prevail. 

5.    Language. 

The  hymns  of  the  RV.  are  composed  in  the  earliest  stage  of  that 
literary  language  of  which  the  latest,  or  Classical  Sanskrit,  was 
stereotyped  by  the  grammar  of  Panini  at  the  end  of  the  fourth 
century  B.C.  It  differs  from  the  latter  about  as  much  as  Homeric 
from  Attic  Greek.  It  exhibits  a  much  greater  variety  of  forms  than 
Sanskrit  does.  Its  case-forms  both  in  nominal  and  pronominal  in- 
flexion are  more  numerous.  It  has  more  participles  and  gerunds,  ij 
It  is,  however,  in  verbal  forms  that  its  comparative  richness  is  most  j 
apparent.  Thus  the  RV.  very  frequently  uses  the  subjunctive,  which 
as  such  has  entirely  died  out  in  Sanskrit ;  it  has  twelve  forms  of  the 
infinitive,  while  only  a  single  one  of  these  has  survived  in  Sanskrit. 
The  language  of  the  RV.  also  differs  from  Sanskrit  in  its  accent,  which, 


INTRODUCTION  xvii 

like  that  of  ancient  Greek,  is  of  a  musical  nature,  depending  on  the 
pitch  of  the  voice,  and  is  marked  throughout  the  hymns.  This 
accent  has  in  Sanskrit  been  changed  not  only  to  a  stress  accent,  but 
has  shifted  its  position  as  depending  on  quantity,  and  is  no  longer 
marked.  The  Vedic  accent  occupies  a  very  important  position  in 
Comparative  Philology,  while  the  Sanskrit  accent,  being  secondary, 
has  no  value  of  this  kind. 

The  Sandhi  of  the  RV.  represents  an  earlier  and  a  less  conventional 
stage  than  that  of  Sanskrit.  Thus  the  insertion  of  a  sibilant  between 
final  n  and  a  hard  palatal  or  dental  is  in  the  RV.  restricted  to  cases 
where  it  is  historically  justified  ;  in  Sanskrit  it  has  become  universal, 
being  extended  to  cases  where  it  has  no  justification.  After  e  and  o 
in  the  RV.  a  is  nearly  always  pronounced,  while  in  Sanskrit  it  is 
invariably  dropped.  It  may  thus  be  affirmed  with  certainty  that  no 
student  can  understand  Sanskrit  historically  without  knowing  the 
language  of  the  RV. 

6.    Metre. 

The  hymns  of  the  RV.  are  without  exception  metrical.  They 
contain  on  the  average  ten  stanzas,  generally  of  four  verses  or  lines, 
but  also  of  three  and  sometimes  five.  The  line,  which  is  called  Pada 
('quarter')  and  forms  the  metrical  unit,  usually  consists  of  eight, 
eleven,  or  twelve  syllables.  A  stanza  is,  as  a  rule,  made  up  of  lines 
of  the  same  type  ;  but  some  of  the  rarer  kinds  of  stanza  are  formed 
by  combining  lines  of  difi'erent  length.  There  are  about  fifteen 
metres,  but  only  about  seven  of  these  are  at  all  common.  By  far  the 
most  common  are  the  Tristubh  (4x11  syllables),  the  GayatrT  (3  x  8), 
and  the  Jagati  (4x12),  which  together  furnish  two-thirds  of  the 
total  number  of  stanzas  in  the  RV.  The  Vedic  metres,  which  are 
the  foundation  of  the  Classical  Sanskrit  metres  except  two,  have  a 
quantitative  rhythm  in  which  short  and  long  syllables  alternate  and 
which  is  of  a  generally  iambic  type.  It  is  only  the  rhythm  of  the  last 
four  or  five  syllables  (called  the  cadence)  of  the  line  that  is  rigidly 
determined,  and  the  lines  of  eleven  and  twelve  syllables  have  a 
caesura  as  well.  In  their  structure  the  Vedic  metres  thus  come  half 
way  between  the  metres  of  the  Tndo-Iranian  period,  in  which,  as  the 
Avesta  shows,  the  principle  is  the   number  of  syllables  only,  and 

1902  h 


xviii  METKE 

those  of  Classical  Sanskrit,  in  which  (except  the  sloka)  the  quantity 
of  every  single  syllable  in  the  line  is  fixed.  Usually  a  hymn  of  the 
Rigveda  consists  of  stanzas  in  the  same  metre  throughout ;  a  typical 
divergence  from  this  rule  is  to  mark  the  conclusion  of  a  hymn  with 
a  stanza  in  a  different  metre.  Some  hymns  are  strophic  in  their 
construction.  The  strophes  in  them  consist  either  of  three  stanzas 
(called  trca)  in  the  same  simple  metre,  generally  Gayatrl,  or  of  two 
stanzas  in  different  mixed  metres.  The  latter  type  of  strophe  is 
called  Pragatha  and  is  found  chiefly  in  the  eighth  book. 

7.     Religion  of  the  Rigveda. 

This  is  concerned  with  the  worship  of  gods  that  are  largely 
personifications  of  the  powers  of  nature.  The  hymns  are  mainly 
invocations  of  these  gods,  and  are  meant  to  accompany  the  oblation 
of  Soma  juice  and  the  fire  sacrifice  of  melted  butter.  It  is  thus 
essentially  a  polytheistic  religion,  which  assumes  a  pantheistic 
colouring  only  in  a  few  of  its  latest  hymns.  The  gods  are  usually 
stated  in  the  RV.  to  be  thirty-three  in  number,  being  divided  into 
three  groups  of  eleven  distributed  in  earth,  air,  and  heaven,  the  three 
divisions  of  the  Universe.  Troops  of  deities,  such  as  the  Maruts,  are 
of  course  not  included  in  this  number.  The  gods  were  believed  to 
have  had  a  beginning.  But  they  were  not  thought  to  have  all  come 
into  being  at  the  same  time  ;  for  the  RV.  occasionally  refers  to  earlier 
gods,  and  certain  deities  are  described  as  the  offspring  of  others. 
That  they  were  considered  to  have  been  originally  mortal  is  implied 
in  the  statement  that  they  acquired  immortality  by  drinking  Soma 
or  by  receiving  it  as  a  gift  from  Agni  and  Savitr. 

The  gods  were  conceived  as  human  in  appearance.  Their  bodily 
parts,  which  are  frequently  mentioned,  are  in  many  instances  simply 
figurative  illustrations  of  the  phenomena  of  nature  represented  by 
them.  Thus  the  arms  of  the  Sun  are  nothing  more  than  his  rays  ; 
and  the  tongue  and  limbs  of  Agni  merely  denote  his  flames.  Some 
of  the  gods  appear  equipped  as  warriors,  especially  Indra,  others  are 
described  as  priests,  especially  Agni  and  Brhaspati.  All  of  them 
drive  through  the  air  in  cars,  drawn  chiefly  by  steeds,  but  sometimes 
by  other  animals.    The  favourite  food  of  men  is  also  that  of  the  gods, 


INTRODUCTION  xix 

consisting  in  milk,  butter,  grain,  and  the  flesh  of  sheep,  goats,  and 
cattle.  It  is  offered  to  them  in  the  sacrifice,  which  is  either  conveyed 
to  them  in  heaven  by  the  god  of  fire,  or  which  they  come  in  their 
cars  to  partake  of  on  the  strew  of  grass  prepared  for  their  reception. 
Their  favourite  drink  is  the  exhilarating  juice  of  the  Soma  plant. 
The  home  of  the  gods  is  heaven,  the  third  heaven,  or  the  highest 
step  of  Visnu,  where  cheered  by  draughts  of  Soma  they  live  a  life 
of  bliss. 

Attributes  of  the  gods. — Among  these  the  most  prominent  is  power, 
for  they  are  constantly  described  as  great  and  mighty.  They  regulate 
the  order  of  nature  and  vanquish  the  potent  powers  of  evil.  They 
hold  sway  over  all  creatures  ;  no  one  can  thwart  their  ordinances 
or  live  beyond  the  time  they  appoint ;  and  the  fulfilment  of  desires  is 
dependent  on  them.  They  are  benevolent  beings  who  bestow  pros- 
perity on  mankind  ;  the  only  one  in  whom  injurious  traits  appear 
being  Rudra.  They  are  described  as  '  true '  and  '  not  deceitful ', 
being  friends  and  protectors  of  the  honest  and  righteous,  but  punishing 
sin  and  guilt.  Since  in  most  cases  the  gods  of  the  RV.  have  not 
yet  become  dissociated  from  the  physical  phenomena  which  they 
represent,  their  figures  are  indefinite  in  outline  and  deficient  in 
individuality.  Having  many  features,  such  as  power,  brilliance, 
benevolence,  and  wisdom  in  common  with  others,  each  god  exhibits 
but  very  few  distinctive  attributes.  This  vagueness  is  further  in- 
creased by  the  practice  of  invoking  deities  in  pairs — a  practice  making 
both  gods  share  characteristics  properly  belonging  to  one  alone. 
When  nearly  every  power  can  thus  be  ascribed  to  every  god,  the 
identification  of  one  deity  with  another  becomes  easy.  There  are  in 
fact  several  such  identifications  in  the  RV.  The  idea  is  even  found 
in  more  than  one  late  passage  that  various  deities  are  but  different 
forms  of  a  single  divine  being.  This  idea,  however,  never  developed 
into  monotheism,  for  none  of  the  regular  sacrifices  in  the  Vedic 
period  were  offered  to  a  single  god.  Finally,  in  other  late  hymns  of 
the  RV.  we  find  the  deities  Aditi  and  Prajapati  identified  not  only 
with  all  the  gods,  but  with  nature  as  well.  This  brings  us  to  that 
pantheism  which  became  characteristic  of  later  Indian  thought  in 
the  form  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy. 

The  Vedic  gods  may  most  conveniently  be  classified  as  deities  of 

b  2 


XX  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THE  GODS 

heaven,  air,  and  earth,  according  to  the  threefold  division  suggested 
by  the  RV.  itself.  The  celestial  gods  are  Dyaus,  Varuna,  Mitra, 
Surya,  Savitr,  Pusan,  the  Asvins,  and  the  goddesses  Usas,  Dawn, 
and  RatrT,  Night.  The  atmospheric  gods  are  Indra,  Apam  napat, 
Rudra,  the  Maruts,  Vayu,  Parjanya,  and  Apas,  the  Waters.  The 
terrestrial  deities  are  PrthivT,  Agni,  and  Soma.  This  Header  con- 
tains hymns  addressed  to  all  these  gods,  with  detailed  introductions 
describing  their  characters  in  the  words,  as  far  as  is  possible,  of  the 
RV.  itself.  A  few  quite  subordinate  deities  are  not  included,  partly 
because  no  entire  hymn  is  addressed  to  them.  Two  such  belong  to 
the  celestial  sphere.  Trita,  a  somewhat  obscure  god,  who  is  mentioned 
only  in  detached  stanzas  of  the  RV.,  comes  down  from  the  Indo- 
Iranian  period.  He  seems  to  represent  the  '  third '  or  lightning 
form  of  fire.  Similar  in  origin  to  Indra,  he  was  ousted  by  the  latter 
at  an  early  period.  Matarisvan  is  a  divine  being  also  referred  to  only 
in  scattered  stanzas  of  the  RV.  He  is  described  as  having  brought 
down  the  hidden  fire  from  heaven  to  men  on  earth,  like  the  Prometheus 
of  Greek  mythology.  Among  the  terrestrial  deities  are  certain  rivers 
that  are  personified  and  invoked  in  the  RV.  Thus  the  Sindhu  (Indus) 
is  celebrated  as  a  goddess  in  one  hymn  (x.  75,  2.  4.  6),  and  the  Vipas 
(Bias)  and  the  SutudrT  (Sutlej),  sister  streams  of  the  Panjab.  in  another 
(iii.  33).  The  most  important  and  oftenest  lauded  is,  however,  the 
Sarasvati  (vi.  61  ;  vii.  95).  Though  the  personification  goes  much 
further  here  than  in  the  case  of  other  streams,  the  connexion  of  the 
goddess  with  the  river  is  never  lost  sight  of  in  the  RV. 

Abstract  deities. — One  result  of  the  advance  of  thought  during  the 
period  of  the  RV.  from  the  concrete  towards  the  abstract  was 
the  rise  of  abstract  deities.  The  earlier  and  more  numerous  class  of 
these  seems  to  have  started  from  epithets  which  were  applicable  to 
one  or  more  older  deities,  but  which  came  to  acquire  an  independent 
value  as  the  want  of  a  god  exercising  the  particular  activity  in 
question  began  to  be  felt.  We  find  here  names  denoting  either  an 
agent  (formed  with  the  suffix  tr  or  tar),  such  as  Dhatr  *  Creator ',  or 
an  attribute,  such  as  Prajapati,  'Lord  of  Creatures'.  Thus  Dhatr, 
otherwise  an  epithet  of  Indra,  appears  also  as  an  independent  deity 
who  creates  heaven  and  earth,  sun  and  moon.  More  rarely  occur 
Vi  dhatr,    the    '  Disposer ',    Dhartr,    the    '  Supporter ',    Tratr,    the 


INTRODUCTION  xxi 

*  Protector ',  and  Netr,  the  '  Leader  '.  The  only  agent  god  mentioned 
at  all  frequently  in  the  RV.  is  Tvastr,  the  '  Artificer ',  though  no 
entire  hymn  is  addressed  to  him.  He  is  the  most  skilful  of  workmen, 
having  among  other  things  fashioned  the  bolt  of  Indra  and  a  new 
drinking-cup  for  the  gods.  He  is  a  guardian  of  Soma,  which  is 
called  the  'food  of  Tvastr',  and  which  Indra  drinks  in  Tvastr's 
house.  He  is  the  father  of  Saranyu,  wife  of  Vivasvant  and  mother 
of  the  primaeval  twins  Yama  and  Yaml.  The  name  of  the  solar 
deity  Savitr,  the  'Stimulator',  belongs  to  this  class  of  agent  gods 
(cf.  p.  11).  ' 

There  are  a  few  other  abstract  deities  whose  names  were  originally 
epithets  of  older  gods,  but  now  become  epithets  of  the  supreme  god 
who  was  being  evolved  at  the  end  of  the  Rigvedic  period.  These 
appellations,  compound  in  form,  are  of  rare  and  late  occurrence. 
The  most  important  is  Prajapati,  'Lord  of  Creatures'.  Originally 
an  epithet  of  such  gods  as  Savitr  and  Soma,  this  name  is  employed 
in  a  late  verse  of  the  tenth  book  to  designate  a  distinct  deity  in 
the  character  of  a  Creator.  Similarly,  the  epithet  Visvakarman, 
'  all-creating ',  appears  as  the  name  of  an  independent  deity  to  whom 
two  hymns  (x.  81.  82)  are  addressed.  Hiranyagarbha,  the  '  Golden 
Germ ',  once  occurs  as  the  name  of  the  supreme  god  described  as  the 
'  one  lord  of  all  that  exists '.  In  one  curious  instance  it  is  possible 
to  watch  the  rise  of  an  abstract  deity  of  this  type.  The  refrain  of  a 
late  hymn  of  the  RV.  (x.  121)  is  kasmai  devaya  havisa  vidhema  ? 
'  to  what  god  should  we  pay  worship  with  oblation  ? '  This  led  to 
the  word  ka,  '  who  ? '  being  used  in  the  later  Vedic  literature  as  an 
independent  name,  Ka,  of  the  supreme  god.  The  only  abstract 
deity  of  this  type  occurring  in  the  oldest  as  well  as  the  latest  parts 
of  the  RV.  is  Brhaspati  (p.  83). 

The  second  and  smaller  class  of  abstract  deities  comprises  per- 
sonifications of  abstract  nouns.  There  are  seven  or  eight  of  these 
occurring  in  the  tenth  book.  Two  hymns  (83.  84)  are  addressed  to 
Manyu,  'Wrath',  and  one  (x.  151)  to  Sraddha,  'Faith'.  Anumati, 
'  Favour  (of  the  gods) ',  Aramati,  '  Devotion  ',  Sunrta,  '  Bounty  ', 
Asuniti,  '  Spirit-life ',  and  Nirrti,  '  Decease ',  occur  only  in  a  few 
isolated  passages. 

A  purely  abstract  deity,  often  incidentally  celebrated  throughout 


xxii  ABSTRACT  DEITIES 

the  RV.  is  A-diti,  '  Liberation  ',  '  Freedom  '  (lit.  '  uii-binding '),  whose 
main  characteristic  is  the  power  of  delivering  from  the  bonds  of 
physical  suffering  and  moral  guilt.  She,  however,  occupies  a  unique 
position  among  the  abstract  deities,  owing  to  the  peculiar  way  in 
which  the  personification  seems  to  have  arisen.  She  is  the  mother 
of  the  small  group  of  deities  called  Adityas,  often  styled  '  sons  of 
Aditi '.  This  expression  at  first  most  probably  meant  nothing  more 
than  'sons  of  liberation ',  according  to  an  idiom  common  in  the  RV. 
and  elsewhere.  The  word  was  then  personified,  with  the  curious 
result  that  the  mother  is  mythologically  younger  than  some  at  least 
of  her  sons,  who  (for  instance  Mitra)  date  from  the  Indo-Iranian 
period.  The  goddess  Diti,  named  only  three  times  in  the  RV., 
probably  came  into  being  as  an  antithesis  to  Aditi,  with  whom  she 
is  twice  mentioned. 

Goddesses  play  an  insignificant  part  in  the  RV.  The  only  one  of 
importance  is  Usas  (p.  92).  Next  come  Sarasvati,  celebrated  ia  two 
whole  hymns  (vi.  61  ;  vii.  95)  as  well  as  parts  of  others,  and  Vac, 
'  Speech '  (x.  71.  125).  With  one  hymn  each  are  addressed  Prthivi, 
'Earth'  (v.  84),  Ratrl,  'Night'  (x.  127,  p.  203),  and  Aranyani, 
'  Goddess  of  the  Forest '  (x.  146).  Others  are  only  sporadically 
mentioned.  The  wives  of  the  great  gods  are  still  more  insignificant, 
being  mere  names  formed  from  those  of  their  consorts,  and  altogether 
lacking  in  individuality :  such  are  Agnayl,  IndranI,  Varunani, 
spouses  of  Agni,  Indra,  and  Varuna  respectively. 

Dual  Divinities. — A  peculiar  feature  of  the  religion  of  the  RV.  is 
the  invocation  of  pairs  of  deities  wdiose  names  are  combined  as  com- 
pounds, each  member  of  which  is  in  the  dual.  About  a  dozen  such 
pairs  are  celebrated  in  entire  hymns,  and  about  a  dozen  more  in 
detached  stanzas.  By  far  the  largest  number  of  hymns  is  addressed 
to  the  couple  Mitra-Varuna,  though  the  names  most  frequently  found 
as  dual  compounds  are  those  of  Dyava-prthivT,  '  Heaven  and  Earth ' 
(p.  36).  The  latter  pair,  having  been  associated  as  universal  parents 
from  the  Indo-European  period  onwards,  in  all  probability  furnished 
the  analogy  for  this  dual  type. 

Groups  of  Deities. — There  are  also  a  few  more  or  less  definite  groups 
of  deities,  generally  associated  with  some  particular  god.  The  Maruts 
(p.  21),  who  attend  on  Indra,  are  the  most  numerous  group.     The 


INTRODUCTION  xxiii 

smaller  group  of  the  Adityas,  of  whom  Varuna  is  the  chief,  is 
constantly  mentioned  in  company  with  their  mother  Aditi.  Their 
number  is  stated  in  the  EV.  to  be  seven  or,  with  the  addition  of 
Martanda,  eight.  One  passage  (ii.  27,  1)  enumerates  six  of  them, 
Mitra,  Aryaman,  Bhaga,  Varuna,  Daksa,  Arnsa  :  Surya  was  probably 
regarded  as  the  seventh.  A  much  less  important  group,  without 
individual  names  or  definite  number,  is  that  of  the  Vasus,  whose 
leader  is  generally  Indra.  There  are,  finally,  the  Visve  devas  (p.  147), 
who,  invoked  in  many  hymns,  form  a  comprehensive  group, 
which  in  spite  of  its  name  is,  strange  to  say,  sometimes  conceived  as 
a  narrower  group  associated  with  others  like  the  Vasus  and  Adityas. 

Lesser  Divinities. — Besides  the  higher  gods,  a  number  of  lesser 
divine  powers  are  known  to  the  RV.  The  most  prominent  of  these 
are  the  Rbhus,  who  are  celebrated  in  eleven  hymns.  They  are  a 
deft-handed  trio,  who  by  their  marvellous  skill  acquired  the  rank  of 
deities.  Among  their  five  main  feats  of  dexterity  the  greatest  con- 
sisted in  transforming  the  bowl  of  Tvastr  into  four  shining  cups. 
The  bowl  and  the  cups  have  been  variously  interpreted  as  the  moon 
with  its  four  phases  or  the  year  with  its  seasons.  The  Rbhus  further 
exhibited  their  skill  in  renewing  the  youth  of  their  parents,  by  whom 
Heaven  and  Earth  seem  to  have  been  meant. 

Occasional  mention  is  made  in  the  RV.  of  an  Apsaras,  a  celestial 
water-nymph,  the  spouse  of  a  corresponding  genius  named  Gandharva. 
In  a  few  passages  more  Apsarases  than  one  are  spoken  of ;  but  the 
only  one  mentioned  by  name  is  UrvasT.  Gandharva  is  in  the  RV. 
a  single  being  (like  the  Gandarewa  of  the  Avesta),  who  dwells  in  the 
aerial  sphere,  guards  the  celestial  Soma,  and  is  (as  in  the  Avesta) 
connected  with  the  waters. 

There  are,  lastly,  a  few  divinities  of  the  tutelary  order,  guardians 
watching  over  the  welfare  of  house  or  field.  Such  is  the  rarely 
mentioned  Vastospati,  '  Lord  of  the  Dwelling ',  who  is  invoked  to 
grant  a  favourable  entry,  to  remove  disease,  and  to  bestow  protection 
and  prosperity.  Ksetrasya  pati,  '  Lord  of  the  Field  ',  is  besought  to 
grant  cattle  and  horses  and  to  confer  welfare.  Sita,  the  '  Furrow  ',  is 
once  invoked  to  dispense  crops  and  rich  blessings. 

In  addition  to  the  great  phenomena  of  nature,  various  features  of 
the  earth's  surface  as  well  as  artificial  objects  are  to  be  found  deified 


xxiv  LESSER  DIVINITIES 

in  the  RV.  Thus  besides  Rivers  and  Waters  (p.  115),  already 
mentioned  as  terrestrial  goddesses,  mountains  are  often  addressed  as 
divinities,  but  only  along  with  other  natural  objects,  or  in  association 
vs^ith  gods.  Plants  are  regarded  as  divine  powers,  one  entire  hymn 
(x.  97)  being  devoted  to  their  praise,  chiefly  with  reference  to  their 
healing  properties.  Sacrificial  implements,  moreover,  are  deified. 
The  most  important  of  these  is  the  sacrificial  post  which  is  praised 
and  invoked  in  a  whole  hymn  (iii.  8).  The  sacrificial  grass  (barhis) 
and  the  Divine  Doors  (dvaro  devih),  which  lead  to  the  place  of 
sacrifice,  are  addressed  as  goddesses.  The  pressing  stones  (gravanas) 
are  invoked  as  deities  in  three  hymns  (x.  76.  94.  175)  :  spoken  of  as 
immortal,  unaging,  mightier  than  heaven,  they  are  besought  to  drive 
away  demons  and  destruction.  The  Mortar  and  Pestle  used  in 
pounding  the  Soma  plant  are  also  invoked  in  the  RV.  (i.  28,  5.  6). 
Weapons,  finally,  are  sometimes  deified :  armour,  bow,  quiver, 
arrows,  and  drum  being  addressed  in  one  of  the  hymns  (vi.  75). 

The  Demons  often  mentioned  in  the  hymns  are  of  two  kinds.  The 
higher  and  more  powerful  class  are  the  aerial  foes  of  the  gods.  These 
are  seldom  called  asura  in  the  RV.,  where  in  the  older  parts  that 
word  means  a  divine  being,  like  ahura  in  the  Avesta  (cf.  p.  134). 
The  term  dasa  or  dasyu,  properly  the  name  of  the  dark  aborigines, 
is  frequently  used  in  the  sense  of  fiend  to  designate  the  aerial 
demons.  The  conflict  is  regularly  one  between  a  single  god  and 
a  single  demon,  as  exemplified  by  Indra  and  Vrtra.  The  latter  is 
by  far  the  most  frequently  mentioned.  His  mother  being  called 
Danu,  he  is  sometimes  alluded  to  by  the  metronymic  term  Danava. 
Another  powerful  demon  is  Vala,  the  personified  cave  of  the  cows, 
which  he  guards,  and  which  are  set  free  by  Indra  and  his  allies, 
notably  the  Ahgirases.  Other  demon  adversaries  of  Indra  are  Arbuda, 
described  as  a  wily  beast,  whose  cows  Indra  drove  out ;  Visvarupa, 
son  of  Tvastr,  a  three  headed  demon  slain  by  both  Trita  and  Indra, 
who  seize  his  cows ;  and  Svarbhanu,  who  eclipses  the  sun.  There 
are  several  other  individual  demons,  generally  described  as  Dasas 
and  slain  by  Indra.  A  group  of  demons  are  the  Panis  ('  niggards '), 
primarily  foes  of  Indra,  who,  with  the  aid  of  the  dog  Sarama,  tracks 
and  releases  the  cows  hidden  by  them. 

The  second  or  lower  class  of  demons  are  terrestrial  goblins,  enemies 


INTEODUCTION  xxv 

of  men.  By  far  the  most  common  generic  name  for  them  is  Raksas. 
They  are  nearly  always  mentioned  in  connexion  with  some  god  who 
destroys  them.  The  much  less  common  term  Yatu  or  Yatudhana 
(primarily  'sorcerer')  alternates  with  Raksas,  and  perhaps  expresses 
a  species.  A  class  of  demons  scarcely  referred  to  in  the  RV.,  but 
often  mentioned  in  the  later  Yedas,  are  the  Pisacas,  eaters  of  raw 
flesh  or  of  corpses. 

Not  more  than  thirty  hymns  are  concerned  with  subjects  other 
than  the  worship  of  gods  or  deified  objects.  About  a  dozen  of  these, 
almost  entirely  confined  to  the  tenth  book,  deal  with  magical  practices, 
which  properly  belong  to  the  sphere  of  the  Atharvaveda.  Their 
contents  are  augury  (ii.  42.  43)  or  spells  directed  against  poisonous 
vermin  (i.  191)  or  disease  (x.  163),  against  a  demon  destructive  of 
children  (x.  162),  or  enemies  (x.  166),  or  rival  wives  (x.  145).  A  few 
are  incantations  to  preserve  life  (x.  58.  60),  or  to  induce  sleep  (v.  55), 
or  to  procure  offspring  (x.  183) ;  while  one  is  a  panegyric  of  frogs  as 
magical  bringers  of  rain  (vii.  103,  p.  141). 

8.    Secular  Matter  in  the  Rigveda. 

Secular  hymns. — Hardly  a  score  of  the  hymns  are  secular  poems. 
These  are  especially  valuable  as  throwing  direct  light  on  the  earliest 
thought  and  civilization  of  India.  One  of  the  most  noteworthy  of 
them  is  the  long  wedding  hymn  (x.  85).  There  are  also  five  funeral 
hymns  (x.  14-18).  Four  of  these  are  addressed  to  deities  concerned 
with  the  future  life ;  the  last,  however,  is  quite  secular  in  tone,  and 
gives  more  information  than  any  of  the  rest  about  the  funeral  customs 
of  early  Yedic  India  (cf.  p.  164). 

Mythological  dialogues. — Besides  several  mythological  dialogues  in 
which  the  speakers  are  divine  beings  (iv.  62;  x.  51.  52.  86.  108), 
there  are  two  in  which  both  agents  are  human.  One  is  a  somewhat 
obscure  colloquy  (x.  95)  between  a  mortal  lover  Pururavas  and  the 
celestial  nymph  Urvasi,  who  is  on  the  point  of  forsaking  him.  It  is 
the  earliest  form  of  the  story  which  much  more  than  a  thousand 
years  later  formed  the  subject  of  Kalidasa's  drama  Yikramorva^i. 
The  other  (x.  10)  is  a  dialogue  between  Yama  and  Yami,  the  twin 
parents  of  the  human  race.  This  group  of  hymns  has  a  special 
literary  interest  as  foreshadowing  the  dramatic  works  of  a  later  age. 


xxvi  SECULAR  HYMNS 

Didactic  hymns. — Four  hymns  are  of  a  didactic  character.  One  of 
these  (x.  84)  is  a  striking  poem,  being  a  monologue  in  which 
a  gambler  laments  the  misery  he  has  brought  on  himself  and  his 
home  by  his  inability  to  resist  the  attraction  of  the  dice.  The  rest 
which  describe  the  various  ways  in  which  men  follow  gain  (ix.  112), 
or  praise  wise  speech  (x.  71),  or  the  value  of  good  deeds  (x.  117),  antici- 
pate the  sententious  poetry  for  which  post-Vedic  literature  is  noted. 

Riddles. — Two  of  the  hymns  consist  of  riddles.  One  of  these 
(viii.  29,  p.  147)  describes  various  gods  without  mentioning  their 
names.  More  elaborate  and  obscure  is  a  long  poem  of  fifty-two  stanzas 
(i.  164),  in  which  a  number  of  enigmas,  largely  connected  with  the 
sun,  are  propounded  in  mystical  and  symbolic  language.  Thus  the 
wheel  of  order  with  twelve  spokes,  revolving  round  the  heavens, 
and  containing  within  it  in  couples  720  sons,  means  the  year  with 
its  twelve  months  and  360  days  and  360  nights. 

Cosmogonic  hymns. — About  half  a  dozen  hymns  consist  of  specula- 
tions on  the  origin  of  the  world  through  the  agency  of  a  Creator 
(called  by  various  names)  as  distinct  from  any  of  the  ordinary  gods. 
One  of  them  (x.  129,  p.  207),  which  describes  the  world  as  due  to  the 
development  of  the  existent  (sat)  from  the  non-existent  (a-sat),  is 
particularly  interesting  as  the  starting-point  of  the  evolutional  philo- 
sophy which  in  later  times  assumed  shape  in  the  Sahkhya  system. 

A  semi-historical  character  attaches  to  one  complete  hymn  (i.  126) 
and  to  appendages  of  3  to  5  stanzas  attached  to  over  thirty  others, 
which  are  called  Danastutis,  or  *  praises  of  gifts '.  These  are  j)ane- 
gyrics  of  liberal  patrons  on  behalf  of  whom  the  seers  composed  their 
hymns.  They  yield  incidental  genealogical  information  about  the 
poets  and  their  employers,  as  well  as  about  the  names  and  the 
habitat  of  the  Vedic  tribes.  They  are  late  in  date,  appearing  chiefly 
in  the  first  and  tenth,  as  well  as  among  the  supplementary  hymns  of 
the  eighth  book. 

Geograx^hical  data. — From  the  geographical  data  of  the  RV., 
especially  the  numerous  rivers  there  mentioned,  it  is  to  be  inferred 
that  the  Indo- Aryan  tribes  when  the  hymns  were  composed  occupied 
the  territory  roughly  corresponding  to  the  north-west  Frontier 
Province,  and  the  Panjab  of  to-day.  The  references  to  flora  and  fauna 
bear  out  this  conclusion. 


INTEODUCTION  xxvii 

The  historical  data  of  the  hymns  show  that  the  Indo-Aryans  were 
still  engaged  in  war  with  the  aborigines,  many  victories  over  these 
foes  being  mentioned.  That  they  were  still  moving  forward  as 
conquerors  is  indicated  by  references  to  rivers  as  obstacles  to  advance. 
Though  divided  into  many  tribes,  they  were  conscious  of  religio-us 
and  racial  unity,  contrasting  the  aborigines  with  themselves  by  calling 
them  non-sacrificers  and  unbelievers,  as  well  as  '  black-skins '  and  the 
'  Dasa  colour '  as  opposed  to  the  '  Aryan  colour '. 

Incidental  references  scattered  throughout  the  hymns  supply  a 
good  deal  of  information  about  the  social  conditions  of  the  time. 
Thus  it  is  clear  that  the  family,  with  the  father  at  its  head,  was  the 
basis  of  society,  and  that  women  held  a  freer  and  more  honoured 
position  than  in  later  times.  Various  crinies  are  mentioned,  robbery, 
especially  of  cattle,  apparently  being  the  commonest.  Debt,  chiefly 
as  a  result  of  gambling,  was  known.  Clothing  consisted  usually  of 
an  upper  and  a  lower  garment,  which  were  made  of  sheep's  wool. 
Bracelets,  anklets,  necklaces,  and  earrings  were  worn  as  ornaments. 
Men  usually  grew  beards,  but  sometimes  shaved.  Food  mainly 
consisted  of  milk,  clarified  butter,  grain,  vegetables,  and  fruit.  Meat 
was  eaten  only  when  animals  were  sacrificed.  The  commonest  kind 
appears  to  have  been  beef,  as  bulls  were  the  chief  offerings  to  the  gods. 
Two  kinds  of  spirituous  liquor  were  made  :  Soma  was  drunk  at 
religious  ceremonies  only,  while  Sura,  extracted  from  some  kind  of 
grain,  was  used  on  ordinary  occasions. 

Occupations. — One  of  the  chief  occupations  of  the  Indo- Aryan  was 
warfare.  He  fought  either  on  foot  or  from  a  chariot,  but  there  is  no 
evidence  to  show  that  he  ever  did  so  on  horseback.  The  ordinary 
weapons  were  bows  and  arrows,  but  spears  and  axes  were  also  used. 
Cattle-breeding  appears  to  have  been  the  main  source  of  livelihood, 
cows  being  the  chief  objects  of  desire  in  prayers  to  the  gods.  But 
agriculture  was  also  practised  to  some  extent :  fields  were  furrowed 
with  a  plough  drawn  by  bulls  ;  corn  was  cut  with  sickles,  being  then 
threshed  and  winnowed.  Wild  animals  were  trapped  and  snared,  or 
hunted  with  bows  and  arrows,  occasionally  with  the  aid  of  dogs. 
Boats  propelled  by  paddles  were  employed,  as  it  seems  mainly  for 
the  purpose  of  crossing  rivers.  Trade  was  known  only  in  the  form 
of  barter,  the  cow  representing  the  unit  of  value  in  exchange.    Certain 


xxviii  OCCQPATIONS  AND  AMUSEMENTS 

trades  and  crafts  already  existed,  though  doubtless  in  a  rudimentary 
stage.  The  occupations  of  the  wheelwright  and  the  carpenter  were 
combined.  The  smith  melted  ore  in  a  forge,  and  made  kettles  and 
other  vessels  of  metal.  The  tanner  prepared  the  skins  of  animals. 
Women  plaited  mats  of  grass  or  reeds,  sewed,  and  especially  wove, 
but  whether  they  ever  did  so  professionally  is  uncertain. 

Amusements. — Among  these  chariot-racing  was  the  favourite. 
The  most  popular  social  recreation  was  playing  with  dice  (cp.  p.  186). 
Dancing  was  also  practised,  chiefly  by  women.  The  people  were 
fond  of  music,  the  instruments  used  being  the  drum  (dundubhi),  the 
flute  (vana),  and  the  lute  (vina).     Singing  is  also  mentioned. 

9.     Literary  merit  of  the  Eigveda. 

The  diction  of  the  hymns  is  on  the  whole  natural  and  simple,  free 
from  the  use  of  compounds  of  more  than  two  members.  Considering 
their  great  antiquity,  the  hymns  are  composed  with  a  remarkable 
degree  of  metrical  skill  and  command  of  language.  But  as  they  were 
produced  by  a  sacerdotal  class  and  were  generally  intended  to  ac- 
company a  ritual  no  longer  primitive,  their  poetry  is  often  impaired 
by  constant  sacrificial  allusions.  This  is  especially  noticeable  in  the 
hymns  addressed  to  the  two  ritual  deities  Agni  and  Soma,  where 
the  thought  becomes  afl'ected  by  conceits  and  obscured  by  mysticism. 
Nevertheless  the  KV.  contains  much  genuine  poetry.  As  the  gods 
are  mostly  connected  with  natural  phenomena,  the  praises  addressed 
to  them  give  rise  to  much  beautiful  and  even  noble  imagery.  The 
degree  of  literary  merit  in  different  hymns  naturally  varies  a  good 
deal,  but  the  average  is  remarkably  high.  The  most  poetical  hymns 
are  those  addressed  to  Dawn,  equal  if  not  superior  in  beauty  to  the 
religious  lyrics  of  any  other  literature.  Some  of  the  hymns  to  Indra 
show  much  graphic  power  in  describing  his  conflict  with  the  demon 
Vrtra.  The  hymns  to  the  Maruts,  or  Storm  gods,  often  depict  with 
vigorous  imagery  the  phenomena  of  thunder  and  lightning,  and  the 
mighty  onset  of  the  wind.  One  hymn  to  Parjanya  (v.  83)  paints 
the  devastating  effects  of  the  rain-storm  with  great  vividness.  The 
hymns  in  praise  of  Varuna  describe  the  various  aspects  of  his  sway 
as  moral  ruler  of  the  world  in  an  exalted  strain  of  poetry.     Some  of 


INTRODUCTION  xxix 

the  mythological  dialogues  set  forth  the  situation  with  much  beauty 
of  language  ;  for  example,  the  colloquy  between  Indra's  messenger 
Sarama  and  the  demons  who  stole  the  cows  (x.  108),  and  that  between 
the  primaeval  twins  Yama  and  Yarn!  (x.  10).  The  Gambler's  lament 
(x.  34)  is  a  fine  specimen  of  pathetic  poetry.  One  of  the  funeral 
hymns  (x.  18)  expresses  ideas  connected  with  death  in  language  of 
impressive  and  solemn  beauty.  One  of  the  cosmogonic  hymns 
(x.  129)  illustrates  how  philosophical  speculation  can  be  clothed  in 
poetry  of  no  mean  order. 

10.    Interpretation. 

In  dealing  with  the  hymns  of  the  RV.  the  important  question 
arises,  to  what  extent  are  we  able  to  understand  their  real  sense, 
considering  that  they  have  come  down  to  us  as  an  isolated  relic  from 
the  remotest  period  of  Indian  literature  ?  The  reply,  stated  generally, 
is  that,  as  a  result  of  the  labours  of  Vedic  scholars,  the  meaning  of 
a  considerable  proportion  of  th^e  RV.  is  clear,  but  of  the  remainder 
many  hymns  and  a  great  many  single  stanzas  or  passages  are  still 
obscure  or  unintelligible.  This  was  already  the  case  in  the  time  of 
Yaska,  the  author  of  the  Nirukta,  the  oldest  extant  commentary 
(c.  500  B.  c.)  on  about  600  detached  stanzas  of  the  RV. ;  for  he  quotes 
one  of  his  predecessors,  Kautsa,  as  sajang  that  the  Vedic  hymns  were 
obscure,  unmeaning,  and  mutually  contradictory. 

In  the  earlier  period  of  Vedic  studies,  commencing  about  the 
middle  of  the  nineteenth  century,  the  traditional  method,  which 
follows  the  great  commentary  of  Sayana  (fourteenth  century  a.c), 
and  is  represented  by  the  translation  of  the  RV.,  begun  by  H.  H. 
Wilson  in  1850,  was  considered  adequate.  It  has  since  been  proved 
that,  though  the  native  Indian  commentators  are  invaluable  guides 
in  explaining  the  theological  and  ritual  texts  of  the  Brahmanas  and 
Sutras,  with  the  atmosphere  of  which  they  were  familiar,  they  did 
not  possess  a  continuous  tradition  from  the  time  when  the  Vedic 
hymns  were  composed.  That  the  gap  between  the  poets  and  the 
interpreters  even  earlier  than  Yaska  must  have  been  considerable, 
is  shown  by  the  divergences  of  opinion  among  his  predecessors  as 
quoted  by  him.    Thus  one  of  these,  Aurnavabha,  interprets  nasatyau, 


XXX  INTERPKETATION 

an  epithet  of  the  Asvins,  as  ^  true,  not  false ',  another  Agrayana,  as 
^  leaders  of  truth  '  (satyasya  pranetarau),  while  Yaska  himself  thinks 
it  may  mean  '  nose-born  '  (nasika-prabhavau) !  Yaska,  moreover, 
mentions  several  different  schools  of  interpretation,  each  of  which 
explained  difficulties  in  accordance  with  its  own  particular  theory. 
Yaska's  own  interpretations,  which  in  all  cases  of  doubt  are  based  on 
etymology,  are  evidently  often  merely  conjectural,  for  he  frequently 
gives  several  alternative  explanations  of  a  word.  Thus  he  explains 
the  epithet  jata-vedas  in  as  many  as  five  different  ways.  Yet  he 
must  have  had  more  and  better  means  of  ascertaining  the  sense  of 
various  obscure  words  than  Sayana  who  lived  nearly  2,000  years 
later.  Sayana's  interpretations,  however,  sometimes  differ  from 
those  of  Yaska.  Hence  either  Yaska  is  wrong  or  Sayana  does  not 
follow  the  tradition.  Again,  Sayana  often  gives  several  inconsistent 
explanations  of  a  word  in  interpreting  the  same  passage  or  in  com- 
menting on  the  same  word  in  different  passages.  Thus  asura, 
'  divine  being ',  is  variously  rendered  by  him  as  '  expeller  of  foes ', 
'giver  of  strength',  'giver  of  life',  '  hurler  away  of  what  is  un- 
desired ',  *  giver  of  breath  or  water ',  '  thrower  of  oblations,  priest ', 
'taker  away  of  breath',  'expeller  of  water,  Parjanya',  'impeller', 
'strong',  'wise',  and  'rain-water'  or  *a  water-discharging  cloud'! 
In  short  it  is  clear  from  a  careful  examination  of  their  comments 
that  neither  Yaska  nor  Sayana  possessed  any  certain  knowledge 
about  a  large  number  of  words  in  the  RV.  Hence  their  interpreta- 
tions can  be  treated  as  decisive  only  if  they  are  borne  out  by 
probability,  by  the  context,  and  by  parallel  passages. 

For  the  traditional  method  Roth,  the  founder  of  Vedic  philology, 
substituted  the  critical  method  of  interpreting  the  difficult  parts  of 
the  RV.  from  internal  evidence  by  the  minute  comparison  of  all 
words  parallel  in  form  and  matter,  while  taking  into  consideration 
context,  grammar,  and  etymology,  without  ignoring  either  the  help 
supplied  by  the  historical  study  of  the  Vedic  language  in  its  con- 
nexion with  Sanskrit  or  the  outside  evidence  derived  from  the  Avesta 
and  from  Comparative  Philology.  In  the  application  of  his  method 
Roth  attached  too  much  weight  to  etymological  consid('ratiuns.  while 
lie  undervalued  the  evidence  of  native  tradition.  On  the  other  hand, 
a  reaction  arose  which,  in  emphasizing  the  purely  Indian  character 


INTKODUCTION  xxxi 

of  the  Vedic  hymns,  connects  the  interpretation  of  them  too  closely 
with  the  literature  of  the  post-Vedic  period  and  the  much  more 
advanced  civilization  there  described.  It  is  important  to  note  that 
the  critical  scholar  has  at  his  disposal  not  only  all  the  material  that 
was  open  to  the  traditional  interpreters ,  and  to  which  he  is  moreover 
able  to  apply  the  comparative  and  historical  methods  of  research, 
but  also  possesses  over  and  above  many  valuable  aids  that  were 
unknown  to  the  traditional  school — the  Avesta,  Comparative  Philo- 
logy, Comparative  Keligion  and  Mythology,  and  Ethnology.  The 
student  will  find  in  the  notes  of  the  Header  many  exemplifications 
of  the  usefulness  of  these  aids  to  interpretation.  There  is  good  reason 
to  hope  from  the  results  already  achieved  that  steady  adherence 
to  the  critical  method,  by  admitting  all  available  evidence  and  by 
avoiding  onesidedness  in  its  application,  will  eventually  clear  up  a 
large  proportion  of  the  obscurities  and  difficulties  that  still  confront 
the  interpreter  of  the  Rigveda. 


EREATA 

P.  14,  line  27,  for  sitipado  read  sitipado. 

P.  28,  line  1,  read  •T^^jf^- 

P.  31,  line  29,  and  p.  46,  1.  29,  for  yo  read  yo. 

P.  48,  head-line,  for  i.  12,  4  read  ii.  12,  4. 

P.  51,  line  31,  for  yo  read  yo. 

P.  60,  line  13,  for  no  read  no. 

P.  69,  line  2,  for  tarn  read  tam. 

Pp.  68,  70,  71,  75,"  head-lines,  for  APAM  read  APAM. 

P.  118,' head-line,  for  APAS  read  APAS. 

P.  125,  line  12,  for  visvacaksas  read  visvacaksas. 

P.  128,  line  3,  for  nu  read  nu. 

P   139,  line  14,  for  vibhidako  read  vibhidako. 

P   142,  last  line,  and  p.  143,  line  11,  for  anyo  read  anyo. 

P.  144,  head-line,  for  MANDUKAS  read  MANDUKAS. 

P.  179,  line  26,  for  te  read  te. 

P   184,  line  17,  for  te  read  te. 

P.  224,  head-line  and  line  1,  for  abhiti  read  abhiti. 


/ 


AGNI 

As  the  personification  of  the  sacrificial  fire,  Agni  is  second  in  importance 
to  Indra  (ii.  12)  only,  being  addressed  in  at  least  200  hymns.  The  anthropo- 
morphism of  his  physical  appearance  is  only  rudimentary,  and  is  connected 
chiefly  with  the  sacrificial  aspect  of  fire.  Thus  he  is  butter-backed,  flame- 
haired,  arrd  has  a  tawny  beard,  sharp  jaws,  and  golden  teeth.  Mention  is 
often  made  of  his  tongue,  with  which  the  gods  eat  the  oblation.  With 
a  burning  head  he  faces  in  all  directions. 

He  is  compared  with  various  animals  :  he  resembles  a  bull  that  bellows, 
and  has  horns  which  he  sharpens ;  when  born  he  is  often  called  a  calf ; 
he  is  kindled  like  a  horse  that  brings  the  gods,  and  is  yoked  to  convey 
the  sacrifice  to  them.  He  is  also  a  divine  bird ;  he  is  the  eagle  of  the 
sky ;  as  dwelling  in  the  waters  he  is  like  a  goose ;  he  is  winged,  and  he 
takes  possession  of  the  wood  as  a  bird  perches  on  a  tree. 

Wood  or  ghee  is  his  food,  melted  butter  his  beverage  ;  and  he  is 
nourished  three  times  a  day.  He  is  the  mouth  by  which  the  gods  eat  the 
sacrifice ;  and  his  flames  are  spoons  with  which  he  besprinkles  the  gods ; 
but  he  is  also  asked  to  consume  the  off'erings  himself.  He  is  sometimes, 
though  then  nearly  always  with  other  gods,  invited  to  drink  the  Soma 
juice. 

His  brightness  is  much  dwelt  upon  :  he  shines  like  the  sun  ;  his  lustre 
is  like  the  rays  of  the  dawn  and  the  sun,  and  like  the  lightnings  of  the 
rain-cloud.  He  shines  even  at  night,  and  dispels  the  darkness  with  his 
beams.  On  the  other  hand,  his  path  is  black  when  he  invades  the  forests 
and  shaves  the  earth  as  a  barber  a  beard.  His  flames  are  like  roaring 
waves,  and  his  sound  is  like  the  thunder  of  heaven.  His  red  smoke  rises 
up  to  the  firmament ;  like  the  erector  of  a  post  he  supports  the  sky  with 
his  smoke.  '  Smoke-bannered  '  (dhuma-ketu)  is  his  frequent  and  exclusive 
epithet. 

He  has  a  shining,  golden,  lightning  car,  drawn  by  two  or  more  ruddy 
and  tawny  steeds.  He  is  a  charioteer  of  the  sacrifice,  and  with  his  steeds 
he  brings  the  gods  on  his  car. 

He  is  the  child  of  Heaven  (Dyaus),  and  is  often  called  the  son  of 
Heaven  and  Earth  (i.  160).  He  is  also  the  offspring  of  the  waters.  The 
gods  generated  him  as  a  light  for  the  Aryan  or  for  man,  and  placed  him 
among  men.  Indra  is  called  Agni's  twin  brother,  and  is  more  closel,y 
associated  with  him  than  any  other  god. 

1902  B 


2  AGNI  [i.  1 

The  mythology  of  Agni,  apart  from  his  sacrificial  activity,  is  mainly 
concerned  with  his  various  births,  forms,  and  abodes.  Mention  is  often 
made  of  his  daily  production  from  the  two  kindling  sticks  (ardnis),  which 
are  his  parents  or  his  mothers.  From  the  dry  wood  Agni  is  born  living ; 
as  soon  as  born  the  child  devours  his  parents.  By  the  ten  maidens  that 
produce  him  are  meant  the  ten  fingers  of  the  kindler.  Owing  to  the 
force  required  to  kindle  Agni  he  is  often  called  'son  of  strength'  (sahasah 
sunuh).  Being  produced  every  morning  he  is  young;  at  the  same  time 
no  sacrificer  is  older  than  Agni,  for  he  conducted  the  first  sacrifice.  Again, 
Agni's  origin  in  the  aerial  waters  is  often  referred  to  :  he  is  an  embryo  of 
the  waters  ;  he  is  kindled  in  the  waters  ;  he  is  a  bull  that  has  grown  in 
the  lap  of  the  waters.  As  the  'son  of  Waters'  (ii.  35)  he  has  become  a 
separate  deity.  He  is  also  sometimes  conceived  as  latent  in  terrestrial 
waters.  This  notion  of  Agni  in  the  waters  is  a  prominent  one  in  the  RV. 
Thirdly,  a  celestial  origin  of  Agni  is  often  mentioned  :  he  is  born  in  the 
highest  heaven,  and  was  brought  down  from  heaven  by  Matarisvan,  the 
Indian  Prometheus  ;  and  the  acquisition  of  fire  by  man  is  regarded  as  a  gift 
of  the  gods  as  well  as  a  production  of  Matarisvan.  The  Sun  (vii.  63)  is 
further  regarded  as  a  form  of  Agni.  Thus  Agni  is  the  light  of  heaven  in 
the  bright  sky  ;  he  was  born  on  the  other  side  of  the  air  and  sees  all 
things ;  he  is  born  as  the  sun  rising  in  the  morning.  Hence  Agni  comes  to 
have  a  triple  character.  His  births  are  three  or  threefold  ;  the  gods  made 
him  threefold ;  he  is  threefold  light ;  he  has  three  heads,  three  bodies,  three 
stations.  This  threefold  nature  of  Agni  is  clearly  recognized  in  the  RV.,  and 
represents  the  earliest  Indian  trinity. 

The  universe  being  also  regarded  as  divided  into  the  two  divisions  of 
heaven  and  earth,  Agni  is  sometimes  said  to  have  two  origins,  and  indeed 
exclusively  bears  the  epithet  dvi-janman  having  two  births.  As  being  kindled 
in  numerous  dwellings  Agni  is  also  said  to  have  many  births. 

Agni  is  more  closely  associated  with  human  life  than  any  other  deity. 
He  is  the  only  god  called  grha-pati  lord  of  the  house,  and  is  constantly 
spoken  of  as  a  guest  (atithi)  in  human  dwellings.  He  is  an  immortal  who 
has  taken  up  his  abode  among  mortals.  Thus  he  comes  to  be  termed  the 
nearest  kinsman  of  men.  He  is  oftenest  described  as  a  father,  sometimes 
also  as  a  brother  or  even  as  a  son  of  his  worshippers.  He  both  takes  the 
offerings  of  men  to  the  gods  and  brings  the  gods  to  the  sacrifice.  He  is 
thus  characteristically  a  messenger  (duta)  appointed  by  gods  and  by  men 
to  be  an  '  oblation-bearer  '. 

As  the  centre  of  the  sacrifice  he  comes  to  be  celebrated  as  the  divine 
counterpart  of  the  earthly  priesthood.  Hence  he  is  often  called  priest 
(rtvij,  vipra),  domestic  priest  (purohita),  and  more  often  than  by  any 
other  name  invoking  priest  (h6tr),  also  officiating  priest  (adhvaryii)  and 
praying  priest    (brahman).     His   priesthood   is   the   most   salient   feati  re 


J-1,  l]  AGNI 


3 


of  his  character  ;   he  is  in  fact   the   great  priest,  as  Incira  is   the   crreat 
warrior.  ^ 

Agni's  wisdom  is  often  dwelt  upon.  As  knowing  all  the  details  of  sacrifice, 
he  is  wise  and  all-knowing,  and  is  exclusively  called  jata-vedas  he  ivho 
knows  all  created  heings. 

He  is  a  great  benefactor  of  his  worshippers,  protecting  and  delivering 
them,  and  bestowing  on  them  all  kinds  of  boons,  but  pre-eminently 
domestic  welfare,  offspring,  and  prosperity. 

His  greatness  is  often  lauded,  and  is  once  even  said  to  surpass  that  of 
the  other  gods.    His  cosmic  and  creative  powers  are  also  frequently  praised. 

^From  the  ordinary  sacrificial  Agni  who  conveys  the  offering  (havya- 
vahana)  is  distinguished  his  corpse-devouring  (kravyad)  form  that  burns 
the  body  on  the  funeral  pyre  (x.  14).  Another  function  of  Agni  is  to  burn 
and  dispel  evil  spirits  and  hostile  magic. 

The  sacrificial  fire  was  already  in  the  Indo-Iranian  period  the  centre  of 
a  developed  ritual,  and  was  personified  and  worshipped  as  a  mighty,  wise, 
and  beneficent  god.  It  seems  to  have  been  an  Indo-European  institution 
also,  since  the  Italians  and  Greeks,  as  well  as  the  Indians  and  Iranians,  had 
the  custom  of  offering  gifts  to  the  gods  in  fire.  But  whether  it  was  already 
personified  in  that  remote  period  is  a  matter  of  conjecture. 

The  name  of  Agni  (Lat.  ignis,  Slavonic  ogni)  is  Indo-European,  and  may 
originally  have  meant  the  'agile  '  as  derived  from  the  root  ag  to  drive  (Lat. 
ago,  Gk.  ayco,  Skt.  ajami). 

ElGVEDA  i.   1. 

The  metre  of  this  hymn  is  Gayatri  (p.  438)  in  which  nearly 
one-fourth  of  the  EV.  is  composed.  It  consists  of  three  octosyllabic 
verses  identical  in  construction,  each  of  which,  when  normal,  ends 
with  two  iambics  (v^  -  .-.  ^).  The  first  two  verses  are  in  the  Samhita 
treated  as  a  hemistich  ;  but  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  in  the 
original  text  the  second  verse  was  more  sharply  divided  from  the 
third  than  from  the  first. 

fmit  Tr^^Tci^T^  II  ftcTTTI  I  T??^J^TrtiT^  II 

[  Agnim  ile  purohitam,  I  magnify  Agni  the  domestic  priest, 

yajnasya  devam  rtvijam,  the  divine  ministrant  of  the  sacrifice, 

hotaram  ratnadhatamam.  the  invoJcer,  best  hestoiver  of  treasure. 

B  2 


4.  AGNI  [i.  1,  1 

On  the  marking  of  the  accent  in  the  RV.  see  p.  448,  2.  The  verb 
lie  (1.  s.  pr.  A.  of  id :  1  for  d  between  vowels,  p.  8,  f.  n.  2)  has  no 
Udatta  because  it  is  in  a  principal  sentence  and  does  not  begin 
a  sentence  or  Pada  (p.  466,  19  A.) ;  its  first  syllable  bears  the 
dependent  Svarita  which  follows  the  Udatta  of  the  preceding 
syllable  (p.  448,  1).  puro-hitam  has  the  accent  of  a  Karmadharaya 
when  the  last  member  is  a  pp.  (p.  456,  top),  yajnasya  is  to  be  taken 
with  r.tvijam  (not  with  purohitam  according  to  Say  ana),  both  because 
the  genitive  normally  precedes  the  noun  that  governs  it  (p.  285  e), 
and  because  it  is  in  the  same  Pada  ;  cp.  EV.  viii.  38,  1  ;  yajnasya 
hi  stha  rtvija  ye  tivo  (Indra-Agni)  are  ministrants  of  the  sacrifice. 
The  dependent  Svarita  which  the  first  sjdlable  of  rtvijam  would 
otherwise  bear  (like  ile),  disappears  because  this  syllable  must  be 
marked  with  the  Anudatta  that  precedes  an  Udatta.  rtv-ij  though 
etymologically  a  compound  (rtu  +  ij  =  yaj)  is  not  analysed  in  the 
Pada  text,  because  the  second  member  does  not  occur  as  an  in- 
dependent word  ;  cp.  x.  2,  5  :  agnir  devam  rtuso  yajati  may  Agni 
sacrifice  to  the  gods  according  to  the  seasons,  ratna-dha-tama  (with 
the  ordinary  Tp.  accent :  p.  456,  2)  :  the  Pada  text  never  divides 
a  cd.  into  more  than  two  members.  The  suffix  tama,  which  the 
Pada  treats  as  equivalent  to  a  final  member  of  a  cd.,  is  here  regarded 
as  forming  a  unit  with  dha ;  cp.  on  the  other  hand  vira-vat  +  tama 
in  3  c  and  citra-sravas  +  tama  in  5  b.  ratna  never  means  jewel  in 
the  RV. 

2  Agnih  purvebhir  rsibhir  Agni  to  he  magnified  hy  past  and 

ilio  nutanair  uta,  present  seers,  may  he  conduct  the  gods 

sa  devam  6ha  vaksati.  here. 

rsibhis  :  The  declensional  endings  bhyam,  bhis,  bhyas,  su  are  in 
the  Pada  text  treated  like  final  members  of  compounds  and  separated, 
but  not  when  the  pure  stem,  as  in  the  a  dec,  is  modified  in  the 
preceding  member ;  hence  purvebhis  (p.  77,  note  9)  is  not  analysed, 
idyas  :  to  be  read  as  ilias  (p.  16,  2  d).     nutanais  :  note  that  the  two 


i.  1, 3]  AGNI  5 

forms  of  the  inst.  pi.  of  the  a  dec.  in  ais  and  ebhis  constantly  occur 
in  the  same  stanza,  sa  (49)  being  unmarked  at  the  beginning  of 
a  Pada,  has  the  Udatta ;  the  dependent  Svarita  of  the  following 
syllable  disappears  before  the  Anudatta  required  to  indicate  the 
following  Udatta  of  vam  (Sandhi,  see  39).  This  Anudatta  and 
the  Svarita  of  vaksati  show  that  all  the  intervening  unmarked 
syllables  vam  6ha  have  the  Udatta.  All  the  unaccented  syllables 
following  a  Svarita  (till  the  Anudatta  preceding  an  Udatta)  remain 
unmarked ;  hence  the  last  two  syllables  of  vaksati  are  unmarked  • 
but  in  the  Pada  text  every  syllable  of  a  word  which  has  no  Udatta 
is  marked  with  the  Anudatta  ;  thus  vaksati.  The  latter  word  is 
the  s  ao.  sb.  of  vah  carry  for  vah-s-a-ti  (148,  2  ;  69  a).  In  a  iha 
vaksati,  the  prp.  because  it  is  in  a  principal  sentence  is  uncom- 
pounded  and  accented  (p.  468,  20),  besides  as  very  often  being 
separated  from  the  verb  by  another  word.  The  verb  vah  is  con- 
stantly connected  with  Agni,  who  conveys  the  sacrifice  and  brings 
the  gods.  Syntactically  the  first  hemistich  is  equivalent  to  a  rel. 
clause,  sa  being  the  correlative  (cp.  p.  294  a).  The  gerundive  idyas 
strictly  speaking  belongs  in  sense  to  nutanais,  but  is  loosely  con- 
strued with  piirvebhis  also,  meaning  '  is  to  be  magnified  by  present 
seers  and  (was)  to  be  magnified  by  past  seers '.  The  pel.  uta  and 
(p.  222)  is  always  significant  in  the  RV. 

^w^  ^'^t^tttt?^  II  "^wm^  I  ^T^ci:^?!^?:^:  II 

\  Agnina  rayim  asnavat  Through  Agni  may  one  ohtain  tvealfh 

posam  eva  div^-dive,  day  hy  day  (and)  prosperity,  glorious 

yasasam  viravattamam.  (and)  most  abounding  in  heroes, 

asnav-a-t :  sb.  pr.  of  ams  attain,  3.  s.  ind.  pr.  asnoti  (cp.  p.  184)  ; 
the  prn.  '  he '  inherent  in  the  3.  s.  of  the  vb.  is  here  used  in  the 
indefinite  sense  of  'one',  as  so  often  in  the  8.  s.  op.  in  classical 
Sanskrit,  rayim,  posam  :  co-ordinate  nouns  are  constantly  used 
in  the  RV.  without  the  conjunction  ca.  div^-dive  :  this  is  one  of  the 
numerous  itv.    compounds   found   in  the   RV.,    which    are   always 


6  AGNI  I  i.  1,  3 

accented  on  the  iii'st  membei*  only,  and  are  analysed  in  the  Pada 
text  like  other  compounds  (189  C  a),  yasasam :  this  is  one  of 
the  few  adjectives  ending  in  -as  that  occur  in  the  RV.  ;  the  corre- 
sponding n.  substantives  are  accented  on  the  first  syllable,  as  yas-as 
fame  (83,  2  a  ;  182,  p.  256).  vira-vat-tamam  :  both  the  suffix  vant 
(p.  264,  cp.  185  a)  and  the  superlative  suffix  tama  are  treated  in  the 
Pada  text  like  final  members  of  a  cd .  ;  viravant  being  here  regarded 
as  a  unit,  it  is  treated  as  the  first  member  in  the  analysis  (cp.  note 
on  ratna-dhatama  in  1  c).  In  these  two  adjectives  we  again  have 
co-ordination  without  the  connecting  pel.  ca.  Their  exact  meaning 
is  'causing  fame'  and  'produced  by  many  heroic  sons',  fame  and 
brave  fighters  being  constantly  prayed  for  in  the  hymns. 

^  <|^g  ^^f?T  II  ^:  I  T^  1 1^^  I  ^wfh  II 

4  Agne,  yam  yajnam  adhvaram  0  Agni,  the  worship  and  sacrifice 

c    visvatah  paribhur  asi,  that  thou  encompassest  on  every  side, 

sa  id  dev^su  gachati.  that  same  goes  to  the  gods. 

yajnam  adhvaram  :  again  co-ordination  without  ca ;  the  former 
has  a  wider  sense  =  worship  (prayer  and  offering) ;  the  latter  = 
sacrificial  act.  visva-tas :  the  prn.  adj.  visva  usually  shifts  its 
accent  to  the  second  syllable  before  adv.  suffixes  and  as  first  member 
of  a  cd.  (p.  454,  10).  asi  is  accented  as  the  vb.  of  a  subordinate 
clause  (p.  467,  B).  sa  id:  all  successively  unmarked  syllables  at 
the  beginning  of  a  hemistich  have  the  Udatta  (p.  449,  2).  On  the 
particle  id  see  p.  218.  dev^su :  the  loc.  of  the  goal  reached 
(p.  325,  1  ?;) ;  the  ace,  which  might  be  used,  would  rather  express 
the  goal  to  which  the  motion  is  directed.  gachati:  as  the  vb. 
of  a  principal  sentence  has  no  Udatta  (19  A) ;  nor  has  it  any  accent 
mark  in  the  Samhita  text  because  all  unaccented  syllables  following 
a  dependent  Svarita  remain  unmarked  ;  on  the  other  hand,  all  the 
syllables  of  an  unaccented  word  are  marked  with  the  Anudfitta  in 
the  Pada  text  (cp.  note  on  2  d).  The  first  syllable  of  gachati  is  long 
by  position  (p.  437,  a  3). 


i.  1,  6]  AGNI                     "                               7 

|Tt  |%f^TT  ^^<l  II  ^^:  I  l^fir:  I  ^  I  ^wi  II 

5  Agnir  hota  kavikratuh  Mai/  Agni   the  invoker,  of  tvise 

satyas  citrasravastamah,^  intelligence  j  the  true,  of  most 'brilliant 


devo  dev^bhir  a  gamat^  fame,  the  god  come  ivith  the  gods. 

Both  kavi-kratus  and  citra-sravas  have  the  regular  Bv.  accent 
(p.  455  c) ;  the  latter  cd.  is  not  analysed  in  the  Pada  text  because 
it  forms  a  unit  as  first  member,  from  which  tama  is  separated  as  the 
second  ;  cp.  notes  on  tama  in  1  c  and  3  c.  dev^bhis  :  the  inst.  often 
expresses  a  sociative  sense  without  a  prp.  (like  saha  in  Skt.)  :  see 
199  A  1.  devo  devebhih  :  the  juxtaposition  of  forms  of  the  same 
\vord,  to  express  a  contrast,  is  common  in  the  RV.  gam-a-t  :  root 
ao.  sb.  of  gam  (p.  171) ;  on  the  accentuation  of  a  gamat  see 
p.  468,  20  A  a... 

\  '"^  ^I^  ^'l  ^fll  ^f  I  ^J^  I  ^»l  I 

"^  ^  ^ft^ftr  I  ^^  I  ^j^^  I  ^tft^ftr  I 

ff%Tr(^(5r^f^T:  ii  rfqi  i  fri;  i  cfci;  i  ^ysm^  \  ^ff t:  ii 

5  yad  anga  dasiise  tuam,  Just  what  good  thou,  0  Agni,  tvilt 

Agne,  bhadram  karisyasi,  do  for  the  ivorshipper,  that  (purpose) 

tav^t  tat  satyam,  Angirah,  of  thee  (comes)  true,  0  Angiras. 

anga :  on  this  pel.  see  180  (p.  213).  dasiise  :  dat.  of  das-vams, 
one  of  the  few  pf.  pt.  stems  in  the  RV.  formed  without  red.  (140,  5  ; 
157  h),  of  which  only  vid-vams  survives  in  Skt.  tvam  :  here,  as 
nearly  everywhere  in  the  RV.,  to  be  read  as  tuam  on  account  of  the 
metre.  Though  the  Padas  forming  a  hemistich  constitute  a  metrical 
unit,  that  is,  are  not  divided  from  each  other  either  in  Sandhi  or  in  the 
marking  of  the  accent,  the  second  Pada  is  syntactically  separated 
from  the  first  inasmuch  as  it  is  treated  as  a  new  sentence,  a  voc.  or 
a  vb.  at  its  beginning  being  always  accented  (p.  465,   18  a  ;    19  h). 


8  AGNI  [i.  1,  6 

Hence  Agne  is  accented  (the  Udatta  being,  as  always,  on  the  first 
syllable,  p.  465,  18),  while  Angiras  is  not  (p.  466,  18  h).  karisyasi 
(ft.  of  kr  do) :  that  is,  whatever  good  thou  intendest  to  do  to  the 
worshipper  will  certainly  be  realized,  tava  it  tat :  that  intention 
of  thee. 

if^  ^t^  xr^iflr  n  if^:  i  ^j^:  \  ^  i  x^f^  \\ 

7  upa  tvagne  div^-dive,  To  thee,  0  Agni,  day  ly  day,  0 

dosavastar,  dhiya  vayam,  illuminer  of  gloom,  we   come   ivith 

namo  bharanta  ^masi  ;'  thought  bringing  homage  ; 

tva  as  the  enc.  form  of  tvam  (109  a)  and  Agne  as  a  voc.  in  the 
middle  of  a  Pada  (p.  466  l>)  are  unaccented.  The  ace.  tva  is  most 
naturally  to  be  taken  as  governed  by  the  preposition  lipa  (p.  209), 
though  it  might  otherwise  be  quite  well  dependent  on  the  cd.  vb. 
lipa  a-imasi  (a  common  combination  of  lipa  and  a  with  verbs 
meaning  to  go),  as  the  first  prp.  is  often  widely  separated  from  the 
verb  (191  /;  p.  468,  20  a),  dosa-vastar  :  Sayana  explains  this  cd. 
(which  occurs  here  only)  as  by  night  and  day,  but  vastar  never  occurs 
as  an  adv.  and  the  accent  of  dosa  is  shifted  (which  is  not  otherwise 
the  case  in  such  cds.,  as  sayam-pratar  evening  and  morning,  from 
sayam) ;  the  explanation  as  0  illuminer  (from  1.  vas  shine)  of  darkness 
(with  voc.  accent  on  the  first  syllable)  is  much  more  probable,  being- 
supported  by  the  description  of  Indra  (iii.  49,  4)  as  ksapam  vasta 
janita  suryasya  illuminer  of  nights,  generator  of  the  Sun.  dhiya  inst. 
of  dhi  thought  (accent,  p.  458,  1),  used  in  the  sense  of  mental  xwayer. 
namas,  lit.  boiv,  implies  a  gesture  of  adoration,  bharantas  :  N.  pi. 
pr.  pt.  of  bhr  hear,  a-imasi  :  the  ending  masi  is  five  times  as 
common  as  mas  in  the  RV.  (p.  125,  f.  n.  2). 

^^T^  ^  ^  II  ^^'^T^Jl  I  ^  I  ^ir  II 


i.  1,  9]  AGNl  9 

S  rajantam  adhvaranam,  (to  thee)  rulimj  over  sacrifices,  the 

gopam  rtasya  didivim,  shining  gitardtcm  of  order,  groiulng  in 

vardhamanam  sn6  dame.  thine  otun  house. 

rajantam  :  this  and  the  other  accusatives  in  this  stanza  are  m 
agreement  with  tva  in  the  preceding  one.  adhvaranam  :  governed 
by  the  preceding  word,  because  verbs  of  ruling  take  the  gen. 
(202  A  a) ;  the  final  syllable  am  must  be  pronounced  with  a  slur 
equivalent  to  two  syllables  (like  a  vowel  sung  in  music),  go-pam : 
©ne  of  the  many  m.  stems  in  final  radical  a  (p.  78),  which  in  Skt.  is 
always  shortened  to  a  (as  go-pa),  rta  means  the  regular  order  of 
nature,  such  as  the  unvarying  course  of  the  sun  and  moon,  and  of 
the  seasons  ;  then,  on  one  hand,  the  regular  course  of  sacrifice  (rite) ; 
on  the  other,  moral  order  (right),  a  sense  replaced  in  Skt.  by  dharma. 
Agni  is  specially  the  guardian  of  rta  in  the  ritual  sense,  because  the 
sacrificial  fire  is  regularly  kindled  every  day ;  Varuna  (vii.  ^^)  is 
specially  the  guardian  of  rta  in  the  moral  sense,  vardhamanam : 
growing  in  thine  oivn  house,  because  the  sacrificial  fire  after  being 
kindled  flames  up  in  its  receptacle  on  the  altar.  sv6 :  to  be  read  as 
su6  ;  this  prn.  meaning  oivn  refers  to  all  three  persons  and  numbers 
in  the  EV.,  my  oivn,  thy- oivn,  his  own,  &c.  (cp.  p.  112  c).  dame: 
this  word  {=  Lat.  domu-s)  is  common  in  the  KV.,  but  has  disappeared 
in  Skt. 

^^^^T  ^:  ^^"^  u  ^^^  I  5: 1  ^^^  II 

9  sa  nah  piteva  sunave,    .^  T  So,  0  Agni,  he  easy  of  access  to  us, 

Agne,  supayano  bhava ;        ^      as  a  father  to  his  son  ;  abide  ivith  us 
sacasva  nah  suastaye.  for  our  weU-heing. 

sa  is  here  used  in  its  frequent  anaphoric  sense  of  as  such,  thus 
(p.  294  &).  nas  enc.  dat.  (109  a)  i)arallel  to  sunave.  pita  iva :  the 
enc.  pel.  iva  is  regularly  treated  by  the  Pada  text  as  the  second 
member  of  a  cd.  ;  in  the  KV.  pitr  is  usually  coupled  with  stinu, 
matr  with  putra.  sunav6  :  this  word  as  written  in  the  Samhita 
text  appears  with  two  Udattas,  because  the  Udatta  of  the  elided  a 


1  0  AGNI  f i.  1,  9 

is  thrown  back  on  the  pi-eceding  syllable  (p.  465,  3) ;  but  this  a  must 
be  restored,  as  the  metre  shows,  and  sfinave  Agne  read.  Though 
a  is  elided  in  about  75  per  cent,  of  its  occurrences  in  the  written 
Samhita  text,  it  remains  in  the  rest  ;  it  must  be  pronounced  in 
about  99  per  cent.  (cp.  p.  23,  f.  n.  4  and  5).  The  vowel  Sandhi 
which  is  invariably  applied  between  the  final  and  initial  sounds 
of  the  two  Padas  of  a  hemistich,  must  always  be  resolved  to  restore 
the  metre.  This  is  another  indication  (see  note  on  Agne  in  6  b) 
that  the  second  and  the  first  Pada  were  originally  as  independent  of 
each  other  as  the  second  and  the  third.  On  the  accentuation  of 
supayana  as  a  Bv.  see  p.  455,  c  a.  sacasva :  this  verb  (which 
is  exclusively  Vedic)  is  construed  with  the  ace.  (here  nas)  or  the 
inst.  ;  the  vowel  of  sva,  the  ending  of  the  2.  s.  ipv.  A.,  is  here  (like 
many  other  final  vowels)  lengthened  in  the  Samhita,  but  is  regularly 
short  in  the  Pada  text,  svastaye  must  be  read  as  su-astaye ;  it 
has  the  sense  of  a  final  dat.  (200  B  2).  It  is  not  analysed  in  the 
Pada  text  because  asti  does  not  occur  as  an  independent  nominal 
stem. 

SAVIT^l 

This  god  is  celebrated  in  eleven  entire  hymns  and  in  many  detached 
stanzas  as  well.  He  is  pre-eminently  a  golden  deity  :  the  epithets  golden- 
eyed,  golden-handed,  and  golden-tongued  are  peculiar  to  him.  His  car  and 
its  pole  are  golden.  It  is  drawn  by  two  or  more  brown,  white-footed 
horses.  He  has  mighty  golden  splendour  which  he  diffuses,  illuminating 
heaven,  earth,  and  air.  He  raises  aloft  his  strong  golden  arms,  with  which 
he  arouses  and  blesses  all  beings,  and  which  extend  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth.  He  moves  in  his  golden  car,  seeing  all  creatures,  on  a  downward 
and  an  upward  path.  Shining  with  the  rays  of  the  sun,  yellow-haired, 
Savitr  raises  up  his  light  continually  from  the  east.  His  ancient  paths  in 
the  air  are  dustless  and  easy  to  traverse,  a,nd  on  them  he  protects  his 
worshippers ;  for  he  conveys  the  departed  spirit  to  where  the  righteous 
dwell.  He  removes  evil  dreams,  and  makes  men  sinless;  he  drives  away 
demons  and  sorcerers.  He  observes  fixed  laws  ;  the  waters  and  the  wind 
are  subject  to  him.  The  other  gods  follow  his  lead ;  and  no  being  can 
resist  his  will.  In  one  stanza  (iii.  62,  10)  he  is  besought  to  stimulate  the 
thoughts  of  worshippers  who  desire  to  think  of  the  glory  of  god  Savitr. 
This  is  the  celebrated  Savitri  stanza  which  has  been  a  morning  prayer 
in  India  for  more  than  three  thousand  years.  Savitr  is  often  distinguished 
from  Snrya  (vii.  63),  as  when  he  is  said  to  shine  with  the  rays  of  the  sun, 


i.  35,1]  SAVITR  11 

to  impel  the  sun.  or  to  declare  men  sinless  to  the  sun.  But  in  other 
passages  it  is  hardly  possible  to  keep  the  two  deities  apart. 

Savitr  is  connected  with  the  evening  as  well  as  the  morning ;  for  at  his 
command  night  comes  and  he  brings  all  beings  to  rest. 

The  word  Savitr  is  derived  from  the  root  su  to  stimulate,  which  is  con- 
stantly and  almost  exclusively  used  with  it  in  such  a  way  as  to  form  a 
perpetual  play  on  the  name  of  the  god.  In  nearly  half  its  occurrences  the 
name  is  accompanied  by  deva  god,  when  it  means  the  *  Stimulator  god '. 
He  was  thus  originally  a  solar  deity  in  the  capacity  of  the  great  stimulator 
of  life  and  motion  in  the  world. 

i.  35.  In  this  hymn  Savitr  appears  as  the  regulator  of  time,  bringing 
day  and  especially  night. 

The  metre  of  this  hymn  is  Tristubh  (p.  441),  the  commonest  in 
the  KV.,  about  two-fifths  of  which  are  composed  in  it.  It  consists 
of  four  verses  of  eleven  syllables  identical  in  construction,  and  is 
divided  into  two  hemistichs.  The  cadence  (the  last  four  syllables) 
is  trochaic  (— v^  — ^)  ;  the  opening,  consisting  of  either  four  or  five 
syllables  followed  by  a  caesura  or  metrical  pause,  is  predominantly 
iambic  {^  —  '^—  or  —  —  —  —  —),  and  the  break  between  the  caesura  and 
the  cadence  is  regularly  w  w  —  or  w  w.  Thus  the  scheme  of  the 
whole  normal  verse  is  either  —  —  —  — ,  *^vj—  |  — w— ^  |  or  ^  —  ^  —  ^^ 
w  w  I  —  w  —  ^  |.  The  metre  of  stanzas  1  and  9  is  Jagati  (p.  442), 
which  consists  of  four  verses  of  twelve  syllables.  The  Jagati  is 
identical  with  the  Tristubh  verse  extended  by  one  syllable,  which, 
however,  gives  the  cadence  an  iambic  character  (—  »^  —  w  ^).  In  the 
first  stanza  the  caesura  is  always  after  the  fifth  syllable,  in  the 
second  Pada  following  the  first  member  of  a  compound. 

S:^fiT  1^  5df^f!Tt^rT^  II  ^.^TftT  I  |^»l^  I  ^f^ffT^^  I  ^^T^  » 

[  hvayami     Agnim     prathamam         /  call  on  Agni  first  for  welfare ; 

suastaye  ;  I  call  on  Mitra-Varuua  here  for 

hvayami  Mitravarunav  ihavase ;     aid  ;  /  call  on  Night  that  brings  the 


12  SAVITR  [i.  35,  1 

hvayami  Ratrim  jagato  niv6s-     world  to  rest ;  I  call  on  god  Savitr 

anim ;  for  help. 

hvayami  devam  Savitaram  uta- 

ye. 

hvayami :  pr.  ind.  from  hva  call  ;  note  the  anaphoric  repetition 
of  this  word  at  the  beginning  of  each  verse,  prathamam  is  in 
apposition  to  Agnim.  sii-astaye  :  this,  avase,  and  iitaye  are  final 
datives  (p.  814,  B  2) ;  the  last  two  words  are  derived  from  the  same 
root,  av  Jiel2:).  svasti  (cp.  note  on  i.  1,  9  c)  evidently  means  2vell- 
heing ;  by  Sayana,  following  Yaska  (Nirukta,  iii.  21),  it  is  explained 
negatively  as  a-vinasa  non-destruction.  Mitra-varuna  :  one  of  the 
numerous  Dvandvas  both  members  of  which  are  dual  and  accented 
(p.  269) ;  note  that  Dv.  cds.  are  not  analysed  in  the  Pada  text, 
ihavase  for  iha  avase  :  on  the  accent  see  p.  464,  17,  1.  jagatas : 
the  objective  gen.  (p.  320,  B  1  h),  dependent  on  nivesanim  =  that 
causes  the  world  to  'turn  in'  (cp.  x.  127,  4.  5) ;  the  cs.  nivesayan  is 
applied  to  Savitr  in  the  next  stanza. 

|fr  ^if^  g^^Tf^  ^^^  II        w  1 1^:  I  ^Tf(7 1  g^^Tf^  i  TO'I  ii 

2  a  krsn^na  rajasa  vartamano,  Boiling  hither  through  the  dark 

nivesayann     amrtam    martiam  space,  laying  to  rest  the  immortal 

ca,  and  the  mortal,  on  his  golden  car 

hiranyayena  Savita  rathena,  god  Savitr  comes  seeing  (all)  crea- 

a  devo  yati  bhuvanani  pasyan.  tures. 

a  vartamanas  :  the  prp.  may  be  separated  from  a  pt.  as  from 
a  finite  vb.,  p.  462,  13  a ;  when  it  immediately  precedes,  as  in  ni- 
vesayan, it  is  usually  compounded,  i^icZ.  krsndna  rajasa  :  =  through 
the  darkness  ;  loc.  sense  of  the  inst.,  119  A  4.  amrtam  martiam  ca 
s.  m.  used  collectively  =  gods  and  men.  rathena  must  of  course  be 
read  rathenala  ;  see  note  on  Agne,  i.  1,  9  b.    a  devo  yati :  cp.  note 


J.  35,  4]  SAVITR  13 

on  a  iha  vaksati,  i.  1,  2  c.     In  this  and  the  two  following  stanzas 
Savitr  is  connected  with  evening. 

J  yati    devah   pravata,   yati    ud-  J^/^e  ^oc?  ^oes  &«/  a  dowmmrd,  he 

vata  ;  ^oes  &^  aw  upward  path ;  adorable 

yati  subhrabhyam  yajato  hari-  he  goes  with  his  ttvo  bright  steeds. 

bhyam.  God  Savitr  comes  from  the  distance, 

a  devo  yati  Savita  paravato,  driving  away  all  hardships. 

apa  visva  durita  badhamanah. 

In  this  stanza  a  Jagati  verse  is  combined  with  a  Tristubh  in  each 
hemistich.  This  is  quite  exceptional  in  the  RV.  :  see  p.  445,  /?  1  and 
f.  n.  7.  pra-vat-a  and  ud-vat-a :  local  sense  of  the  inst.  ( 199  A  4) ;  note 
that  the  suffix  vat  (p.  263)  is  in  the  Pada  text  treated  like  the  second 
member  of  a  cd.  The  downward  and  upward  path  refer  to  the  sun's 
course  in  the  sky.  The  second  yati  is  accented  as  beginning  a  new 
sentence,  haribhyam :  inst.  in  sociative  sense ;  cp.  dev6bhis  in 
i.  1,  5.  On  the  different  treatment  of  subhrabhyam.  and  haribhyam 
in  the  Pada  text  see  note  on  purvebhis  in  i.  1,  28.  paravato  vj 
pa:  see  note  on  Agne  in  i.  1,  9.  paravatas :  abl.  with  verb  of 
motion  (201  A  1).  apa  badhamanas  :  cp.  note  on  a  in  2  c.  visva 
durita  :  this  form  of  the  n.  pi.  is  commoner  in  the  RV.  than  that  in 
ani ;  p.  78,  f.  n.  14. 

flt^^'^  ^^<ft  ff ^T?:  I       ff t^i^^^T^i:  I  ^^ri:  I  f f ^5F[^  I 

fwr  wftr  fff^^*  ^^T^:  ii         img:  i 

li^T  I  T^ff%  I  crf^ft^T  I  ^^T^: 


14 


SAVITR 


[i.  35,  4 


4  abhivrtam    kfsanair,     visvaru-         His  car   adorned   ivith  pearls. 

pam,  omniform,  with  golden  inns,  lofty, 

hiranyasamyam,   yajato  brhan-     tJte      adorable      Savitr      hrigJitly 

tarn,  lustrous,  putting  on  the  dark  spaces 

asthad    ratham     Savita    citra-     and  Ms  might,  has  mounted. 

bhanuh, 
krsna   rajamsi,  tavisim  dadha- 

nah. 
The  final  vowel  of  abhi  is  lengthened  in  the  Samhita  text,  as 
often  when  a  long  vowel  is  favoured  by  the  metre.  The  prp.  is 
also  accented,  this  being  usual  when  a  prp.  is  compounded  with 
a  pp.  (p.  462,  13 1).  krsanais  :  stars  are  probably  meant,  as  is 
indicated  by  x.  68,  11 ;  '  the  Fathers  adorned  the  sky  with  stars,  like 
a  dark  horse  with  pearls  '.  visva-rupam  :  on  the  accent  cp.  note  on 
i.  1,  4  b.  -samyam :  inflected  like  rathi,  p.  87 ;  the  sami  is 
probably  a  long  pin  fixed  at  each  end  of  the  yoke  to  prevent  its 
slipping  off  the  horse's  neck,  a  asthat :  root  ao.  of  stha.  krsna 
rajamsi  :  =  darkness,  dadhanas  (pr.  pt.  ;  the  pf.  would  be  da- 
dhanas)  governs  both  rajamsi  and  tavisim  =  clothing  himself  in 
darkness  (cp.  2  a)  and  might,  that  is,  bringing  on  evening  by  his 
might. 


_  ^ 


5  vi     janan      chyavah     sitipado 

akhyan, 
ratham    hiranyapraiigam    vah- 

antah. 
sasvad  visah  Savitur  daiviasya 
upasthe     visva   bhuvanani   ta- 

sthuh. 


w^  I  f^^- 1  ^f^g- 1 1^^  ' 

^tivS^  I  f^^i  I  g^^Tf^  I  ^^,:  II 

His  dusky  steeds,  white-footed, 
dratving  his  car  tvith  golden  pole, 
have  surveyed  the  peoples.  For 
ever  the  settlers  and  all  creatures 
have  rested  in  the  lap  of  divine 
Savitr. 


i.  35,  6]  SAVITR  15 

vi  :  separated  from  vb.  ;  see  note  on  a  vaksati,  i.  1,  2  c.  janan 
ehyavah. :  for  janan  syavah  (40,  1).  siti-padas  :  on  the  accentua- 
tion of  this  Bv.  on  the  final  member,  see  p.  455,  c  a.  Note  that  the 
initial  a  of  akhyan  remains  after  o  (cp.  note  on  i.  1,  9  b).  akhyan  : 
a  ao.  of  khya  see  (p.  168,  a  1),  cp.  7  a  and  8  a,  and  pasyan  in  2  d  ; 
the  ao.  expresses  a  single  action  that  has  just  taken  place  (p.  345  C) ; 
the  pf.  tasthur  expresses  an  action  that  has  constantly  (sasvat) 
taken  place  in  the  past  down  to  the  present  (113  A  a).  In  -praiigam 
(analysed  by  the  Pada  text  of  x.  130,  3  as  pra-uga),  doubtless  = 
pra-yugam  (as  explained  in  a  Pratisakhya),  there  is  a  remarkable 
hiatus  caused  by  the  dropping  of  y.  visva  bhiivanani :  here  the 
old  and  the  new  form  of  the  n.  pi.  are  used  side  by  side,  as  very 
often.  On  the  Sandhi  of  daivyasyopasthe  cp.  note  on  Agne, 
i.  1,  9  b.  daivya  divine  is  a  variation  of  the  usual  deva  accompanying 
the  name  of  Savitr.  upasthe  :  the  idea  that  all  beings  are  con- 
tained in  various  deities,  or  that  the  latter  are  the  soul  (atma)  of  the 
animate  and  inanimate  world,  is  often  expressed  in  the  RV. 

'mi  ^^^  g^%  f^TT^TZ  I       ii^t  I  ^^^  I  g^%  i  (^tt^tz  i 
Tf  #^5  ^  ^  cTfw^fffi:  II  ^^:  I 

P  I  ?^g  I  ^:  I  ^  f:fif  I  cTfir  if^'^ct.ll 

>  tisro  dyavah ;  Savitiir  dva  upa-         (There  are)  three  heavens :  tivo 

stham,  (are)  the  laps  of  Savitr,  one  over- 

6ka  Yamasya  bhuvane  virasat.  coming  men,   (is)  in  the  abode  of 

anim     na     rathyam     amrtadhi  Yama.     All  immortal  things  rest 

tasthur :  (on    him)    as    on     the    axle-end 

iha  bravitu  ya  u  tac  ciketat.  of  a  car :  let  him  who  mag  under- 
stand this  tell  it  here. 

The  interpretation  of  this  stanza  is  somewhat  difficult  ;  for  it  is 
meant,  as  the  last  Pada  indicates,  as  an  enigma  (like  several  others 
in  the  RV.).     The  first  Pada  is  evidently  intended  to  explain  the 


16  SAVITE  [i.  35,  G 

last  two  of  the  j^rececling  stanza  :  of  the  three  worlds  Savitr  occupies 
two  (air  and  earth).  The  second  Pada  adds  :  the  third  world  (the 
highest  heaven)  is  the  abode  of  Yam  a,  in  which  dwell  men  after 
death  (that  is,  the  Pitrs).  The  third  Pada  means:  on  Savitr,  in 
these  two  (lower)  worlds,  the  gods  rest,  dyavas :  N.  pi.  of  dyo, 
here  f.  (which  is  rare)  ;  probably  an  elliptical  pi.  (193,  3  a)  =  heaven, 
air,  and  earth,  dva  :  for  dvau  before  u  (22)  ;  after  tisro  dyavah 
the  f.  form  dv6  should  strictly  be  used  (like  6ka  in  b),  but  it  is 
attracted  in  gender  by  the  following  upastha  (cp.  194,  3).  upa- 
stham :  the  dual  ending  a  (which  in  the  EV.  is  more  than  seven 
times  as  common  as  au),  appears  before  consonants,  in  pausa  at  the 
end  of  a  Pada,  and  in  the  middle  of  a  Pada  before  vowels,  with  which 
it  coalesces.  Here  it  is  nasalized  (as  often  elsewhere)  before  the 
initial  vowel  of  the  following  Pada  to  avoid  the  hiatus  ;  this  is 
another  indication  (cp.  note  on  Agne,  i.  1,  9  b)  that  there  was  in  the 
original  text  of  the  RV.  no  vowel  Sandhi  betw^een  the  Padas  of 
a  hemistich,  vira-sat :  N.  s.  of  vira-sah  (81  h),  in  which  there  is  cere- 
bralization  of  s  by  assimilation  to  the  final  cerebral  t  (for  -sat) ;  in  the 
first  member  the  quantity  of  the  vowels  (for  vira)  is  interchanged  for 
metrical  convenience  ;  the  Pada  text  does  not  analyse  the  cd.  because 
the  form  vira  does  not  occur  as  an  independent  word  (cp.  note  on  rtvij, 
i.  1,  1  b).  amrta  :  n.  pi.  —  the  gods,  anim  na  :  on  him,  as  the  car 
rests  on  the  two  ends  of  the  axle  which  pass  through  the  nave  of  the 
Avheels.  adhi  tasthur  :  the  pf.  of  stha  here  takes  the  ace.  by  being 
compounded  with  adhi  ;  in  5  d  the  simple  verb  takes  the  loc.  The 
third  Pada  is  only  a  modification  in  sense  of  5  c  d.  bravitu  :  3.  s. 
ipv.  of  bru  spea7<^  (p.  143,  3  c).  The  pel.  u  is  always  written  in  the 
Pada  text  as  a  long  vowel  and  nasalized  :  um  iti.  ciketat :  pf.  sb. 
of  cit  observe. 


I 


i-  35,  8]  SAVITR 


17 


7  vi  suparno  antariksani  akhyad,         The  bird  has  surveyed  the  atmo- 

gabhiravepa  asurah  sunithah.        spherk  regions,  the  divine  spirit,  of 

kiiedanim  suriah  ?  kas  eiketa  ?      deep  inspiration,  of  good  guidance, 

katamam    dyam     rasmir    asya     Wliere  is  now  the  sun?     WJio  has 

tatana  ?  understood  (it)  ?    To  tvhat  heaven 

has  his  ray  extended  ? 

7-9  deal  with  Savitr  as  guiding  the  sun. 

vi  .  .  .  akhyat :  cp.  5  a  and  8  a.     suparnas  :  Savitr  is  here  called 
a  bird,  as  the  sun-god  Surya  (vii.  63)  often  is.     On  the  accent  of  this 
Bv.  and  of  su-nithas  see  p.  455,  c  a.     antariksani ;  equivalent  to 
krsna    rajamsi  (4  d),   the   aerial   spaces   when   the   sun   is  absent, 
asuras :  this  word,  which  is  applied  to  various  gods  in  the  EV.,  but 
especially  to  Varuna,  and  in  the  Avesta,  as  ahura,  is  the  name  of  the 
highest    god,    means    a    divine   being    possessed    of  occult  power; 
towards  the  end  of  the  Rigvedic  period  it  gradually  lost  this  sense 
and  came  to  mean  a  higher  hostile  power,  celestial  demon,      su- 
nithas  :  guiding  well  here  means  that  the  sun  illumines  the  paths 
with  his  light,     kvedanim  :  when  an  independent  Svarita  is  in  the 
Samhita  text  immediately  followed  by  an  Udatta,  the  Svarita  vowel, 
if  long,  has  added  to  it  the  figure  3,  which  is  marked  with  both 
Svarita  and  Anudatta  (p.  450  h).     idanim  :  notv  =  at  night    eiketa  : 
pf.  of  eit  observe  (139,  4).     dyam  :  ace.  of  dyo  (p.  94,  3),  here  again 
(cp.    6  a)  f.      asya :    =  asya   L      tatana :   pf.    of  tan   stretch    (cp. 
137,  2  h).     The  question  here  asked,  where  the  sun  goes  to  at  night, 
is  parallel  to  that  asked  about  the  stars  in  i.  24,  10:  'those  stars 
which  are  seen  at  night  placed  on  high,   where    have   they  sone 
by  day?'     .  ^ 

—  vs. 

V^K  I  Tm  I  ^T^  I  ^T^tftr  II 


190-2 


18 


SAVITR 


[i.  35,  8 


Tf^ 


8  astau  vi  akhyat  kakiibhahprthi- 

vyas, 
tri  dhanva,   yojana,  sapta  sin- 

dhun. 
hiranyaksah  Savita  deva  agad, 
dadhad  ratna  dasiise  variani. 


He  has  surveyed  the  eight  peaks 
of  the  earth,  the  three  waste  lands, 
the  leagues,  the  seven  rivers. 
Golden-eyed  god  Savitr  has  come, 
bestowing  desirable  gifts  on  the 
worshipper. 


The  general  meaning  of  this  stanza  is  that  Savitr  surveys  all 
space :  the  mountains,  the  plains,  the  rivers,  and  the  regions  between 
heaven  and  earth,  astau  :  106  b.  prthivyas  :  on  the  accentuation 
see  p.  458,  2.  tri :  n.  pi.  (105,  3)  to  be  read  disyllabically.  dhanva : 
ace.  pi.  of  dhanvan  n.,  90,  3  (p.  70  ;  cp.  p.  67,  bottom).  The  long 
syllable  after  the  caesura  in  b  and  d  (—  w  —  for  w  w  — )  is  rare  in  the 
KV.  (p.  440,  4  B).  yojana  :  probably  the  thirty  leagues  that  Dawn 
traverses  in  the  sky  (i.  123,  8),  the  number  of  each  of  the  other 
features  being  expressly  stated,  hiranyaksas :  the  accent  of  this 
cd.  as  a  Bv.  is  quite  exceptional :  p.  455  c.  a-agat :  root  ao.  of 
ga  go.  dadhat :  on  the  accent  cp.  127,  2 ;  on  the  formation  of  the 
stem,  156. 


9  hiranyapanih  Savita  vicarsanir 
ubh6  dyavaprthivi  antar  iyate. 
apamivam  badhate;  v^tisuriam; 
abhi  krsn^na  rajasa  dyam  rnoti. 


Golden-handed  Savitr,  the  active, 
goes  between  both  heaven  and  earth. 
He  drives  aivay  disease  ;  he  guides 
the  sun ;  through  the  dark  space  he 
penetrates  to  heaven. 

Dyava-prthivi  :  with  the  usual  double  accent  of  Devatfi-dvandvas 
(p.  457,  e  P)  and  not  analysed  in  the  Pada  text  (cp.  note  on  1  b). 
Its  final  1,  as  well  as  the  e  of  ubh6,  l)eing  Pragrhya  (25  a,  26  a),  is 
followed  ])y  iti  in  i he  Pada  text  (p.   25,   f.  n.  2).     antar  (46)  com- 


i.  35,  10]  SAVITR  19 

bined  with  i  go  governs  the  ace.  ;  cp.  the  two  laps  of  Savitr  in  6  a. 
apa  badhate :  he  drives  away  disease,  cp.  3d;  contrary  to  the 
general  rule  (p.  466,  19  A)  the  vb.  is  here  accented  ;  this  irregularity 
not  infrequently  occurs  when  in  the  same  Pada  a  compound  verb  is 
immediately  followed  by  a  simple  vb.  vdti :  accented  because  it 
begins  a  new  sentence  ;  Savitr  guides  the  sun :  cp.  7  c.  krsn^na 
rajasa :  cp.  2  a  and  4  d.  abhi  .  .  .  dyam  rnoti ;  cp.  7  d.  The 
metre  of  d  is  irregular  :  it  is  a  Tristubh  of  twelve  syllables,  the  first 
two  syllables  (abhi)  taking  the  place  of  a  long  one.  Cp.  p.  441,  4  a 
and  p.  445,  B  1. 

^^t^w:  iTf?r^^  ^WT^:  II        ^^Tfi:  1 1^:  i  iRf^^j^^^R;  i  ^mm  \\ 

0  hiranyahasto  asurah  sunithah,  Let    the   golden-handed    divine 

sumrlikah  suavam  yatu  arvan.       spirit,    of   good    guidance,    most 

apasedhan  raksaso  yatudhanan,     gracious,  aiding  tvelJ,  come  hither, 

asthad  devah  pratidosam  grna-     Chasing  away  demons  and  sorcerers, 

nah.  the  god  heing  lauded  has  arisen 

towards  eventide. 

asuras :  cp.  7  b.  svavan  :  the  analysis  of  the  Pada  text,  sva- 
van  =  possessed  of  property,  is  followed  by  Sayana  who  renders  it  by 
dhanavan  wealthy  ;  this  would  mean  that  Savitr  bestows  wealth 
(cp.  dadhad  ratna  in  8  d,  and  vi.  71,  4  a  dasiise  suvati  bhuri 
vamam  he,  Savitr,  brings  much  ivealth  to  the  tvorsMpper).  This  nom. 
occurs  several  times  in  the  RV.,  and  is  always  analysed  in  the  same 
way  by  the  Padapatha.  On  the  other  hand,  three  oblique  cases 
of  su-avas  giving  good  help  occur  (svavasam,  svavasa,  svavasas). 
Roth  takes  svavan  to  be  a  nom.  of  this  stem  irregularly  formed  by 
analogy  for  su-avas  (cp.  83,  2  a).  I  follow  the  Pada  text  as  the 
meaning  is  sufficiently  good.  Final  an,  which  regulai-ly  becomes  am 
before  vowels  (39),  sometimes  undergoes  the  same  change  before  y 
(40,  4).  raksasas  has  the  accent  of  a  m.  in  as  (83,  2  a)  ;  the  n.  form 
is  raksamsi.     yatudhanan  is  added,  as  is  oCten  the  case,  without 

c  2 


20  SAVITR  [i.  35,  10 

ii  connecting  ca :  cp.  note  on  rayim,  in  i.  1,  3a;  note  that  the 
^  Sandhi  of  an  before  vowels  (39)  does  not  apply  at  the  end  of  an 
internal  Pada.  If  Savitr  in  this  stanza  is  connected  with  morning 
rather  than  evening,  asthat  would  here  be  equivalent  to  lid  asthat ; 
cp.  EV.  vi.  71,  4  :  lid  u  sya  devah.  Savita  damuna  hiranyapanih 
pratidosam  asthat  that  god  Savitr,  the  domestic  friend,  the  golden- 
handed,  has  arisen  toivards  eventide ;  it  may,  however,  be  equivalent 
to  a  asthat,  that  is,  he  has  mounted  his  car,  cp.  4  c.  grnanas : 
pr.  pt.  A.,  with  ps.  sense,  of  1.  gr  sing,  greet. 

cjci  %  %  ^^+:  ^f^rr:  5^1^  %\\\  tiisfi:  1  ^ft<Tftf^  1  I^t^ec:  i 

T^i  ^  ^  ^fti  ^  ^ff  ^^  II     T^  I  ?  I  ^M  "^fti  I  ^  I  fff  1 1^  II 

11  y^tepanthah,  Savitahjpurviaso,  Thine  ancient  paths,  0  Savitr, 

arenavah  siikrta  antarikse,  the  dustless,  the  ivell  made,  in  the 

t^bhir  n6  adya  pathibhih  sug6-  air,  (going)  hy  those  paths  easij  to 

bhi  traverse x^fotect  us  to-day,  and  speaJc 

raksa   ca    no,    adtii    ca   bruhi,  for  us,  0  god. 

deva. 

te  :  the  dat.  and  gen.  of  tvam,  is  always  unaccented  ;  while  t6, 
N.  pi.  m.  and  N.  A.  du.  f.  n.  of  ta,  is  always  t6.  panthas  :  N.  pi.  of 
pantha,  m.  p>ath,  which  is  the  only  stem  (not  panthan)  in  the  RV. 
(99,  1  a).  Savitah  :  when  final  Visarjnniya  in  the  Samhita  text 
represents  original  r,  this  is  always  indicated  by  the  word  being 
written  with  r  followed  by  iti  in  the  Pada  text*;  here  Savitar  iti. 
'renavas  :  the  initial  a  must  be  restored  (see  note  on  Agne,  i.  1,  9  b  ; 
but  a  is  not  elided  after  o  in  c  and  d)  ;  on  the  accent  of  a  Bv. 
formed  with  privative  a,  see  p.  455,  c  a.  sii-krtas  :  Karmadharayas, 
in  which  the  first  meml^er  is  an  adv.  and  the  last  a  pp.,  accent  the 
former  ;  p.  456,  1  a.  t^bhis  :  inst.  of  ta,  p.  106  ;  p.  457,  11  h.  In  c 
n6  adya  should  be  pronounced  because  e  and  o  are  sliortened  before 
a  {\\  437,  a  4) ;  tliis  rule  does  not  apply  when  e  and  o  are  separated 
from  a  by  the  caesura  ;  hence  in  d  6,  adhi  should  ))e  pronounced, 
sug^bhi  :  see  47.     The  final  a  of  raksa  is  lengthened  because  the 


i.  85]  MAEUTS  21 

second  syllable  of  the  Padn  favours  a  long  vowel,  adhi  .  .  .  bruhi : 
he  our  advocate;  the  meaning  of  this  e.xpression  is  illustrated  by 
other  passages  :  in  i.  123,  3  Savitr  is  besought  to  report  to  Surya 
that  his  w^orshippers  are  sinless  ;  in  vii.  60,  2  Surya  is  implored  to 
make  a  similar  report  to  the  Adityas. 


MARUTAS 

This  group  of  deities  is  prominent  in  the  RV.,  thirty-three  hymns  being 
addressed  to  them  alone,  seven  to  them  with  India,  and  one  each  to  them 
with  Agni  and  Pusan  (vi.  54).  They  form  a  troop  (gana,  sardhas),  being 
mentioned  in  the  plural  only.  Their  number  is  thrice  sixty  or  thrice 
seven.  They  are  the  sons  of  Rudra  (ii.  83)  and  of  Prsni,  who  is  a  cow 
(probably  representing  the  mottled  storm-cloud).  They  are  further  said  to 
have  been  generated  by  Yayu,  the  god  of  Wind,  in  the  wombs  of  heaven, 
and  they  are  called  the  sons  of  heaven;  but  they  are  also  spoken  of  as 
self-born.  They  are  brothers  equal  in  age  and  of  one  mind,  having 
the  same  birthplace  and  the  same  abode.  They  have  grown  on  earth,  in 
air,  and  in  heaven,  or  dwell  in  the  three  heavens.  The  goddess  Rodasi  is 
always  mentioned  in  connexion  with  them  ;  she  stands  beside  them  on  their 
car,  and  thus  seems  to  have  been  regarded  as  their  bride. 

The  brilliance  of  the  Maruts  is  constantly  referred  to :  they  are  golden, 
ruddy,  shine  like  fires,  and  are  self-luminous.  They  are  very  often  asso- 
ciated with  lightning :  all  the  five  compounds  of  vidyut  in  the  RV.  are 
almost  exclusively  descriptive  of  them.  Their  lances  represent  lightning, 
as  their  epithet  rsti-vidyut  lightning- speared  shows.  They  also  have 
golden  axes.  They  are  sometimes  armed  with  bows  and  arrows,  but  this 
trait  is  probably  borrowed  from  their  father  Rudra.  They  wear  garlands, 
golden  mantles,  golden  ornaments,  and  golden  helmets.  Armlets  and 
anklets  (khadi)  are  peculiar  to  them.  The  cars  on  which  they  ride  gleam 
with  lightning,  and  are  drawn  by  steeds  (generally  feminine)  that  are 
ruddy  or  tawny,  spotted,  swift  as  thought.  They  are  great  and  mighty ; 
young  and  unaging ;  dustless,  fierce,  terrible  like  lions,  but  also  playful  like 
children  or  calves. 

The  noise  made  by  them,  and  often  mentioned,  is  thunder  and  the 
roaring  of  the  winds.  They  cause  the  mountains  to  quake  and  the  two 
worlds  to  tremble  ;  they  rend  trees,  and,  like  wild  elephants,  devour  the 
forests.  One  of  their  main  activities  is  to  shed  rain  :  they  cover  the  eye 
of  the  sun  with  rain ;  they  create  darkness  with  the  cloud  when  they  shed 
rain  ;  and  they  cause  the  heavenly  pail  and  the  streams  of  the  mountains  to 
pour.     The  waters  they  shed  are  often  clearly  connected  with  the  thunder- 


22  MAKUTS  [i.  85,  i 

storm.  Their  rain  is  often  figuratively  called  milk,  gliee,  or  honey.  They 
avert  heat,  but  also  dispel  darkness,  produce  light,  and  prepare  a  path  for 
the  sun. 

They  are  several  times  called  singers :  they  are  the  singers  of  heaven  ; 
they  sing  a  song  ;  for  Indra  when  he  slew  the  dragon,  they  sang  a  song  and 
pressed  Soma.  Though  primarily  representing  the  sound  of  the  winds, 
their  song  is  also  conceived  as  a  hymn  of  praise.  Thus  they  come  to  be 
compared  with  priests,  and  are  addressed  as  priests  when  in  the  company  of 
Indra. 

Owing  to  their  connexion  with  the  thunderstorm,  the  Maruts  are  con- 
stantly associated  with  Indra  (ii.  12)  as  his  friends  and  allies,  increasing  his 
strength  and  prowess  with  their  prayers,  hymns,  and  songs,  and  generally 
assisting  him  in  the  fight  with  Vrtra.  Indra  indeed  accomplishes  all  his 
celestial  exploits  in  their  company.  Sometimes,  however,  the  Maruts 
accomplish  these  exploits  alone.  Thus  they  rent  Vrtra  joint  from  joint, 
and  disclosed  the  cows. 

When  not  associated  with  Indra,  the  Maruts  occasionally  exhibit  the 
maleficent  traits  of  their  father  Rudra.  Hence  they  are  implored  to  ward 
off  the  lightning  from  their  worshippers  and  not  to  let  their  ill-will  reach 
them,  and  are  besought  to  avert  their  arrow  and  the  stone  which  they  hurl, 
their  lightning,  and  their  cow-  and  man-slaying  bolt.  But  like  their  father 
Rudra,  they  are  also  supplicated  to  bring  healing  remedies.  These  remedies 
appear  to  be  the  waters,  for  the  Maruts  bestow  medicine  b}^  raining. 

The  evidence  of  the  RV.  indicates  that  the  Maruts  are  Storm-gods.  The 
name  is  probably  derived  from  the  root  mar,  1o  shine,  thus  meaning  '  the 
shining  ones '. 

i.  85.     Metre  :  Jagati  ;  5  and  12  Tristubh. 

J{if^  ^TT  f^^%  ^^:  II  1^  I 

^^f^  I  ^Tt:  I  f^^  I  ^^^:  II 

1  pra  y6  siimbhante,  janayo  na,  The  wondrous  sons  of  Eudra, 

saptayo  the   racers,   tvho  on   their  course 

yaman,   Rudrasya  sunavah  su-  adorn  themselves  like  women,  the 

damsasah,  Maruts  have  indeed  made  the  two 


i.  85,  3]  MARUTS  23 

rodasi  hi  Marutas  cakrir^  vr-     worlds  to  increase.     The  impetuous 
dh6.  heroes  rejoice  in  rites  of  worship. 

madanti  vira  vidathesu  ghrsva- 
yah. 

janayas :  99,  1  a.  yaman :  loc,  90,  2.  sudamsasas :  accent, 
p.  455,  10  c  a.  cakrir^  :  3.  pi.  A.  pf.  of  kr  ;  with  dat.  inf.,  p.  334,  b. 
madanti :  with  loc,  204,  1  a.  vidathesu :  the  etymology  and 
precise  meaning  of  this  word  have  been  much  discussed.  It  is  most 
probably  derived  from  vidh  tvorship  (cp.  p.  41,  f.  n.  1),  and  means 
divine  worship, 

^f>^  f^r^t  ^f^T  ^f^TfTT:  II    ^fti  I  f^:  I  ff^^:  I  gftr^J^TfTT:  ii 

2  ta  uksitaso  mahimanam  asata :  Thei/  having  waxed  strong  have 

divlRudrasoadhicakriresadah.  attained  greatness:  in  heaven  the 

arcanto  arkam,  janayanta  indri-  Rudras    have   made  their  abode. 

yam,  Singing  their  song  and  generating 

adhi    sriyo    dadhire   Prsnima-  the   might   of  Indra,   they  whose 

tarah.  mother  is  Prsni  have  put  on  glory. 

t6 :  N.  pi.  m.  of  ta  that,  110.  uksitasas :  pp.  of  2.  uks  (=  vaks) 
grow,  asata  :  3.  pi.  A.  root  ao.  of  ams  attain.  Rudrasas  :  the 
Maruts  are  often  called  '  Rudras  '  as  equivalent  to  '  sons  of  Rudra  '. 
adhi  :  prp.  with  the  loc.  divi  ;  176,  2.  janayanta  indriyam  :  that 
is,  by  their  song,  adhi  dadhire :  3.  pi.  A.  pf.  of  adhi  dha,  which 
is  especially  often  used  of  putting  on  ornaments,  sriyas :  A.  pi.  of 
sri  glory  ;  referring  to  the  characteristic  brilliance  of  the  Maruts. 

^  ^^Tf!T^  ^^^^^^  ^%fiT^    ^vf^fTT:  I  ^^1  ^^^^  I  ^f^vJfn:  I 

^(SRT^^T^^  f\^%  ^fTT^^  H  ^cRTf^  I  ^^TJR:  I  ^^  I  T^^  I  ^rT^  It 


24 


MARUTS 


[i.  85, 


3  gomataro  yac  chubhayante  aiiji- 

bhis, 
tanusu  subhra  dadhire   viriik- 

matah. 
badhante  visvam  abhimatinam 

apa. 
vartmani     esam     anu      riyate 

ghrtam. 


When  they  ivhose  mother  is  a  cow 
deck  themselves  with  ornaments, 
shining  they  put  on  their  'bodies 
hrilliant  weapons.  They  drive  off 
every  adversary.  Fatness  flows 
along  their  tracks. 


gomataras  :  as  the  sons  of  the  cow  Prsni.  yac  chubhayante  : 
Sandhi,  53.  dadhire  :  pf.  with  pr.  sense,  they  have  put  on  =  they  wear. 
apa :  prp.  after  the  vb.  and  separated  from  it  by  other  words, 
191  /;  p.  468,  20.  anu  riyate  :  3.  pi.  A.  pr.  of  ri  flotv.  ghrtam  : 
ghee  =  fertilizing  rain.  The  meaning  of  d  is  :  the  course  of  the 
Maruts  is  followed  by  showers  of  rain,  esam :  unemphatic  G. 
pi.  m.  of  ayam,  p.  452,  8  B  c. 


^  f^  ^  mw%  ^^mm  ^f%^:    f%  I  %  I  '^T^^  I  gi^^T^:  i  ^fn 

-  _  N»  - 


vi  y^  bhrajante  sumakhasa  rsti- 

bhih, 
pracyavayanto  acyuta  cid  ojasa, 
manojiivo     yan,     Maruto,     ra- 

thesu  a 
vrsavratasah       prsatir      ayug- 

dhuam ; 


Who  as  great  ivarriors  shine 
forth  with  their  spears,  overthrow- 
ing even  ivhat  has  never  been  over- 
thrown ivith  their  might :  tvhen  ye, 
0  Maruts,  that  are  sivift  as  thought, 
ivith  your  strong  hosts,  have  yoked 
the  spotted  mares  to  your  cars, 


siimakhasas  :  a  Karmadharaya  cd.  according  to  its  accent  (cp. 
p.  455,  10  c  a),  but  the  exact  meaning  of  makha  is  still  somewhat 
uncertain,  pra-cyavayantas :  pr.  pt.  of  cs.  of  cyu  7nove  ;  though 
this  cs.,   which   occurs  frequently  in    the   RV.,   always  has   a  long 


i.  85,  6]  MAEUTS  25 

radical  vowel  in  the  Samhita  text,  it  invariably  has  a  short  vowel  in 
the  Padapatha.  Marutas :  change  from  the  3.  to  the  2.  prs.,  in  the 
same  sentence,  a  not  infrequent  transition  in  the  RV.  manojuvas  : 
N.  pi.  radical  u  stem  mano-ju,  100,  II  a  (p.  88).  rathesu  a  :  176,  2. 
prsatis :  the  spotted  mares  that  draw  the  cars  of  the  Maruts. 
ayugdhvam :  2.  pi.  A.  root  ao.  of  yuj  yoke. 

^m^^^  f^  ^f^  ^TT.T'l        ^fT  I  ^^TO  I  f^  I  ^%  I  ^ttt:  I 
^ii^f'T^^f^  ^  II  ^Hvj^^  I  ^s^i  I  f^  I  ^^f^  I 

pra  yad  rathesu  prsatir  ayug-  ivJien  ye  have  yoked   the   spotted 

dhvam,  mares  before  your  cars,  speeding,  0 

vaje     adrim,    Maruto,    ramha-  Maruts,  the  stone  in  the  conflict, 

yantah,  they  discharge  the  streams  of  the 

utarusasya  vi  sianti  dharas  ruddy  (steed)  and  moisten  the  earth 

carmevodabhir  vi  undanti  bhu-  like  a  shin  with  ivaters, 
ma. 

ayugdhvam  :  with  loc,  cp.  204,  1  b.  adrim  :  the  Maruts  hold 
lightning  in  their  hands  and  cast  a  stone,  uta :  here  comes  before 
the  first  instead  of  the  second  of  two  clauses,  as  ca  sometimes  does 
(p.  228,  1).  arusasya :  the  ruddy  steed  of  heaven  ;  cp.  v.  83,  6 
where  the  Maruts  are  invoked  to  pour  forth  the  streams  of  the 
stallion  ;  and  in  v.  56,  7  their  ruddy  steed  (vaji  arusah)  is  spoken  of. 
vi  syanti:  3.  pi.  pr.  of  sa  lind  ]  Sandhi,  67  a  ;,  change  back  from 
2.  to  3.  prs. ;  cp.  4  c  d.  undanti :  3.  pi.  pr.  of  ud  ivet.  bhuma : 
N.  of  bhuman  n.  earth  (but  bhuman  m.  abundance). 

\  w  ^  ^v^  ^H^  T^^Ct  w  I  ^:  I  ^f ^5  I  ■^^■^^  i  TH^J^:  i 
T^w^:  IT  f^'ncT  ^T¥"fy:  i  t^^^^t^:  i  it  i  f^'rj^  i  ^T:FvSf*r:  i 
^^riT  ^ff  ^^  ^:  ^r^fi  ^^rr  i  ^  i  ^ff :  i  ^^  i  ^:  i  ^^:  i 
m^^^  i?^cft  w^_  ^5«r^:  II        fffT*^  I 

^T^^'t^  I  ^^ct:  I  ^^:  I  ^5^^:  ii 


26 


MARUTS 


[i. 


G  a  vo  vahantu    saptayo   raghu-  Let    your    smft-yliding    racers 

syado ;  bring  you  hither.    Sivift-flying  come 

raghupatvanah  pra  jigata  bahii-  forward  ivith  your  arms.    Sit  down 

bliih.  on  the  sacrificial  grass :    a  ivide 

sidata  barhir  :    urii   vah   sadas  seat  is  made  for  you.     Rejoice,  0 

krtam.  Maruts,  in  the  sweet  juice. 
madayadhvam,  Maruto,  madh- 

v6  andhasah. 

raghu-syadas  :  Sandhi,  67  &.  raghupatvanas  :  as  belonging  to 
this  Pada  to  be  taken  with  pra  jigata  (ga  go),  bahubhis  :  with 
outstretched  arms  as  they  drive,  sidata  a :  2.  pi.  ipv.  pr.  of  sad  sit 
with  prp.  following  (p.  468,  20).  sadas  :  Sandhi,  43,  2  a.  krtam  : 
as  finite  vb.,  208.  madayadhvam :  cs.  of  mad  rejoice,  with  gen., 
202  A  Jj.  madhvas  :  gen.  n.  of  madhu,  p.  81,  f.  n.  12  ;  the  sweet 
juice  is  Soma. 


^  I  ^^^'^  I  ^vJrT^^:  I  ^vf^^T  I 
W  I  ^T^^l  rT^:  I  ^^1  ^ftSTI  ^^«  I 
f^^:   I   ^fi;  I  f  I  ^ci;  I  f  4t!I^  I 

^^:  I  ^  I  ^5^1: 1  ^f^  I  ^t^  I 
ft%  II 


7  te  'vardhanta  svatavaso  mahi-         Self-strong  they  greiv  by  their 

tvana  :  greatness :  they  have  mounted  to  the 

a  nakam  tasthur;  urii  cakrire    firmament;  they  have  made  for  them- 


sadah. 
Visnur    yad    dhavad   vrsanam 

madacyutam, 
vayo    na    sidann    adhi   barhisi 

priy6. 

td  'vardhanta:  Sandhi  accent,  p.  465,  17,  3.     mahitvana :  inst. 
of  mahitvana,  p.  77,  f.  n.  3.     a  tasthur  :  vb.  of  a  i)rincipal  sentence 


selves  a  ivide  seat.  When  Visnu 
helped  the  bull  reeling  tvith  intoxi- 
cation, they  sat  down  upon  their 
beloved  sacrificial  grass  like  birds. 


i.  85,  9]  MARUTS  27 

accented  according  to  p.  468,  fS.  Visnus :  the  mention  of  wide 
space  (a  conception  intimately  connected  with  Visnu,  cp.  uru-gaya, 
&c.)  in  6  c  and  7  b  has  here  probably  suggested  the  introduction  of 
Visnu  (i.  154),  who  is  in  various  passages  associated  with  the 
Maruts  (especially  in  v.  87)  and  who  also  forms  a  dual  divinity 
(fndra-Visnu)  with  Indra.  dha :  Sandhi,  54.  avat :  3.  s.  ipf.  of 
av  favour ;  Visnu  helps  Indra,  aided  by  the  Maruts,  in  his  conflicts, 
vrsan :  dec,  90,  1 ;  both  this  word  and  madacyut  are  applied  to 
Soma  as  well  as  Indra,  but  the  meaning  of  the  vb.  av  and  the  use 
of  the  ipf.  are  in  favour  of  Indra  being  intended,  the  sense  then 
being :  '  when  Visnu  and  Indra,  associated  in  conflict,  came  to  the 
Soma  offering,  the  Maruts,  their  companions,  came  also.'  vayas  : 
N.  pi.  of  vi  bird,     sidan  :  unaugmented  ipf.  of  sad  sit, 

'T^^  f^^T  g^'-sTT  ^^wt         ^^^^:  I  ^  I  ^fi^Tg  i  ^fW^  i 
TT^t^  T^  ^^^f  ^  "^V  II       *f^^  I  f^^T  I  g^'fi  I  'T^fi^i^:  I 

TT^T^tvJ^^  I  ^^vj^'fir:  I  ^t-  II 

8  sura  iv6d  yiiyudhayo  na  jagma-  LiJce  heroes,  speeding  like  war- 

yah,  riors,  like  fame-seeking  (men)  they 

sravasyavo  na  prtanasu  yetire.  have  arrayed  themselves  in  battles. 

bhayante  visva  bhiivana  Mariid-  A  U  creatures  fear  the  Maruts :  the 

bhio :  men    are    like    kings    of   terrible 

raj  ana  iva  tvesasamdrso  narah.  aspect. 

iva :  note  how  this  pel.  interchanges  with  na  in  this  stanza, 
yetire :  3.  pi.  pf.  A.  of  yat :  137,  2  a.  bhayante  :  3.  pi.  pr.  A.  of 
bhi  fear ;  the  pr.  stem  according  to  the  bhu  class  is  much  commoner 
in  the  EV.  than  that  according  to  the  third  class.  Mariidbhyas : 
201  A  b.     naras  :  the  Maruts  ;  N.  pi.  of  nr  man,  101,  1. 

e  ^FT  ^T^  gim  ffT^^  <3f^T  I  ^fT.  I  ^^  I  g^lfffll  ffT- 


28  MARUTS  [i.  85,  o 

si-f^  1^xmwl^^4y(T{^  II       \a%  I  x^'"  I  ^fr  i  ^mf%  i  ^i^  i 

"^i^  1 1^'^  I  f^:  I  ^m^,  I  #^ci.  I 
^xg^»l  II 

9  Tvasta    yad    vajram    sukrtam  When    the  sidlful   Tvastr  had 

hiranyayam  turned     the     tvell-made,     golden, 

sahasrabhrstim    suapa    avarta-  thousand-edged  holt,  Indra  took  it 

yat,  to  perform  manly  deeds :  he  slew 

dhatta  Indro   nariapamsi   kar-  Vrtra,  and  drove  out  the  flood  of 

tave :  tvaters. 
ahan  Vrtram,  nir  apam  aubjad 

arnavam. 

The  association  of  ideas  connecting  Indra  with  the  Maruts  is 
continued  from  7  c  d.  That  Tvastr  fashioned  Indra's  bolt  for  him 
is  mentioned,  in  a  similar  context,  in  i.  32,  1  c  and  2  b  :  ahann 
ahim,  anv  apas  tatarda ;  Tvasta  asmai  vajram  svaryam  tataksa 
he  slew  the  serpent,  he  released  the  waters  ;  Tvastr  fashioned  for  him  the 
whizzing  holt,  dhatta  :  3.  s.  pr.  A.  used  in  the  past  sense  (212  A  2). 
kartave  :  dat.  inf.  of  purpose,  in  order  to  perform  (kr),  211.  narya- 
pamsi  is  here  and  in  viii.  96,  19  analysed  by  the  Pada  text  as  nari 
apamsi.  The  only  possible  sense  of  these  words  would  be  deeds  against 
the  hero  (Yrtra).  On  the  other  hand  naryani  appears  once  (vii.  21,  4) 
and  narya  twice  (iv.  19,  10  ;  viii.  96,  21)  as  an  attribute  of  apamsi  ; 
the  epithet  naryapasam,  analysed  by  the  Padapatha  (viii.  93,  1)  as 
narya-apasam  doing  manly  deeds  is  applied  to  Indra.  It  thus  seems 
preferable  to  make  the  slight  emendation  naryapamsi  (to  be  read 
nariapamsi)  in  the  Samhita  text,  and  narya|apamsi  in  the  Pada 
text,     nir  aubjat :  3.  s.  ipf.  of  ubj  force  (cp.  23  c). 

«^0  ^  ^^i^ff  fT  ^^^T  ^J^  I  ^^  I  ^^^^  I  %  I  ^^^T  I 

^Tf  f THi  f^fS[f»Tf  ff  xi^rT^  I       f  f  f  TUm;   I    f^cT    I    f^f^^:    I    f^    I 


i.  85,  11] 

^^  ^»T^  TMlf^  ^ftR^ 


MARUTS 


29 


TJiei/  have  pushed  up  the  tvell 
tvith  might;  they  have  split  even 
the  firm  mountain.  Blowing  their 
pipes  the  hountiful  Maruts  have 
performed  glorious  deeds  in  the 
intoxication  of  Soma. 


0  urdhvam    nunudre    avatam   ta 

ojasa; 
dadrhanam  cid  bibhidur  vi  par- 

vatam. 
dhamanto  vanam  Marutah  suda- 

navo 
made  somasya  raniani  cakrire. 

urdhvam  :  have  pressed  (the  bottom)  upward,  that  is,  overturned, 
poured  out ;  avatam  :  the  cloud ;  =  they  have  shed  rain,  dadrhanam  : 
pf.  pt.  A.  of  drh  malie  firm,  with  long  red.  vowel  (139,  9),  shortened 
in  the  Pada  text,  bibhidur  vi :  p.  468,  20.  parvatam :  cloud 
mountain  ;  another  way  of  saying  the  same  thing,  dhamantas  : 
with  reference  to  the  sound  ]nade  by  the  Maruts  ;  cp.  arcantas,  2  c. 
made  somasya :  Indra  is  constantly  said  to  perform  his  mighty 
deeds  in  the  intoxication  of  Soma,  so  his  associates  the  Maruts  are 
here  similarly  described. 


^T^  f^T{W  f!^^nT  ^T^fi^: 


f^^i  I  5^1;  I  ^^^'i  I  ^^T I  f^^T  I 
^ftr^^  I  ^(^^  I  ^rr^^  I  g^vj^  i 
w  I  ^f^  I  t^  I  ^^^T  I  f^^ 
im^^:  I 

^JT(^  I  ftlt^  I  ff^^'rr  I  VJTiTvjfiT:  II 


11  jihmam   nunudre   avatam  taya 

disa : 
asincann  utsam  Gotamaya  trs- 

naje. 
a  gachantim  avasa  citrabhana- 

vah  : 
kamam     viprasya     tarpayanta 

dhamabhih. 


They  have  pushed  athwart  the 
ivell  in  that  direction  :  they  poured 
out  the  spring  for  the  thirsty 
Gotama.  Of  hrilliant  splendour 
they  approach  him  with  help;  may 
they  satisfy  the  desire  of  the  sage 
hy  their  powers. 


30  MAR  UTS  [i.  85,  11 

jihmam  :  so  as  to  be  horizontal  and  pour  out  the  water,  much  the 
same  as  urdhvam  in  10  a.  taya  disa  :  this  expression  is  obscure  ; 
it  may  mean,  in  the  quarter  in  which  Gotama  was  ;  cp.  199  A  4. 
im :  him,  Gotama,  p.  220.  viprasya :  of  Gotama.  tarpayanta : 
cs.  of  trp  he  pleased ;  the  inj.  is  more  natural  here,  coming  after  a 
pr.,  than  an  unaugmented  ipf.  would  be. 

<^^  ^T  ^:  ^^'  ^iTiTT^T^  ^f^        ^r  I  ^:  I  n^  i  ^^^t^t^  i  ^f^  i 

12  ya  vah  sarma  sasamanaya  sauti,  The  shelters  which  you  have  for 

tridhatuni  dasiise  yachatadhi.  the  zealous  man,  extend  them  three- 

asmabhyam    tani,    Maruto,    vi  fold   to   the   worshipper.      Extend 

yanta.  them  to  us,  0  Maruts.    Bestoiv  on 

rayim  no  dhatta,  vrsanah,  su-  ^^5  ivealth  together  ivitli   excellent 

viram.  heroes,  mighty  ones* 

sarma :  N.  pi.  n.  (90,  2)  sasamanaya :  pf.  pt.  A.  of  sam  labour. 
tridhatuni  :  used  appositionally  (198).  dasiise  :  dat.  of  dasvams, 
157  5.  yachata  adhi :  prp.  after  vb.,  p.  468,  20  ;  ipv.  pr.  of  yam 
stretch,  asmabhyam  :  p.  104.  vi  yanta  :  2.  pi.  ipv.  root  ao.  of 
yam  stretch  (cp.  p.  172,  5).  dhatta :  2.  pi.  ipv.  of  dha  put 
(p.  144  B  h).  su-viram  :  that  is,  accompanied  by  warrior  sons  ;  cp. 
viravattamam,  i.  1,  3  c. 

ViSNU 

This  deity  occupies  a  subordinate  position  in  the  RV.,  being  celebrated 
in  only  five  or  six  hymns.  The  only  anthroponiorphic  traits  mentioned 
about  him  are  the  strides  he  takes,  and  the  description  of  him  as  a  youth 
vast  in  body  who  is  no  longer  a  child.  The  central  feature  of  his  nature 
consists  in  his  three  steps,  connected  with  which  are  his  exclusive  epithets 
'wide-going'  (uru-gay^)  and  'wide-striding'  ( uru-kramd).  With  these 
steps  he  traverses  the  earth  or  the  terrestrial  spaces.  Two  of  his  stei)s  are 
visible  to  men,  but  the  third  or  hi<^hest  is  beyond  the  flii>ht  ol'  birds  or 


i.  154,  l] 


VISNU 


mortal  ken.  His  highest  step  is  like  an  eye  fixed  in  heaven ;  it  shines 
brightly  down.  It  is  his  dear  abode,  where  pious  men  and  the  gods  rejoice. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  three  steps  refer  to  the  course  of  the  sun, 
and  in  all  probability  to  its  passage  through  the  three  divisions  of  the 
world  :  earth,  air,  and  heaven.  Visnu  sets  in  motion  like  a  revolving  wheel 
his  ninety  steeds  (=  days)  with  their  four  names  ( =  seasons),  an  allusion  to 
the  three  hundred  and  sixty  days  of  the  solar  year.  Thus  Visnu  seems  to 
have  been  originally  a  personification  of  the  activity  of  the  sun,  the  swiftly- 
moving  luminary  that  with  vast  strides  passes  through  the  whole  universe. 
Visnu  takes  his  steps  for  man's  existence,  to  bestow  the  earth  on  him  as  a 
dwelling.  The  most  prominent  secondary  characteristic  of  Visnu  is  his 
friendship  for  Indra,  with  whom  he  is  often  allied  in  the  fight  with  Vrtra. 
In  hymns  addressed  to  Visnu  alone,  Indra  is  the  only  other  deity  inci- 
dentally associated  with  him.  One  hymn  (vi.  69)  is  dedicated  to  the  two 
gods  conjointly.  Through  the  Vrtra  myth  the  Maruts,  Indra's  companions, 
are  drawn  into  alliance  with  Visnu,  who  throughout  one  hymn  (v.  87)  is 
praised  in  combination  with  them. 

The  name  is  most  probably  derived  from  vis  be  active,  thus  meaning  '  the 
active  one '. 


i.  154.     Metre:  Tristubh. 


ft^f:  I  g  I  ^»l  I  ^iftr  I  IT  I 
^:  I  mf^^TfiT  I  f^^^  I  T^ftf  I 

^:  I  ^WT^^I^cl^ifTT^I^^i^^l 

f^^^5RTnw:  I  %^T  I  ^^vj'TT^:  ii 


1  Visnor  nu  kam  viriani  pra  vo- 

cam, 
yah  parthivani  vimam^  rajamsi; 
yo  askabhayad  littaram  sadha- 

stham, 
vicakramanas  tredhorugayah. 


I  ivUl  noiv  proclaim  the  heroic 
poicers  of  Visnu,  who  has  measured 
out  the  terrestrial  regions ;  who 
estahlished  the  upper  gathering- 
place,  having,  tvide-paced,  strode 
out  trip)ly. 


kam  :  this  pel.  as  an  end.  always  follows  nii,  sii  or  hi  (p.  225,  2). 
viryani  :    the  syllable  preceding  the  so-called  independent   Svarita 


32  VISNU  [i.  154,  1 

(p.  448)  is  marked  with  the  Anudatta  in  the  same  way  as  that 
ijreceding  the  Udatta ;  here  we  have,  as  usual,  in  reality  the  depen- 
dent Svarita,  the  word  having  to  be  pronounced  viriani.  pra 
vocam  :  inj.  ao.  of  vac,  147,  3.  parthivani  rajamsi :  the  earth 
and  the  contiguous  air.  vi-mam6  :  this  refers  to  the  sun  traversing 
the  universe  ;  cp.  what  is  said  of  Varuna  in  v.  85,  5  :  maneneva 
tasthivam  antarikse  vi  yo  marn^  prthivim  suryena  ivlio  standing 
in  the  air  has  measured  out  the  earth  with  the  sun,  as  with  a  measure, 
askabhayat :  ipf.  of  skabh  prop  ;  the  cosmic  action  of  supporting 
the  sky  is  also  attributed  to  Savifcr,  Agni,  and  other  deities,  littaram 
sadhastham :  that  is,  heaven,  as  opposed  to  the  terrestrial  spaces 
in  b,  according  to  the  twofold  division  of  the  world,  vicakram- 
anas :  pf.  pt.  A.  of  kram.  tre-dha :  with  his  three  steps  ;  the 
first  syllable  must  be  pronounced  with  a  slur  equivalent  to  two 
short  syllables  (^  <j)  ;  the  resolution  tredha  urugayah  would 
produce  both  an  abnormal  break  and  an  abnormal  cadence  (p.  441, 
top). 

^f^f^^fi^  g^^Tf^  f^^t  II      ^f^vjf^^f^  I  g^^Tf^  I  f%^f  II 

2  pra  tad  Visnuh  stavate  viriena^         By  reason  of  his  heroic  poiver, 

mrgo  na  bhimah   kucaro    girl-     like  a  dread  heast  that  wanders  at 

sthah,  tvill,  that  haunts   the   mountains, 

yasyoriisu  trisii  vikramanesu.         Vimu  is  praised  aloud  for  thai  : 

adhiksiyanti  bhiivanani  visva.       he  in  tvhose  three  ivide  strides  all 

beings  divelU 

pra  stavate  :  A.  of  stu  in  the  ps.  sense,  as  is  often  the  case  when 
the  pr.  stem  is  formed  according  to  the  first  (and  not  the  second) 
class,  tad:  the  cognate  ace.  (p.  300,  A)  referring  to  the  heroic 
])owers  of  Visnu  attributed  to  him  in  the  preceding  stanza,  virydna  : 
cp.   not(^  on   viryani  in   1  a.     mrgas :    Sayana  here  interprets   this 


i.  154,  3]  VISNU  33 

word  to  mean  a  beast  of  prey  such  as  a  lion  ;  but  though  bhima 
occurs  as  an  attribute  both  of  simha  lion  and  of  vrsabha  hull  in  the 
RV.,  giristha  is  found  three  or  four  times  applied  to  the  latter  and 
never  to  the  former,  and  in  the  next  stanza  Visnu  is  called  a 
'  mountain-dwelling  bull ' ;  hence  the  simile  appears  to  allude  to 
a  bull  rather  than  a  lion,  ku-cara :  Yaska,  followed  by  Sayana, 
has  two  explanations  of  this  word,  doing  ill  (ku  =  kutsitam  karma 
hlametvorthy  deed)  or  going  anyivhere  (kva  ay  am  na  gachati  where  does 
he  not  go?).  Note  that  the  word  is  not  analysed  in  the  Pada  text 
because  ku  does  not  occur  as  an  independent  word.  Sayana  has 
two  explanations  of  giristhas :  dwelling  in  a  lofty  tvorld  or  always 
abiding  in  speech  (girl  as  loc.  of  gir)  consisting  of  3fantras,  &c.  (!) ; 
on  the  inflexion  see  97,  2  ;  note  that  in  the  analysis  of  the  Pada  text 
the  change  caused  by  internal  Sandhi  in  the  second  member  is, 
as  always,  removed,  vikramanesu  :  note  that  the  final  vowel  of 
the  Pada  must  be  restored  at  the  junction  with  the  next  Pada. 
adhi-ksiyanti  :  the  root  1.  ksi  follows  the  ad  class  (ks6ti)  when  it 
means  divell,  but  the  bhu  class  (ksayati)  when  it  means  rule  over. 
With  c  and  d  cp.  what  is  said  of  Savitr  in  i.  35,  5, 

^  \t  ^  ^^  ^w^  ^:  I  T^^  I  ^^1 1  iT^^fT^  I  ^y 

'mi  f^^  f^fHfTr^tf*^:  II  vJ^I  I 

U^:  I  f^J^^  I  f^if^:  I T^  I  ^^f*T:  ii 

3  pra  Visnave  susam  etu  manma^  Let  my  inspiring  hymn  go  forth 

giriksita  urugayaya  vrsne,  for  Visnu,  the  mountain- dwelling 

ya  idam  dirgham  prayatam  sa-  toide-pacing  hull,  who  alone  with 

dhastham  hut  three  steps  has  measured  out 

6ko   vimam6    tribhir    it   pad^-  this  long  far-extended  gathering- 

bhih. ;  place  ; 

susam:  the  u  must  be  slurred  disyllabically  (=w«^).  idam 
sadhastham  :  of  course  the  earth  as  opposed  to  littaram  sadhastham 
in  1  c.     6kas  and  tribhis  are  antithetical,     id  emphasizes  the  latter 

1902  J) 


34  VISNU  [i.  ]54,  3 

word :  tvitli  only  three.  The  second  Pada  of  this  stanza  is  parallel  to 
the  third  of  the  preceding,  the  epithets  in  the  former  being  applied 
direct  to  Visnu,  in  the  latter  to  the  wild  beast  to  which  Visnu  is 
compared  :  giriksit  =  giristha  ;  urugaya  =  kucara ;  vrsan  = 
rnrgd  bhimah.  This  correspondence  of  kucara  (besides  V.'s  alterna- 
tive exclusive  epithet  urukrama  in  5  c  and  elsewhere)  confirms  the 
explanation  of  urugaya  as  tvide-paclng  from  ga  go  (Yaska,  mahagati 
having  a  tvide  gait),  and  not  widely  swrig  from  ga  sing  (Say ana). 

XTifi:  I  \iyi:\T.  \  g^^f^  i  f^^i  ii 

4  yasya  tri  purna  madhuna  pa-  Whose     three     steps    filled    ivith 

dani  mead,  unfailing,  rejoice  in  bliss; 

aksiyamana  svadhaya  madanti ;  and  who  in  threefold  wise  alone 

ya    u    tridhatu    prthivira    uta  has  supported  earth   and  heaven, 

dyam  and  all  beings. 
Hko  dadhara  bhuvanani  visva. 

tri :  n.  pi.  of  tri  (105,  3).  padany  :  the  final  vowel  of  the  Pada 
must  be  restored  ;  cp.  2  c.  purna  :  cp.  p.  308  d.  aksiyamana : 
never  failing  in  mead  ;  the  privative  pel.  a  is  almost  invariably 
accented  in  Karmadharayas,  p.  456  a  (top)  ;  such  negative  cds.  are 
not  analysed  in  the  Pada  text,  svadhaya  :  inst.  with  verbs  of 
rejoicing  (p.  308  c).  madanti  :  his  footsteps  rejoice,  that  is,  those 
dwelling  in  them  do  so.  u :  =  also  (p.  221,  2).  tri-dhatu  :  this  n. 
form  is  best  taken  adverbially  =  iredha  in  1  d,  in  a  threefold  tvay, 
by  taking  his  three  steps.  It  might,  however,  mean  the  threefold 
world,  loosely  explained  by  the  following  earth  and  heaven.  6kas : 
alone  in  antithesis  to  visva,  cp.  3  d.  dadhara :  pf.  of  dhr,  with 
long  red.  vowel  (139,  9),  whiclf  is  here  not  shortened  in  the 
Pada  text. 


i.  154,  6] 

f^wf:  ^^  4t^  t^  ^m: 


VISNU  85 

^vj^^^  I  ^:  I  ff  I  ^^,  I  ^?eTT  I 


i  tad    asya    priyam    abhi   patho 

asyam, 
naro  yatra  devayavo  madanti  : 
urukramasya     sa    hi    bandhur 

ittha, 
Visnoh  pad6   paramd   madhva 

utsah. 


I  would  attain  to  that  dear 
domain  of  his.  tvhere  men  devoted 
to  the  gods  rejoice  :  for  that, 
trull/  akin  to  the  wide-strider,  is  a 
well  of  mead  in  the  highest  step 
of  Visnu. 


abhi  asyam :  op.  root  ao.  of  ams  reach,  yatra  :  in  the  third 
step  of  Visnu  =  heaven,  where  the  Fathers  drink  Soma  with  Yama 
(cp.  i.  35,  6).  naras  :  that  is,  pious  men  who  dwell  in  heaven ; 
N.  pi.  of  nr,  101,  1.  sa  :  referring  to  pathas  is  attracted  in  gender 
to  bandhus,  194,  3.  ittha:  p.  218.  madhvas  (gen.,  p.  81,  n.  12): 
cp.  4  a,  where  the  three  steps  are  filled  with  mead  ;  but  the  third 
step  is  its  special  abode. 


c!T  I  ^T^  I  mml^  I  ^T^ftr  1 1^  i 
^^  I  ini:  I  ^fr^J^WT:  i  ^^to:  i 

^^  I  ^  I  fTfl.  I  ^vJ'TT^^  I  f  ^:  I 

^^T^  I  ^^1 1  '^i  I  'TTf^r  I  gfT  II 


6  ta  vam  vastiini   usmasi  gama-  We  desire  to  go  to  those  abodes 

dhyai,  of  you  two,  where  are  the  many- 

yatra  gavo  bhiirisrnga  ayasah  :  horned  nimble  kine  :  there  indeed 

atraha  tad  urugayasya  vrsnah  that  highest  step  of  the  wide-pacing 

paramam     padam     ava     bhati  bull  shines  brightly  down. 

bhuri. 

D  2 


36  VISNU  [i.  154,  6 

vam  :  of  you  hvo,  that  is,  of  Indra  and  Visnu.  The  former,  being 
the  only  other  god  with  whom  Visnu  is  intimately  associated,  would 
easily  be  thought  of  incidentally  in  a  hymn  addressed  to  Visnu 
alone  ;  this  dual  also  anticipates  the  joint  praise  of  these  two  gods 
as  a  dual  divinity  (Indra- Visnu)  in  the  first  two  stanzas  of  the  next 
hymn  (i.  155).  usmasi  :  1.  pi.  pr.  of  vas  desire  (134,  2  a),  gam- 
adhyai  i  dat.  inf.,  p.  193,  7.  gavas :  N.  pi.  of  go  cotv  (102,  2} ; 
it  is  somewhat  doubtful  what  is  meant  by  the  cows ;  they  are 
explained  by  Yaska  and  Sayana  as  rays  ;  this  is  a  probable  sense,  as 
the  rays  of  dawn  are  compared  with  cattle,  and  something  connected 
with  sunlight  is  appropriate  to  the  third  step  of  Visnu,  the  realm 
of  light.  Eoth  explains  gavas  as  stars,  but  there  is  little  to  support 
this  interpretation,  bhiiri-srngas :  many-horned  would  allude  to 
the  diffusion  of  the  sunbeams  in  many  directions,  ayasas :  this 
form  is  understood  as  a  N.  pi.  of  aya  (from  i  go)  by  Yaska,  who 
explains  it  as  ayanas  moving,  and  by  Sayana  as  gantaras  goers  = 
ativistrtas  very  widely  diffused ;  but  the  occurrence  of  the  A.  s. 
ayasam,  the  G.  pi.  ayasam,  as  well  as  the  A.  pi.  ayasas,  indicates 
that  the  stem  is  ayas ;  while  its  use  as  an  attribute  of  simha  lion, 
asva  horse,  and  often  of  the  Maruts,  shows  that  the  meaning  must 
be  active,  stvift,  nimble,  aha :  on  the  use  of  this  pel.  see  p.  216. 
vf  snas  :  cp.  3  b. 

DYAVA-PRTHIvi 

Heaven  and  Earth  are  the  most  frequently  named  pair  of  deities  in  the 
RV.  They  are  so  closely  associated  that,  while  they  are  invoked  as  a  pair 
in  six  hymns,  Dyaus  is  never  addressed  alone  in  any  hymn,  and  Prthiv  in 
only  one  of  three  stanzas.  The  dual  compound  Dyava-Prthivi,  moreover, 
occurs  much  oftener  than  the  name  of  Dyaus  alone.  Heaven  and  Earth 
are  also  mentioned  as  rodasi  the  ttvo  ivorlds  more  than  100  times.  They 
are  parents,  being  often  called  pitara,  matara,  jdnitri,  besides  being 
separately  addressed  as  'father'  and  'mother'.  They  have  made  and 
sustain  al]  creatures ;  they  are  also  the  parents  of  the  gods.  At  the  same 
time  they  are  in  different  passages  spoken  of  as  themselves  created  by 
individual  gods.  One  of  them  is  a  prolific  bull,  the  other  a  variegated 
cow,  being  both  rich  in  seed.  They  never  grow  old.  They  are  great  and 
wide-extended ;  they  are  broad  and  vast  abodes.  They  grant  food  and 
wealth,  or  bestow  great  fame  and  dominion.     Sometimes  moral  qualities 


i.  160,  l] 


DYAVA-PRTHIVI 


are  attributed  to  them.  They  are  wise  and  promote  righteousness.  As 
father  and  mother  they  guard  beings,  and  protect  from  disgrace  and  mis- 
fortune. They  are  sufficiently  personified  to  be  called  leaders  of  the  sacrifice 
and  to  be  conceived  as  seating  themselves  around  the  offering  ;  but  they 
never  attained  to  a  living  personification  or  importance  in  worship.  These 
two  deities  are  quite  co-ordinate,  while  in  most  of  the  other  pairs  one  of  the 
two  greatly  predominates. 


i.  160.     Metre:  Jagati. 


"^  TfH  I  f|  I  ^T^T^f^^  Tf^  I  f^^- 

sil?jm  I 

^nr:  1 1^%  I 
1^:  I  ^ft  TfTT  I  "^^m  I  ^:  I  ^f^:  II 


1  t6  hi  Dyava-Prthivi  visvasam- 

bhuva, 
rtavari,   rajaso    dharayatkavi : 
sujanmani  dhisane  antar  iyate 
dev6     devi     dharmana    Suriah 

siicih. 


These  two,  indeed,  Heaven  and 
Earth,  are  beneficial  to  all,  observing 
order,  supporting  the  sage  of  the  air  : 
heftveen  the  two  divine  howls  that 
produce  fair  creations  the  divine 
hright  Surya  moves  according  to 
fixed  laiv. 

The  first  two  Padas  form  an  independent  sentence  ;  otherwise  hi 
(p.  252)  would  accent  iyate  in  c.  Dyava-Prthivi :  on  the  accent, 
and  treatment  in  the  Pada  text,  see  note  on  i.  35,  1  b.  visva-sam- 
bhuva  :  dec,  p.  89;  accent,  note  on  i.  1,  4b;  final  a  and  a  are 
never  contracted  with  r  (19  a  and  note  5).  rta-vari :  note  that, 
when  the  final  vowel  of  a  cd.  is  Pragrhya,  this  is  in  the  Pada  text 
first  indicated  by  iti,  and  the  cd.  is  then  repeated  and  analysed  ;  in 
the  present  case  the  suffix  vari  (f.  of  van,  pp.  67  and  69,  f.  n.  2) 
is  treated  like  the  final  member  of  a  cd.,  and  the  final  vowel  of  rta 
is  treated  as  metrically  lengthened,     dharayat-kavi  :  a  governing 


38  DYAVA-PRTHIVi  [i.  160,  l 

cd.  (189  A  2  a) ;  the  gen.  rajasas  is  dependent  on  -kavi,  probably  = 
Agni,  who  (in  x.  2,  7)  is  said  to  have  been  begotten  by  Dyava-prthivi. 
dhisane :  the  exact  meaning  of  this  word,  here  a  designation  of 
dyava-prthivi,  is  uncertain,  antar  iyate  goes  hettveen  with  ace.  ; 
the  same  thing  is  said  of  Savitr  in  i.  35,  9  b.  dharman  n.  ordinance 
(dharman  m.  ordainer)  is  the  only  stem  in  the  KV.  (dharma  is 
a  later  one). 

ftm  I  ^fi:  I  ^»i  I  ^f^T  I  ^^:  I  ^^T- 
^^ci;ii 

2  uruvyaeasa  mahini  asascata,  As  Father  and  Mother^  far-ex- 

pita  mata  ca,  bhiivanani  raks-  tending^  great,   inexhaustible,   the 

at  ah.  two  protect  (all)  being  s.     LiJce  two 

sudhrstame  vapusie  na  rddasi,  most  proud  fair  women  are  the  tivo 

pita  yat  sim  abhi  riipair  avasa-  ivorlds,    since    the  Father  clothed 

yat.  them  with  beauty. 

uru-vyacasa :  on  the  accent  of  this  Bv.  having  wide  extension,  see 
p.  455  c  a.  The  du.  a-sascat-a  is  a  Bv.  (as  the  accent  shows, 
p.  455  c  a)  having  no  second,  while  a-sascant  (also  an  epithet  of 
Dyava-prthivi)  is  a  Karmadharaya  (p.  455,  f.  n.  2),  not  a  second  = 
unequalled,  su-dhrstame  :  on  the  Pada  analysis  cp.  note  on  i.  1,  1  c. 
vapusyd  :  cp.  note  on  viryani,  i.  154,  1  a.  pita :  the  god  here  meant 
as  the  father  of  Dyava-prthivi  may  be  Visvakarman,  who  in  KV. 
X.  81,  1.  2  is  called  'our  father'  and  is  described  as  creating  the 
earth  and  heaven,  sim  :  see  p.  249.  abhi  avasayat :  ipf.  cs.  of 
2.  vas  tvear. 

^  ^  ^f^*  f^*  f^^«  i^f^^^f      w.  I  ^f^:  I H^:  I  ftTt:  i  ^f^^i^li 


i.  160,  4]  DYAVA-PRTHIVi  -  39 

fw^mi  ^  17^  ^^  f  ^ff  II   f^^f  1 1  g^^  I  ^^:  I  ^^  I  ^^  ii 

3  sa  vahnih  putrah  pitaroh  pavi-  2'hat  son  of  the  two  parents,  the 

travan  driver,  the  purifier,  wisely  purifies 

punati    dhiro    bhuvanani    ma-  beings  hy  his  mysterious  power. 

yaya.  He  has  alivays  milked  from  the 

dhenum   ca    prsnim   vrsabham  speckled   cow  and  from   the   hull 

sur^tasam  abounding    in    seed    his    shining 

visvaha  sukram  pay6  asya  duk-  moisture, 

sata. 

putras  :  by  the  son  of  the  parents  (Heaven  and  Earth)  Agni  is 
meant ;  for  he  is  expressly  said  to  have  been  begotten  by  Heaven 
and  Earth  (RV.,  x.  2,  7),  cp.  note  on  lb;  he  is  especially  called 
vahni  as  the  one  who  conveys  (vahati)  the  gods  to  the  sacrifice  ;  he 
is  very  frequently  called  pavaka  purifier  (a  term  seldom  applied  to 
any  other  deity)  ;  he  purifies  beings  in  his  character  of  priest. 
Sayana  thinks  the  Sun  is  meant,  and  explains  purifies  by  illumines, 
dhenum :  the  term  cotv  is  often  used  in  the  RV.  in  the  sense  of 
earth,  ca  is  here  used  with  the  first  ace.  instead  of  the  second 
(cp.  p.  228,  1).  vrsabham  :  Dyaus  is  called  a  bull  in  other  passages 
also,  and  is  said  to  have  been  made  by  Agni  to  roar  for  man 
(i.  31,  4).  su-r6tasam :  alludes  to  the  shedding  of  rain,  visvaha  is 
a  cd.  adv.  resulting  from  the  juxtaposition  of  visva  aha  as  an  ace. 
of  time  (cp.  p.  300,  5)  =  for  all  days  equivalent  to  aha  visva  which 
also  occurs,  duksata :  unaugmented  sa  ao.  (141  a)  without  initial 
aspiration  (which  is,  however,  restored  in  the  Pada  text),  from 
duh  milk  (with  two  ace,  198,  2).  The  general  meaning  of  c  d  is 
that  Agni  as  the  priest  of  sacrifice  causes  heaven  to  fertilize  the 
earth,  and  the  latter  to  be  productive. 

8  "^  l^-RT^^^t^ w^  ^^^  I  I^T^tR;  I  ^^t^c  I  ^^:  ^  <i^:  i 

^  ^^T^  ft^^  ft^^iJ^T  I     ^:  I   ^^T^  I  "ft^^^Tf^  I  f^^ 


40  DYAVA-PRTHIVI  [i.  160, 4 

^wtf'T:  I  ^^f»T:  I  ^ni  i  ^^%  ii 


4  ayam    devanam   apasam    apas- 

tamo 
yo     jajana     rodasi     visvasam- 

bhuva. 
vi  yo  mamd  rajasi  sukratuyaya 
ajarebhih  skambhanebhih,  sam 

anrce. 


He  of  the  active  gods  is  the 
most  active  who  has  created  the  tivo 
worlds  that  are  beneficial  to  all. 
He  who  with  insight  has  measured 
out  the  tivo  spaces  (and  upheld 
them)  ivifJi  unaging  supports,  has 
been  universally  praised. 


In  this  stanza  (cp.  2)  the  father  of  Heaven  and  Earth  is  celebrated. 
apasam  :  partitive  gen.  (p.  321,  ha),  vi  .  .  .  mam§  :  this  expression 
is  also  used  of  Visnu  (see  i.  154,  1.  3)  and  other  gods,  rajasi :  the 
heavenly  and  the  terrestrial  spaces.  The  initial  vowel  of  d  must  be 
restored,  sam  anrce :  red.  pf.  of  arc  sing  (139,  6),  the  A.  being 
used  in  the  ps.  sense  ;  Sayana  explains  it  in  an  act.  sense  as  puji- 
tavan  has  honoured,  which  he  further  interprets  to  mean  stha- 
pitavan  has  established ! 


^^^  I  ^T^j|f^^  x^  I  ^^yj  I 

^^  I  ^fir  I  f^:  I  ^ff^t*T  I  f^f 1 1 
^iTT^Ji:  I  ^^:  I  ^  Tf^  I  ^^  I 
T^rm^  II 


5  t6  no  grnan^,  mahini,  mahi  sra- 
vah, 
ksatram,    Dyava-Prthivi,    dha- 
satho  brhat. 


So  being  lauded,  0  great  ones, 
bestoiv  on  us,  0  Heaven  and  Earth, 
great  fame  and  ample  dominion. 
Bring  for  us  praiseivorthy  strength 


i.  160,  5]  DYAVA  PRTHIVi  41 

y^nabhi    krstis  tatanama    vis-     hy  tvhich  we  may  always  extend 

vaha  over  the  peoples. 

panayiam  6j6  asm6  sam  inva- 

tam. 

t^ :  N.  du.  f.,  used  anaphorically  (p.  294,  h).     grnan6  :  pr.  pt.  of 

1.  gr  sing,  A.  used  in  ps.  sense,  mahini  :  there  are  six  adjectives 
meaning  great,  formed  from  the  root  mah  te  great :  by  far  the 
commonest  is  mah  (81) ;  mahant  (85  a)  is  also  common ;  maha  and 
mahin  are  not  common,  but  are  inflected  in  several  cases ;  mahi 
and  mahas  (83,  2  a  a)  are  used  in  the  N.  A.  sing,  only,  the  former 
very  often,  the  latter  rarely,     ksatram  :  without  ea.     dhasathas  : 

2.  du.  sb.  s  ao.  (p.  162,  2)  of  dha  hestow,  to  be  construed  with  the 
dat.  nas.  abhi  .  .  .  tatanama :  pf.  sb.  of  tan  •  stretch  (140,  1, 
p.  156).  visva-ha  is  an  adv.  formed  with  the  suffix  ha  =  dha 
(p.  212  P)  meaning  literally  in  every  manner  =  always  (cp.  visvaha 
in  3  d) ;  on  the  accent  cp.  note  on  visvatas  in  i.  1,  4  b.  panayya : 
see  162,  2.  6j6 :  final  o  is  pronounced  short  before  a  (p.  437,  a  4), 
but  the  rhythm  of  the  break  here  (—  w  — )  is  abnormal  (p.  440,  f.  n.  6). 
asm6 :  properly  loc.  of  vayam  (p.  104),  but  also  used  as  a  dat.,  is 
Pragrhya ;  it  is  dat.  here  (200  A  1).  invatam  :  2.  du.  ipv.  of  inv, 
a  secondary  root  produced  by  a  transfer  from  the  fifth  class  (i-nu)  to 
the  first,  inv-a  (133,  3  I). 

INDRA 

Indra  is  invoked  alone  in  about  one-fourth  of  the  hymns  of  the  RV.,  far 
more  than  are  addressed  to  any  other  deity ;  for  he  is  the  favourite  national 
god  of  the  Vedic  people.  He  is  more  anthropomorphic  on  the  physical  side, 
and  more  invested  with  mythological  imagery,  than  any  other  member  of  the 
pantheon.  He  is  primarily  a  god  of  the  thunderstorm  who  vanquishes  the 
demons  of  drought  or  darkness,  and  sets  free  the  vsraters  or  wins  the  light. 
He  is  secondarily  the  god  of  battle  who  aids  the  victorious  Aryan  in  over- 
coming his  aboriginal  foes. 

His  physical  features,  such  as  body  and  head,  are  often  referred  to  ; 
after  he  has  drunk  Soma  he  agitates  his  jaws  and  his  beard  ;  and  his  belly 
is  many  times  mentioned  in  connexion  with  his  great  powers  of  drinking 
Soma.  Being  tawny  (hari)  in  colour,  he  is  also  tawny-haired  and  tawny- 
bearded.    His  arms  are  especially  often  referred  to  because  they  wield  the 


42  INDEA  [ii.  12 

thunderbolt  (vajra),  which,  mythologically  representing  the  lightning 
stroke,  is  his  exclusive  weapon.  This  bolt  was  fashioned  for  him  by  Tvastr, 
being  made  of  iron  (ayasa),  golden,  tawny,  sharp,  many-pointed,  sometimes 
spoken  of  as  a  stone  or  rock.  Several  epithets,  compounds  or  derivatives 
of  vajra,  such  as  vajra-bahu  bearing  the  holt  m  his  arm  and  vajrin  tvielder 
of  the  holt  are  almost  without  exception  applied  to  him.  Sometimes  he  is 
described  as  armed  with  bow  and  arrows  ;  he  also  carries  a  hook  (afikusa). 

Having  a  golden  car,  drawn  by  two  tawny  steeds  (hari),  he  is  a  car- 
fighter  (rathestha).  Both  his  car  and  his  steeds  were  fashioned  by  the 
Rbhus,  the  divine  artificers. 

As  Indra  is  more  addicted  to  Soma  than  any  of  the  other  gods,  the 
comm(?n  epithet  '  Soma-drinker '  (Somapa)  is  characteristic  of  him.  This 
beverage  stimulates  him  to  carry  out  his  warlike  deeds;  thus  for  the 
slaughter  of  Vrtra  he  is  said  to  have  drunk  three  lakes  of  Soma.  One  whole 
hymn  (x.  119)  is  a  monologue  in  which  Indra,  intoxicated  with  Soma,  boasts 
of  his  greatness  and  his  might. 

Indra  is  often  spoken  of  as  having  been  born,  and  two  whole  hymns 
deal  with  the  subject  of  his  birth.  His  father,  the  same  as  Agni's,  appears 
to  be  Dyaus ;  but  the  inference  from  other  passages  is  that  he  is  Tvastr,  the 
artificer  among  the  gods.  Agni  is  called  Indra's  twin  brother,  and  Pusan 
(vi.  54)  is  also  his  brother.  His  wife,  who  is  often  mentioned,  is  Indranl. 
Indra  is  associated  with  various  other  deities.  The  Maruts  (i.  85)  are  his 
chief  allies,  who  constantly  help  him  in  his  conflicts.  Hence  the  epithet 
Marutvant  accompanied  hy  the  Maruts  is  characteristic  of  him.  Agni  is 
the  god  most  often  conjoined  with  him  as  a  dual  divinity.  Indra  is  also 
often  coupled  with  Varuna  (vii.  86)  and  Vayu,  god  of  Wind,  less  often  with 
Soma  (viii.  48),  Brhaspati  (iv.  50),  Pusan,  and  Visnu. 

Indra  is  of  vast  size ;  thus  it  is  said  that  he  would  be  equal  to  the  earth 
even  if  it  were  ten  times  as  large  as  it  is.  His  greatness  and  power  are 
constantly  dwelt  on :  neither  gods  nor  men  have  attained  to  the  limit  of 
his  might ;  and  no  one  like  him  is  known  among  the  gods.  Thus  various 
epithets  such  as  sakra  and  sacivant  mighty,  sacipati  lord  of  might,  sata- 
kratu  having  a  hundred  potvers,  are  characteristic  of  him. 

The  essential  myth  forming  the  basis  of  his  nature  is  described  with 
extreme  frequency  and  much  variation.  Exhilarated  by  Soma  and  generally 
escorted  by  the  Maruts,  he  attacks  the  chief  demon  of  drought,  usually 
called  Vrtra,  but  often  also  the  serpent  (ahi).  Heaven  and  Earth  tremble 
when  the  mighty  combat  takes  place.  With  his  bolt  he  shatters  Vrtra 
who  encompasses  the  waters,  hence  receiving  the  exclusive  epithet  apsu-jit 
conquering  in  the  tvaters-  The  result  of  the  conflict,  which  is  regarded  as 
being  constantly  renewed,  is  that  he  pierces  the  mountain  and  sets  free 
the  waters  pent  up  like  imprisoned  cows.  The  physical  elements  in  the 
conflict  are  nearly  always  the  bolt,  the  mountain,  waters  or  rivers,  while 


ii.  12]  INDRA  43 

lightning,  thunder,  cloud,  rain  are  seldom  directly  named.  The  waters  are 
often  terrestrial,  but  also  often  aerial  and  celestial.  The  clouds  are  the 
mountains  (parvata,  giri),  on  which  the  demons  lie  or  dwell,  or  from  which 
Indra  casts  them  down,  or  which  he  cleaves  to  release  the  waters.  Or  the 
cloud  is  a  rock  (adri)  which  encompasses  the  cows  (as  the  waters  are 
f;  sometimes  called),  and  from  which  he  releases  them.  Clouds,  as  containing 
the  waters,  figure  as  cows  also;  they  further  appear  under  the  names  of 
udder  (iidhar),  spring  (litsa),  cask  (kavandha),  pail  (ko^a).  The  clouds, 
moreover,  appear  as  the  fortresses  (puras)  of  the  aerial  demons,  being 
described  as  moving,  autumnal,  made  of  iron  or  stone,  and  as  90,  99,  or 
100  in  number.  Indra  shatters  them  and  is  characteristically  called  the 
'fort-destroyer'  (purbhid).  But  the  chief  and  specific  epithet  of  Indra  is 
'  Vrtra-slayer '  (Vrtra-han),  owing  to  the  essential  importance,  in  the  myth, 
of  the  fight  with  the  demon.  In  this  fight  the  Maruts  are  his  regular 
allies,  but  Agni,  Soma,  and  Visnu  also  often  assist  him.  Indra  also  engages 
in  conflict  with  numerous  minor  demons  ;  sometimes  he  is  described  as 
destroying  demons  in  general,  the  Raksases  or  the  Asuras. 

With  the  release  of  the  waters  is  connected  the  winning  of  light,  sun, 
and  dawn.  Thus  Indra  is  invoked  to  slay  Vrtra  and  to  win  the  light. 
When  he  had  slain  Vrtra,  releasing  the  waters  for  man,  he  placed  the 
sun  visibly  in  the  heavens.  The  sun  shone  forth  when  Indra  blew  the 
serpent  from  the  air.  There  is  here  often  no  reference  to  the  Vrtra  fight. 
Indra  is  then  simply  said  to  find  the  light ;  he  gained  the  sun  or  found  it 
in  the  darkness,  and  made  a  path  for  it.  He  produces  the  dawn  as  well  as 
the  sun ;  he  opens  the  darkness  with  the  dawn  and  the  sun.  The  cows 
mentioned  along  with  the  sun  and  dawn,  or  with  the  sun  alone,  as  found, 
released,  or  won  by  Indra,  are  here  probably  the  morning  beams,  which  are 
elsewhere  compared  with  cattle  coming  out  of  their  dark  stalls.  Thus  when 
the  dawns  went  to  meet  Indra,  he  became  the  lord  of  the  cows ;  when  he 
overcame  Vrtra  he  made  visible  the  cows  of  the  nights.  There  seems  to  be 
a  confusion  between  the  restoration  of  the  sun  after  the  darkness  of  the 
thunderstorm,  and  the  recovery  of  the  sun  from  the  darkness  of  night  at 
dawn.  The  latter  feature  is  probably  an  extension  of  the  former.  Indra's 
connexion  with  the  thunderstorm  is  in  a  few  passages  divested  of  mytho- 
logical imagery,  as  when  he  is  said  to  have  created  the  lightnings  of  heaven 
and  to  have  directed  the  action  of  the  waters  downwards.  With  the 
Vrtra-fight,  with  the  winning  of  the  cows  and  of  the  sun,  is  also  connected 
the  gaining  of  Soma.  Thus  when  Indra  drove  the  serpent  from  the  air, 
there  shone  forth  fires,  the  sun,  and  Soma  ;  he  won  Soma  at  the  same  time 
as  the  cows. 

Great  cosmic  actions  are  often  attributed  to  Indra.  He  settled  the 
quaking  mountains  and  plains.  He  stretches  out  heaven  and  earth  like 
a  hide  ;  he  holds  asunder  heaven  and  earth  as  two  wheels  are  kept  apart  by 


44  INDRA  [ii.  12 

the  axle ;  he  made  the  non-existent  into  the  existent  in  a  moment.  Some- 
times the  separation  and  support  of  heaven  and  earth  are  described  as 
a  result  of  Indra's  victory  over  a  demon  who  held  them  together. 

As  the  destroyer  of  demons  in  combat,  Indra  is  constantly  invoked  by 
warriors.  As  the  great  god  of  battle  he  is  more  frequently  called  upon  than 
any  other  deity  to  help  the  Aryans  in  their  conflicts  with  earthly  enemies. 
He  protects  the  Aryan  colour  and  subjects  the  black  skin.  He  dispersed 
50,000  of  the  black  race.  He  subjected  the  Dasyus  to  the  Aryan,  and  gave 
land  to  the  Aryan. 

More  generally  Indra  is  praised  as  the  protector,  helper,  and  friend  of  his 
worshippers.  He  is  described  as  bestowing  on  them  wealth,  which  is  con- 
sidered the  result  of  victories.  His  liberality  is  so  characteristic  that  the 
frequent  attribute  maghavan  bountiful  is  almost  exclusively  his. 

Besides  the  central  myth  of  the  Vrtra-fight,  several  minor  stories  are 
connected  with  Indra.  In  various  passages  he  is  described  as  shattering  the 
car  of  Usas,  goddess  of  Dawn  (iv.  51);  this  trait  is  probably  based  on  the 
notion  of  Indra's  bringing  the  sun  when  kept  back  by  the  delaying  dawn. 
He  is  also  said  to  have  stopped  the  steeds  of  the  Sun,  apparently  by 
causing  the  latter  to  lose  a  wheel  of  his  car.  Indra  is  further  associated 
with  the  myth  of  the  winning  of  Soma ;  for  it  is  to  him  that  the  eagle  brings 
the  draught  of  immortality  from  the  highest  heaven.  Another  myth  is 
the  capture  by  Indra,  with  the  help  of  Sarama,  of  the  cows  confined  in 
a  cave  by  demons  called  Panis. 

Various  stories  which,  though  mixed  with  mythological  elements,  pro- 
bably have  an  historical  basis,  are  told  of  Indra's  having  fought  in  aid  of 
individual  proteges,  such  as  king  Sudas,  against  terrestrial  foes. 

The  attributes  of  Indra  are  chiefly  those  of  physical  superiority  and  rule 
over  the  physical  world.  He  is  energetic  and  violent  in  action,  an 
irresistible  fighter,  an  inexhaustible  lavisher  of  the  highest  goods  on  man- 
kind, but  at  the  same  time  sensual  and  immoral  in  various  ways,  such  as 
excess  in  eating  and  drinking,  and  cruelty  in  killing  his  own  father  Tvastr. 
He  forms  a  marked  contrast  to  Varuna,  the  other  great  universal  monarch  of 
the  RV.,  who  wields  passive  and  peaceful  sway,  who  uniformly  applies  the 
laws  of  nature,  who  upholds  moral  order,  and  whose  character  displays  lofty 
ethical  features. 

The  name  of  Indra  is  pre-Indian ;  for  it  occurs  in  the  Avesta  as  that  ot 
a  demon;  the  term  verethraghna  {^^vivsihaun)  is  also  found  there  as  the 
designation  of  the  God  of  Victory,  though  unconnected  with  Indra.  Thus 
it  seems  likely  that  there  was  already  in  the  Indo-Iranian  period  a  god 
resembling  the  Vrtra-slaying  Indra  of  the  RV.  The  etymology  of  the  word 
is  doubtful,  but  its  radical  portion  ind  may  be  connected  with  that  in 
ind-u  (h^op. 


ii.  12,  2] 

ii.  12.     Metre:  Tristubh. 


INDRA 


45 


^:  I  ^Trf:  I  -^  I  :q^^:  i  ^^^T^i:  i 
W  I  ^^+?l  I  "ft^^  tT^  I  ^^ 
g»=W  I  ^IT  I  ^:  I  ^^T^:  1  vk*  I 


L  yo  jata  eva  prathamo  manasvan 
devo  devan  kratuna  paryabhti- 

sat ; 
yasya  siismad  rodasi  abhyase- 

tam 
nrmnasya  raahna  :    sa,  janasa, 

Indrah. 


The  chief  wise  god  who  as  soon 
as  horn  surpassed  the  gods  in 
power  ;  before  tvhose  vehemence  the 
two  ivorlds  trembled  by  reason  of 
the  greatness  of  his  valour:  he, 
0  men,  is  Indra. 


eva  :  see  p.  224,  2.  manas-van  :  note  that  the  suffix  van  is  not 
separated  in  the  Pada  text,  as  it  is  in  pavitra-van  (i.  160,  3)  ;  had 
the  Sandhi  of  the  word,  however,  been  mano-van  it  would  have 
been  analysed  as  manahvjvan.  dev6  devan  :  cp.  i.  1,  5  c.  parya- 
bhusat :  the  exact  meaning  of  the  vb.  pari  bhus  is  somewhat 
uncertain  here,  but  as  the  greatness  of  Indra  is  especially  emphasized 
in  this  hymn,  surpass  seems  the  most  probable.  Sayana  explains  it 
here  as  encompassed  with  protection  ;  in  the  AV.  as  ruled  over  ;  in  the 
TS.  as  surpassed,  rodasi :  the  Pragrhya  i  of  duals  is  not  shortened 
in  pronunciation  before  vowels  (p.  437,  f.  n.  3).  abhyasetam  :  ipf. 
of  bhyas  =  bhi  be  afraid  of,  with  abl.  (p.  316,  b).  mahna  :  inst.  of 
mahan  greatness  (cp.  p.  458,  2).  The  refrain  sa,  janasa,  Indrah 
ends  every  stanza  (except  the  last)  of  this  hymn  ;  similarly  visvas- 
mad  Indra  littarah  ends  all  the  twenty-three  stanzas  of  x.  86. 


46  INDRA  [ii.  12,  2 

^  ^T^^^Tf^  W^T^  ^^:  II      ^:  I  ^T^  I  W^Tfl^  I  W  I  ^-^w  I 


vyathamanam. 


T^/^o  mac^e  firm  the  quaJcing 
earth,  who  set  at  rest  the  agitated 
mountains  ;  tvho  measures  out  the 
air  more  ividely,  who  supported 
heaven :  he,  0  men,  is  Indra. 


2  yah     prthivim 

adrmhad, 
yah  parvatan  prakupitam  aram 

nat, 
y6  antariksam  vimam^  variyo. 
yo  dyam  astabhnat :  sa,  janasa, 

fndrah. 

yds  :  note  that  every  Pada  of  this  stanza,  as  well  as  of  nearly 
every  other  stanza  of  this  hymn,  begins  with  a  form  of  the 
relative  prn.  corresponding  to  the  sa  of  the  refrain.  The  cosmic 
deeds  of  Indra  in  all  the  three  divisions  of  the  universe,  earth,  air, 
and  heaven,  are  here  described,  aramnat :  ipf.  of  ram  set  at  rest. 
vimam^  variyas  (cpv.  of  uni,  103,  2  a) :  here  the  cpv.  is  used 
predicatively,  extended  so  as  to  be  tvider ;  cp.  vi.  69,  5,  where  it  is 
said  of  Indra  and  Visnu :  '  ye  made  the  air  wider  and  stretched  out 
the  spaces  for  us  to  live.'  dyam  :  ace.  of  <iy6  sky.  astabhnat :  ipf. 
of  stabh  prop  ;  in  this  and  the  preceding  stanza  the  ipf.  of  narration 
is  used  throughout  excepting  vimam6  (a  form  of  constant  occurrence, 
cp.  154,  1.  3  ;  160,  4):  cp.  213  d  (p.  343). 

-m  I  f  WT  I  ^?l  I  ^WTct  I  ^H  I 


^  w[  ^^^^  w  ^^-m  I 
^^^(^  ^  ^^T^  T'^:  II 

3  j6  hatvahim  arinat  sapta  sin 

dhun, 
■yd  ga  udajad  apadha  Valasya, 
yd  asmanor  antar  agnim  jajana, 
samvrk   samatsu :    sa,   janasa, 

indrah. 


Wo  I  'FT:  I  ^fi:>J^^ri:i  ^^^J>i(TI  ^^^  I 

w  I  ^^^^:  I  ^nr:  i  ^j^i  ^^jit  i 
^'l>jf  ^  I  ^jR^s^  I  m  I  ^^T^:  I  T%^:  n 

Who  having  slain  the  serpent 
released  the  seven  streams,  tvho 
drove  out  the  coivs  l)y  the  unclosing 
of  Vala,  who  hetiveen  two  rocks 
has  produced  fire,  victor  in  battles  : 
he,  0  men,  is  Indra. 


ii.  ri,  4]  INDEA  47 

The  first  hemistich  refers  to  the  two  well-known  myths,  the 
release  of  the  waters  by  the  conquest  of  Vrtra,  and  the  capture  of 
the  cows  imprisoned  by  Vala ;  cp.  ii.  14,  2 :  yo  ap6  vavrvamsam 
Vrtram  jaghana  who  sletv  Vrtra  who  had  enclosed  the  waters,  and 
ibid.  3  :  yo  ga  udajad,  apa  hi  Valam  vah.  who  drove  out  the  cows,  for 
he  unclosed  Vala.  arinat :  ipf.  of  ri  release,  sapta  sindhun  :  the 
seven  rivers  of  the  Panjab.  gas :  A.  pi.  of  gd  cotv.  ud-ajat :  ipf. 
of  aj  drive.  There  is  some  doubt  as  to  the  exact  interpretation  of 
apadha,  a  word  that  occurs  here  only.  In  form  it  can  only  be  an 
I.  s.  of  apa-dha  (cp.  97,  2).  The  parallel  use  of  apa-vr  in  ii.  14,  3 
(quoted  above)  indicates  that  apa-dha  means  the  unclosing  by  Indra 
of  the  cave  of  Vala  in  which  the  cows  are  imprisoned  ;  cp.  also 
i.  11,  5:  tvam  Valasya  gomato  *pavar  bilam  thou  hast  unclosed  the 
aperture  of  Vala  rich  in  coivs.  The  form  is  explained  by  Durga,  the 
commentator  on  the  Nirukta,  by  apadhanena  as  meaning  udgha- 
tanena  Valasya  %  the  unclosing  of  Vala.  Sayana  interprets  it  as  an 
irregularity  for  the  abl.  =  from  the  enclosure  of  Vala.  Valasya  :  the 
objective  gen.  (p.  320,  B  1  &)  =  by  opening  (the  cave  of)  Vala. 
asmanor  antar  :  between  two  clouds,  according  to  Sayana  ;  between 
heaven  and  earth  according  to  Durga  ;  the  allusion  is  to  the  lightning 
form  of  Agni  who  in  several  passages  is  said  to  be  '  in  the  rock  ', 
to  be  *  produced  from  the  rock '  and  is  called  *  son  of  the  rock ' 
(adreh  suniih). 


i  ^m  f^^T  ^^^T  ^fnf%  %^  I  X^l  I  f%^t  I  ^^TT  I  iJffTf^  I 

4  y6nema  visva  cyavana  krtani,  -B«/  whom  all  things  here  have 

y6  dasam  varnam  adharam  gii-     been  made  unstable,  who  has  made 
hakah ;  subject  the  Basa  colour  and  has 


48  INDKA  [i.  12,  4 

svaghniva    yo  jigivam  laksam     made   it  disappear;    who,  like  a 

adad  winning    gambler   the   stake,   has 

aryah     pustani  :     sa,  janasa,     taken  the  possessions  of  the  foe:  he, 

Indrah.  0  men,  is  Indra. 

ima  visva :  all  these  things,  that  is,  all  things  on  earth,  cyavana 
is  used  predicatively  after  krtani,  just  as  adharam  is  in  b  after 
akar ;  cp.  iv.  30,  22 :  yds  ta  visvani  cicyus6  ivho  hast  shaken  the 
whole  ivorld.  dasam  varnam :  the  non- Aryan  colour  (==  krsnam 
varnam),  the  aborigines ;  note  the  difference  of  accent  in  the 
substantive  dasa  and  the  adj.  dasa.  akar  ;  root  ao.  of  kr  (148,  1  h), 
to  be  •  construed  with  both  adharam  (make  inferior  =  subject)  and 
giiha  {put  in  hiding  =  cause  to  disappear,  drive  away).  When  a  final 
VisarjanT5"a  in  the  Samhita  text  represents  an  etymological  r,  this  is 
indicated  in  the  Pada  text  by  putting  iti  after  the  word  and 
repeating  the  latter  in  its  pause  form :  akar  ity  akah.  jigivam  : 
pf.  pt.  of  ji  win  (139,  4) ;  on  the  Sandhi  see  40,  3.  Since  the  normal 
metre  requires  w  w  —  after  the  caesura  (p.  441,  top),  this  word  was 
here  perhaps  metrically  pronounced  jigivam  as  it  came  to  be 
regularly  written  in  B.  adat :  irr.  a  ao.  (147  a  1)  from  da  give; 
though  not  analysed  in  the  Pada  text,  it  must  owing  to  the  sense 
be  =  a-adat  has  taken,  aryas  :  gen  of  ari  (99,  3) ;  this  word  appears 
to  be  etymologically  a  Bv.  =  having  no  wealth  (ri  =  rai),  either 
for  oneself  (whence  the  sense  needy,  suppliant)  or  to  bestow  on 
others  (whence  the  sense  niggard,  foe).  [If  a  single  meaning  has  to 
be  given,  devout  is  misleading,  and  suppliant  should  be  substituted 
for  it  in  the  Vedic  Grammar,  p.  81,  f.  n.  1  ;  99,  3  ;  and  in  the 
Index,  p.  473.] 

^#  ^tT  ^  ^^T^  X^:  II  x^"^  I  iQ[^^  I 

w.  I  ^^:  I  gi\:  I  ft^:vST^  i  w  i 

f^f TfH  I 

^f^  I  ^#  I  \jTn  ^:  I  ^^T^:  I  ^^:  li 


ii.  12,  6] 


INDRA 


49 


5  yam   sma    prchanti  kiiha   s^ti 

ghoram, 
ut^m  ahur  naiso  astiti  enam  ; 
so  'ryah  pustir  vija  iva  minati. 
srad  asmai  dhatta :  sa,  janasa, 

indrah. 


The  terrible  one  of  whom  they 
ask  '  where  is  he ',  of  ivhom  they  also 
say  ' he  is  not' ;  he  diminishes  the 
possessions  of  the  niggard  like 
the  (player's)  stake.  Believe  in  him : 
he,  0  men,  is  Indra, 


sma  (p.  250)  is  metrically  lengthened,  the  second  syllable  of  the 
Pada  favouring  a  long  vowel  (p.  441,  top),  prchanti  :  pr.  of  prach. 
s6ti  for  sa  iti :  the  irr.  contraction  of  sa  with  a  following  vowel  is 
common  (48  a),  im  anticipates  enam :  see  p.  220.  ahur  :  pf.  of 
ah  say,  139,  4  ;  this  vb.  not  being  accented,  b  has  the  form  of 
a  principal  clause,  though  the  almost  invariable  use  of  relative 
clauses  in  this  hymn  would  lead  one  to  expect  that  the  yam  of  the 
first  clause  would  accentuate  the  second  also,  so  aryas  :  the  initial 
a,  though  written,  should  be  dropped  ;  otherwise  the  irr.  contraction 
vijeva  is  just  possible,  but  ^  —  for  y^  w  following  a  caesura  after  the 
fifth  syllable  is  rare.  5  c  is  parallel  to  4  c  :  a  minati  to  adat ; 
aryah  pustih  to  aryah  pustani;  vijah  to  laksam.  Usas  (iv.  51) 
is  in  i.  92,  10  described  as  wearing  away  the  life  of  mortals, 
svaghniva  krtniir  vija  aminana  diminishing  it  as  a  skilful  gambler 
the  stakes,  minati  :  pr.  of  mi  damage,  srad  dhatta  (2.  pi.  ipv.  of 
dha)  believe,  with  dat.  (200  A.  1  e).  The  Padas  a  b  mention  doubts 
as  to  the  existence  of  Indra  ;  c  implies  that  he  does  exist ;  and  d 
calls  for  belief  in  him. 

gn^T'T^  ^  ^^^  V^:  II        grf^J^TT^  I  w.  I  ^'TT^:  I  T^:  ii 

6  yo  radhrasya  codita,  yah  krsa-  Who  is  furtherer  of  the  rich,  of 

sya,  the  poor,  of  the  suppliant  Brahmin 

yo     brahmano     nadhamanasya  singer;    who,  fair-lipped,    is    the 

kir6h ;  helper  of  him  that  has  pressed  Soma 


1902 


E 


50  INDKA  [ii.  12, 6 

yuktagravno  yd  avita  susiprah.      and  has  set  to  work  the  stones  :  he, 
sutasomasya  :  sa,    janasa,    In-      0  men,  is  Indra. 
drah. 

codita  governs  the  three  genitives  (the  rich,  the  poor,  the  priestly- 
poet)  of  a  b,  as  the  three  relatives  show ;  while  avita  governs  that 
of  c.  su-sipras  :  Bv.  cd.,  p.  455,  c  a.  The  exact  meaning  of  sipra 
is  somewhat  doubtful,  but  as  it  is  regularly  dual,  has  the  attributive 
tawny f  hari-sipra  being  parallel  to  hari-smasaru  taivny-tearded,  and 
is  associated  with  Indra's  drinking  of  Soma,  it  can  hardly  mean 
anything  but  lips  or  moustaches  ;  it  could  not  well  mean  jaws  which 
are  hanu.  yukta-gravnas :  of  him  who  has  set  in  motion  the 
stones  with  which  the  Soma  shoots  are  pounded. 

^:  ^  ^  '^^^  ^^t^  ^:  i  f^'l^i  ^»  i  ^^1 1  ^wr  i 

7  yasyasvasah      pradisi,      yasya  In  whose  control  are  horses,  hine, 

gavo,  clans,  all  chariots ;  tvho  creates  the 

yasya   grama,  yasya  visve   ra-  sun,  the  dawn;  ivho  is  the  guide 

thasah;  of  the  waters:    he,    0    men,    is 

yah  sliriam,  ya  usasam  jajana ;  Indra. 

y6  apam  neta :  sa,  janasa,  In- 
drah. 

usasam :  often  also  usasam ;  du.  N.  A.  usasa  and  usasa ;  N.  pi. 
usasas  and  usasas ;  see  83,  2  a,  f.  n.  1. 

^^+  f ^^  ^  oT^n^  \^\  II       ^^T^Jl I  f^fi:  I  T^'i  I  wf^^^^  I 

^T^f  I  f*^  ^fir  I  ^:  I  w^:  i  ^:  ii 


ii.  12,  9] 


INDRA ' 


51 


8  yam  krandasi    samyati   vihva- 
yete, 
pare  avara  ubhaya  amitrah ; 
samanam   cid  ratham  atasthi- 


vamsa 
nana  havete : 
drah. 


sa,    janasa,    In- 


Whom  the  two  battle-arrays, 
coming  together,  call  upon  diver- 
gently, loth  foes,  the  farther  and 
the  nearer;  two  having  mounted 
the  selfsame  chariot  invoice  him 
separately :  he,  0  men,  is  Indra, 


sam-yati :  pr.  pt.  du.  n.  of  sam-i  go  together,  vi-hvayete  (from 
hva)  and  nana  havete  (from  hu,  the  Samprasarana  form  of  hva) 
are  synonymous  =  call  on  variously ;  cp.  i.  102,  5.  6 :  nana  hi  tva 
havamana  jana  im6  these  men  calling  on  thee  (Indra)  variously  ;  and 
atha  jana  vi  hvayante  sisasavah  so  men  call  on  thee  variously, 
desiring  gains.  par6  Vara :  must  be  read  pare  avara,  though  the 
succession  of  five  short  syllables  before  the  caesura  is  irregular 
(p.  440,  4).  The  second  Pada  explains  krandasi  :  ubhayas  (never 
used  in  the  dual)  =  both  groups  of  foes,  that  on  the  farther  and  that 
on  the  nearer  side,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  speaker ;  according 
to  Sayana,  the  superior  and  the  inferior,  samanam  contrasted  with 
nana  :  two  who  are  on  the  same  chariot,  that  is,  the  fighter  and  the 
driver,  invoke  him  separately,  havete  :  not  being  accented  must 
be  taken  as  the  vb.  of  a  principal  clause  ;  cp.  note  on  5  b. 


9  yasman  nart6  vijayante  janaso,         Without    whom    men     do    not 

yam    yiidhyamana     avase    ha-  conquer,  whom  they  tvhen  fighting 

vante ;  call  on  for  help  ;  who  has  heen  a 

yo    visvasya    pratimanam    ba-  match  for  every  one,  who  moves  the 

bhuva,  immovable  :  he,  0  men,  is  Indra. 
j6   acyutaeyut :       sa,     janasa, 
Indrah. 

E  2 


52 


INDKA 


[ii.  n,  9 


na  rt6  :  must  be  pronounced  nart6  (19  a),  vi-jayante :  pr.  of  ji 
conquer.  havante :  cp.  vihvayete  in  8  a.  avase :  final  dat. 
(p.  314,  B  2).  pratlmanam :  cp.  iv.  18,  4  :  nahi  nii  asya  prati- 
manam  asti  antar  jat^su  uta  j6  janitvah/or  there  is  no  match  for 
him  among  those  who  have  been  horn  nor  those  who  will  he  horn. 
acyuta-cyiit :  cp.  4  a ;  also  iii.  30,  4 :  tvam  cyavayann  acyutani 
.  .  .  carasi  thou  continuest  shaking  unshaken  things. 


^0  ^:  w^cfr  ^tf^  ^^t^T'l 


10  yah  sasvato  mahi  ^no  dadhanan 
amanyamanan  charua  jaghana ; 
yah  sardhate  nanudadati  srdh- 

yam, 
yo   dasyor   hanta :    sa,  janaso, 

fndrah. 


Who  slays  with  his  arroiv  the 
unexpecting  many  that  commit 
great  sin;  ivho  forgives  not  the 
arrogant  man  his  arrogance,  ivho 
slays  the  Dasyu :  lie,  0  men,  is 
Indra. 


dadhanan:  pr.  pt.  A.  of  dha.  The  Sandhi  of  an  (39)  is  not 
applied  between  Padas  (cp.  i.  35,  10  c).  amanyamanan :  not 
thinking  scil.  that  he  would  slay  them  ;  on  the  Sandhi  of  n  +  s,  see 
40,  1.  sarva :  tvith  his  arroiv  (inst. ,  p.  80);  with  his  characteristic 
weapon,  the  vajra,  he  slays  his  foes  in  battle,  jaghana :  lias  slain 
(and  still  slays)  may  be  translated  by  the  present  (213  A  a),  anu- 
dadati  :  3.  s.  pr.  of  anu  +  da  forgive,  with  dat.  (cp.  200  A/),  dasyos  : 
of  the  demon,  a  term  applied  to  various  individual  demons,  such  as 
Sambara  (11a). 


c|C|  ^:  ij?4t  ^^^3  f^^^ 


^:  I  ir^-^  I  ^^'^^  I  f^^'fi?^  i 
^^Tft^T^  I  ^T.f^  I  ^g^^N^ct^i 
^^T^iT+^^i:  I  ^:  I  ^fw'l  I  ?^T^  I 
^ipi  I  ^^t'Tfl  I  ^'  I  ^'fW'  I  T^'  II 


I 


ii,  12,  12] 


INDRA 


1  yah  Sambaram  parvatesu  ksi- 

yantam 
eatvarimsyam      saradi      anva- 

vindat ; 
ojayamanam  yo  ahim  jaghana, 
Danum    sayanam :   sa,  janasa, 

Indrah. 


Who  in  the  fortieth  autumn 
found  out  SafYibara  cUvelUng  in 
the  mountains  ;  who  has  slain  the 
serpent  as  he  shoived  his  strength, 
the  son  of  JDdnu,  as  he  lay :  he, 
0  men,  is  Indra. 


Sambara,  next  to  Vrtra,  Vala,  and  Susna,  is  the  most  frequently 
mentioned  demon  foe  of  Indra,  who  strikes  him  down  from  his 
mountain.  He  is  often  spoken  of  as  possessing  many  forts,  ksi- 
yantam  :  see  note  on  i.  154,  2  d.  catvarimsyani :  that  is,  Indra 
found  him  after  a  very  long  search,  as  he  was  hiding  himself, 
anvavindat :  ipf.  of  2.  vid  find.  The  second  hemistich  refers  to 
Indra's  slaughter  of  Vrtra.  ojayamanam :  cp.  iii.  32,  11 ;  ahann 
ahim  parisayanam  arna  ojayamanam  thou  slewest  the  serpent  shoiving 
his  strength  as  he  lag  around  the  flood.  Danum :  this  is  strictly  the 
name  of  Vrtra's  mother,  here  used  as  a  metronymic  =  Danava ;  cp. 
i.  32,  9  :  Danuh  saye  sahavatsa  na  dheniih  Bdnu  lag  like  a  cow  with 
her  calf(i.  e.  Vrtra).     sayanam  :  pr.  pt.  A.  of  si  lie  (134,  1  c). 


^:  I  ^Hitft^:  I  I^'t:  i  gf^^^r-H, 
^^.j^^^fi:  I  ?ErH%  I  f  F  I  ft't^  I 
^:  I  "^ffW'l  I  ^WT^  I  ^^vjm^:  I 
^TJ^l^vJTt^nTii:!  ^:  i^^T^:i  T^:ii 


12  yah  saptarasmir  vrsabhas  tiivi- 

sman 
avasrjat  sartave  saptd  sindhun ; 
yo  Rauhinam  asphurad  vajra- 

bahur 
dyam  ar6hantam :    sa,  janasa, 

indrah. 


The  mighty  seven-reined  hull  who 
let  loose  the  seven  streams  to  floiv ; 
who  armed  ivith  the  holt  spurned 
Uauhina  as  he  scaled  heaven :  he, 
0  men,  is  Indra. 


The  term  vrsabha  is  very  often  applied  to  gods,  but  especially  to 
Indra,  as  expressing  mighty  strength  and  fertility,    sapta-rasmis  : 


54  INDRA  [ii.  12,  12 

having  seven  reins  probably  means  '  hard  to  restrain  \  *  irresistible ' ; 
Sayana  interprets  the  cd.  to  mean  'having  seven  kinds  of  clouds 
(parjanyas)  that  shed  rain  on  the  earth  '.  tuvis-man  :  the  suffix 
mant  is  separated  in  the  Pada  text  only  after  vowels,  as  g6  vj  man  ; 
on  the  Sandhi  see  10  a.  ava-asrjat :  ipf.  of  srj  emit,  sartave  :  dat.  inf. 
of  sr  floiv  (p.  192,  4).  sapta  sindhun  :  cp.  3  a  and  i.  35,  8  b.  Rau- 
hinam  :  a  demon  mentioned  in  only  one  other  passage  of  the  RV. 
dyam  a-rohantam  :  ascending  to  heaven  in  order  to  attack  Indra. 

«^?  ^T^t  f^^#  ^ft  ^^  W[^\   I   f^ri;  I   ^#  I  ^ft  T^  I 

^  ^m^w*  ^  ^^^  v^i  II       ^:  I  ^^^t^t:  i  f^^f^:  i  ^#^^tf:  i 

^:  I  ^#if^:  I  ^:  l  ^cfjf :  i  T^:  li 

13  DyavacidasmaiPrthivinamete;  Even  Heaven  and  Earth  how 

iSusmac  cid  asya  parvata  bha-  doivn  hefore  him;    before  his  ve- 

yante ;  hemence  even  the  mountains  are 

yah  somapa  nicit6  vajrabahur,  afraid.   Who  is  linoivn  as  the  Soma- 

jd    vajrahastah  ;     sa,    janasa,  drinker,  holding  the  holt  in  his  arm, 

Indrah.  who  holds  the  holt  in  his  hand  :  he, 

0  men,  is  Indra. 

Dyava  .  .  .  Prthivi :  the  two  members  of  Devata-dvandvas  are 
here,  as  often,  separated  by  other  words  (186  A  1).  asmai :  dat. 
with  nam  how  (cp.  200  A  1  A;,  p.  311).  bhayante  :  see  note  on 
i.  85,  8  c.  siismad :  cp.  1  c.  soma-pas  (97,  2) :  predicative  nom., 
(196  h).     ni-citas  :  on  the  accent  see  p.  462,  f.  n.  4. 

«^8  ^:  g^^^^^  ^:  ^^^  ^:  I  W^^  i  ^^f^  I  ^^  I  ^t^^'^TIi 

^:  i[^T^  ^^:  itii^rj^^fft  i  ^:  i  ^^^t^  i  ^:  i  ^^tr^  i  ^^  i 

^^  w^  ^M  W  ^*ft  ^^  I  w^  I  ^^^1 1  ^^  I  ^-  I 

•^^i  tto:  ^  ^'TT^  T^:  ii  ^^  i  T^'l  I TT^:  I  €:  i  w^:  i  ly^- " 


ii.  12,  15] 


INDEA 


55 


I:  yah  sunvantam  avati,  yah  pac-         Who  with  his  aid  helps  him  that 


antam, 
yah   samsantam,   yah   sasama- 

nam  uti ; 
yasya      brahma      vardhanam, 

yasya  s6ino, 
yasyedam  radhah  :   sa,  janasa, 

indrah. 


presses  Soma,  him  that  hakes,  him 
that  offers  praise,  him  that  has  pre- 
pared the  sacrifice ;  whom  prayer, 
whom  Soma,  whom  this  gift 
strengthens :  he,  0  men,  is  Indra. 


sunvantam :  all  the  participles  in  a  and  b  refer  to  some  act  of 
worship :  pressing  Soma  ;  baking  sacrificial  cakes,  &c.  ;  praising  the 
gods  ;  having  prepared  the  sacrifice,  sasamanam :  explained  by 
Sayana  as  stotram  kurvanam  offering  a  Stotra  ;  by  the  Naighantuka, 
iii.  14,  as  arcantam  singing ;  by  the  Nirukta,  vi.  8,  as  samsamanam 
praising,  uti  :  contracted  inst.  of  uti  (p.  80)  to  be  construed  with 
avati ;  cp.  i.  185,  4 :  avasa  avanti  helping  with  aid.  vardhanam  : 
to  be  taken  predicatively  with  each  of  the  three  subjects  brahma, 
s6mas,  radhas,  of  whom  prayer,  &c.  is  the  strengthening,  that  is, 
whom  prayer,  &c.  strengthens ;  yasya  being  an  objective  gen. 
(p.  320,  B  1  h).     idam  radhas  this  gift  =  this  sacrificial  offering. 


^:  1 1^^  I  ^^%  I  ^w:  I  ^  I  f^ci:  I 
m^^i  ^ff^  I  ^:  I  f^^  I  '^ftRw:  i 
^^^  I  ^  I  T^  I  i^i  I  fkm^:  I 
g>jftT+^:  I  T^^^^  \  ^  i  ^^r  ii 


15  yah  sunvat6   pacate  dudhra  a 

cid 
vajam  dardarsi,   sa  kilasi  sat- 

yah. 
vayam  ta,  Indra,  visvaha  pri- 

yasah, 
suviraso  vidatham  a  vadema. 


As  he  who,  most  fierce,  enforces 
booty  for  him  that  presses  and  him 
that  hakes,  thou  indeed  art  true. 
We  ever  dear  to  thee,  0  Indra, 
with  strong  sons,  would  utter  divine 
worship. 


This  concluding  stanza  is  the  only  one  that  does  not  end  with  the 
refrain  sa,  janasa,  Indrah.    Instead,  the  poet,  changing  from  the  3. 


56  INDEA  [ii.  12,  15 

to  the  2.  prs.,  substitutes  at  the  end  of  b  the  words  sa  kila^asi 
satyah  as  such  thou  art  indeed  true  =  to  be  depended  on  (cp.  note  on 
satyam  in  i.  1,  6  c);  while  c  and  d  are  a  prayer  ending  with  an 
adaptation  of  the  favourite  refrain  of  the  Gautamas,  the  poets  of  the 
second  Mandala  :  brhad  vadema  vidathe  suvirah  tve  would,  accom- 
panied hy  strong  sons,  speaJc  aloud  at  divine  ivorship.  a  cid : 
perhaps  better  taken  as  emphasizing  dudhras  (cp.  p.  216)  than  with 
dardarsi  (int.  of  df).  te :  gen.  with  priyasas  (p.  322,  C).  vida- 
tham  :  the  etymology  and  precise  sense  of  this  word  have  been 
much  discussed.  There  can  now  be  hardly  any  doubt  that  it  is 
derived  from  the  root  vidh  worship,  and  that  it  means  divine  worship, 
scarcely  distinguishable  from  yajna,  of  which  it  is  given  as  a 
synonym  in  Naighantuka,  iii.  17  ;  cp.  note  on  i.  85,  1. 


EUDEl 

This  god  occupies  a  subordinate  position  in  the  RV.,  being  celebrated 
in  only  three  entire  hymns,  in  part  of  another,  and  in  one  conjointly  with 
Soma.  His  hand,  his  arms,  and  his  limbs  are  mentioned.  He  has  beautiful 
lips  and  wears  braided  hair.  His  colour  is  brown  ;  his  form  is  dazzling, 
for  he  shines  like  the  radiant  sun,  like  gold.  He  is  arrayed  with  golden 
ornaments,  and  wears  a  glorious  necklace  (niska).  He  drives  in  a  car.  His 
weapons  are  often  referred  to :  he  holds  the  thunderbolt  in  his  arm,  and 
discharges  his  lightning  shaft  from  the  sky ;  but  he  is  usually  said  to  be 
armed  with  a  bow  and  arrows,  which  are  strong  and  swift. 

Rudra  is  very  often  associated  with  the  Maruts  (i.  85).  He  is  their  father, 
and  is  said  to  have  generated  them  from  the  shining  udder  of  the  cow  Prsni. 

He  is  fierce  and  destructive  like  a  terrible  beast,  and  is  called  a  bull,  as 
well  as  the  ruddy  (arusa)  boar  of  heaven.  He  is  exalted,  strongest  of  the 
strong,  swift,  unassailable,  unsurpassed  in  might.  He  is  young  and  unaging, 
a  lord  (i^ana)  and  father  of  the  world.  By  his  rule  and  univeral  dominion 
he  is  aware  of  the  doings  of  men  and  gods.  He  is  bountiful  (raidhvanis), 
easily  invoked  and  auspicious  (siva).  But  he  is  usually  regarded  as  malevo- 
lent ;  for  the  hymns  addressed  to  him  chiefly  express  fear  of  his  terrible 
shafts  and  deprecation  of  his  wrath.  He  is  implored  not  to  slay  or  injure, 
in  his  anger,  his  worshippers  and  their  belongings,  but  to  avert  his  great 
malignity  and  his  cow-slaying,  man-slaying  bolt  from  them,  and  to  lay 
others  low.  He  is,  however,  not  purely  maleficent  like  a  demon.  He  not 
only  preserves  from  calamity,  but  bestows  blessings.  His  healing  powers 
are  especially  often  mentioned  ;  he  has  a  thousand  remedies,  and  is  the 


ii.  33,  1]  RUDRA  57 

greatest  physician  of  physicians.  In  this  connexion  he  has  two  exclusive 
epithets,  jalasa,  cooling,  and  jalasa-bhesaja,  2?05sessw^  cooling  remedies. 

The  physical  basis  represented  by  Rudra  is  not  clearly  apparent.  But  it 
seems  probable  that  the  phenomenon  underlying  his  nature  was  the  storm, 
not  pure  and  simple,  but  in  its  baleful  aspect  seen  in  the  destructive 
agency  of  lightning.  His  healing  and  beneficent  powers  would  then  have 
been  founded  partly  on  the  fertilizing  and  purifying  action  of  the  thunder- 
storm, and  partly  on  the  negative  action  of  sparing  those  whom  he  might 
slay.  Thus  the  deprecations  of  his  wrath  led  to  the  application  of  the 
euphemistic  epithet  siva,  which  became  the  regular  name  of  Rudra's 
historical  successor  in  post-Vedic  mythology. 

The  etymological  sense  of  the  name  is  somewhat  uncertain,  but  would  be 
*  Howler '  according  to  the  usual  derivation  from  rud  cry. 

ii.  33.     Metre:  Tristubh. 

^  ^  ^ft  ^fH  ^T{         ^  I  ^:  I  ^^:  I  ^^f?T  I  ^j[  I 
IT  ^^?Tff  ^^  iR^Tfir:  II  3T  I  ^T^^ff  I  ^f  I  TT^^Tfit:  II 

1  a   te,  pitar  Marutam,  sumnam  Let  thy  good  will,  0  Father  of 

etu  :  the  Maruts,  come  (to  us) :  sever  us 

ma  nah  suryasya  samdrso  yuyo-  not  from  the  sight  of  the  sun.  May 

thah.  the  hero  he  merciful  to  us  in  regard 

abhi  no  vir6  arvati  ksameta ;  to  our  steeds  ;  may  we  he  prolific 

pra   jayemahi,    Rud^ra,    praja-  with  offspring. 
bhih. 

pitar  Marutam :  the  whole  of  a  compound  voc.  expression  loses 
its  accent  unless  it  begins  a  sentence  of  Pad  a ;  in  the  latter  case 
only  the  first  syllable  would  be  accented  (p.  465,  18  a),  yuyothas  : 
2.  s.  inj.  A.  of  2.  yu  separate,  with  irregular  strong  radical  vowel 
(p.  144,  a),  samdrsas  :  abl.  201  A  1.  viras  =  Rudra,  with  change 
from  2.  to  3.  prs.,  as  is  often  the  case  (cp.  i.  85,  5  c).  arvati  abhi 
ksameta  =  may  he  not  injure  us  in  our  steeds,  may  he  spare  them. 
Rudra  must  be  read  as  a  trisyllable  [lb.  Id). 


58 


EUDEA  [ii.  33,  2 


2  tvadattebhi,  Rud^ra,  samtame-  B^/  the  most  salutary  medicines 

bhih  given  hy  thee,  0  Budra,  I  ivould 

satam  hima  asiya  bhesaj^bhih.  attain  a  hundred  winters.     Drive 

vi    asmad   dv^so    vitaram,     vi  far  away  from  us  hatred,  away 

amho,  distress,  away  diseases  in  all  di- 

vi  amivas  catayasva  visucih.  rections. 

tva-dattebhi  :  the  first  member  of  this  cd.  retains  the  inst.  case- 
form  (p.  273)  ;  Sandhi,  47.  satam :  on  the  concord  see  p.  291,  h  ; 
life  extending  to  a  hundred  winters  or  autumns  (saradas)  is  often 
prayed  for.  asiya  :  root  ao.  op.  A.  of  ams  (p.  171,  4).  vi  :  the  prp. 
of  a  cd.  vb.  is  often  repeated  with  each  object,  the  vb.  itself  being 
used  only  once,  vitaram  :  adv.  of  the  cpv.  of  vi  farther  (cp.  ut-tara) 
employed  only  with  verbs  compounded  with  vi.  catayasva  :  ipv. 
A.  cs.  of  cat,  with  metrical  lengthening  of  the  final  vowel,  visucis  : 
A.  pi.  f.  of  visvanc  turned  in  various  directions,  is  used  predicatively 
like  an  adv. 


3  sr^stho   jatasya,    Rud^ra,    sri- 
yasi, 
tavastamas  tavasam,  vajrabaho. 
pdrsi   nah  param  amhasah  su- 

asti ; 
viiva  abhtti  rapaso  yuyodhi. 


%^:  I  ^TfT^  I  ^f  I  t^T  I  ^f^  I 

^^:vjft^:  I  T\^m^^  i  ^^^jft  i^ 

^^smf[  I 
vf^  I  ^:  I  TTTT'l  I  ^f ^'  I  ^^f^  I 
f^^i:  I  ^^vST^:  I T^:  i  W^_f^  ii 

Thou  art  the  best  oftvhat  is  born, 
0  Budra,  in  glory,  the  mightiest  of 
the  mighty,  0  ivielder  of  the  bolt. 
Transport  us  to  the  farther  shore 
of  distress  in  safety.  Ward  off 
all  attacks  of  mischief 


ii.  33,  4]  EUDRA  59 

jatasya  :  the  pp.  used  as  a  n.  collective  noun  =  that  which  lias  been 
borrif  creation,  vajra-baho :  it  is  only  here  that  this  specific  epithet 
of  Indra  is  applied  to  any  other  deity ;  the  voc.  o  of  u  stems  is 
regularly  treated  as  Pragrhya  by  the  Pada  text,  but  not  in  the 
Samhita  text  (where  for  instance  vayav  a  and  vaya  ukth^bhih 
are  written),  parsi  :  from  pr  take  across,  is  one  of  a  number  of 
isolated  2.  s.  pr.  indicatives  in  form,  but  ipv.  in  sense  (p.  349,  /S). 
nas  :  initial  n  cerebralized  even  in  external  Sandhi  (65  A  c).  param: 
ace.  of  the  goal  (197  A 1).  svasti  :  this  word  is  not  analysed  in  the 
Pada  text  (like  sumati,  &c.)  because  asti  does  not  occur  as  an 
independent  substantive  ;  here  it  is  a  shortened  form  of  the  con- 
tracted inst.  svasti  (p.  80,  n.  2) ;  it  is  several  times  used  in  the 
sense  of  a  final  dat.  =  svastaye.  abhitis :  =  abhi  itis,  hence  the 
Svarita  (p.  464,  17,  1  a) ;  Sandhi,  47.  yuyodhi  :  2.  s.  ipv.  of  yu 
separate^  with  irr.  strong  radical  vowel  (p.  144,  a). 

8  TT  ^T  ^^  'Sf  ^■^'^I  'f^Tf^^     ^T  I  ^T  I  ^f  I  ^f  ^T^  I  Ti}:^fH:  I 

^  ^TT  ^iJ^  ^^%^^  ^fi:  I  ^:  I  ^TT'l  I  ^^^  I  «^^%ty:  I 

fH^^^  ^T  fvi^mi  'jwtf^  II      f^^^i fi^^i  W[  I  fi^W^i ^^f^  II 

4  ma    tva,    Rudra,    cukrudhama        May  we  not  anger  thee,  0  Rudra, 

namobhir,  with  our  obeisances,  nor  with  ill 

ma   diistuti,    vrsabha,    ma    sa-  praise,    0    bull,    nor    with   joint 

huti.  invocation.    Baise  up  our  heroes 

lin  no  viram   arpaya  bhesaj6-  with  remedies :  I  hear  of  thee  as 

bhir  :  the  best  physician  of  physicians. 
bhisaktamam  tva  bhisajam  sr- 

nomi. 

cukrudhama:  this  form,  red.  (cs.)  ao.  (149,  p.  174)  might  in 
itself  be  either  sb.  or  inj.,  because  the  1.  pi.  P.  of  these  moods 
is  identical  in  a  stems  ;  but  the  use  here  of  the  prohibitive  pel. 
ma,  which  is  employed  with  inj.  forms  only  (180),  decides  the 
question,  namobhis  :  that  is,  with  ill  or  inadequate  worship  ; 
cp.  dustuti  in  b  ;  the  latter  form  is  a  contracted  inst.  (p.  80) ;  on 


60  EUDRA  [ii.  33,  4 

the  internal  Sandhi  of  this  word  see  43,  3  a.  sahuti :  contracted 
inst.  ;  invocation  with  other  deities  whom  Eudra  might  consider 
inferior.  ud  arpaya :  cs.  of  ud  r  (p.  197,  irr.  1)  —  raise  up, 
strengthen,  bhisajam :  partitive  gen.  (see  202  B  2  &,  p.  321) ;  cp. 
3  b.     srnomi  :  pr.  of  sru  hear;  with  double  ace,  198,  1. 

^^:  ^fiiiffif  ftT^^TW  II        ^^:  I  g^ftiTt:  i.'OT^fi:  i  ^^tW  ii 

5  havimabhir    havate    yo   havir-  Budra  ivho  is  called   on  ivith 

bhir,  invocations  and  with  oUations,  I 

ava  stomebhi  Eud*ram  disiya  :  would  appease  with  songs  of  praise  : 

rdudarah.  suhavo  ma  no  asyai  may  he,    the  compassionate,  easy 

babhruh.  susipro  riradhan  ma-  to    invoke,    ruddy    hroivn,    fair- 

nayai.  lipped,    not    subject    us    to    that 

jealousy  of  his. 

haviman  :  from  hu  call,  but  havis  from  hu  sacrifice,  ava  disiya  : 
s  ao.  op.  A.  of  da  give  (144,  3).  rdtidaras  is  not  analysed  in  the 
Pada  text,  perhaps  owing  to  a  doubt  whether  it  is  =  rdu-udara  or 
rdu-dara  (the  former  is  the  view  of  Yaska  who  explains  it  as 
mrdu-udara) ;  for  rdu-pa  and  rdu-vrdh  are  separated  and  dara  is 
separated  in  puyam-dara.  Both  this  word  (according  to  the  former 
analysis)  and  su-hava  are  Bv.  (p.  455,  c  a),  babhriis  :  this  colour 
is  attributed  to  Eudra  in  viii.  9,  15  also  ;  otherwise  it  is  applied 
more  often  to  Soma  (viii.  48)  as  well  as  once  to  Agni.  su-sipras  : 
see  note  on  ii.  12,  6  c.  riradhat :  inj.  red.  ao.  of  randh.  asyai 
manayai  :  that  is,  Eudra's  well-known  wrath  is  deprecated ;  cp. 
4ab.  There  is  some  doubt  as  to  the  exact  interpretation  of  this 
stanza.  The  chief  objection  to  the  above  explanation  is  the  necessity 
to  take  havate  in  a  ps.  sense  (=  huyate  according  to  Sayana).  The 
following  sense  has  also  been  suggested:  'he  who  invokes  Eudra 
(thinks),  *'  I  would  buy  off  Eudra  with  songs  of  praise " :  let  not 
Eudra  subject  us  to  that  suspicion  (on  his  part).' 


ii.  33,  7]  KUDKA  61 

6  lin  ma  mamanda  vrsabho  Ma-  The  bull    accompanied    by  the 

riitvan  Maruts  has  gladdened  me,  the  sup- 

tvaksiyasa     vayasa     nadhama-  pliant,  with  his  most  vigorous  force, 

nam.  I  tvould  unscathed  attain  shade  in 

ghrniva  chayam  arapa  asiya  :  heat  as  it  tvere  :  I  would  desire  to 

a  vivaseyam   Rud^rasya   sum-  win  the  good  will  of  Budra. 

nam. 

lid  .  .  .  mamanda :  pf.  of  mand  (nasalized  form  of  mad)  gladden ; 
intransitive,  he  glad,  in  A.  only,  rsabhas :  Rudra.  Mariitvan  ; 
though  this  epithet  is  characteristic  of  Indra,  it  is  also  twice  applied 
to  Rudra  (as  father  of  the  Maruts,  see  1  a)  as  well  as  very  rarely  to 
a  few  other  gods  who  are  associated  with  Indra  ;  on  the  Sandhi  see 
40,  2.  ghrniva  has  been  much  discussed.  The  only  natural 
explanation  (following  the  Pad  a  text)  is  ghrni  iva,  taking  ghrni 
as  a  contracted  inst.  f.  (p.  80)  expressing  either  cause  =  by  reason  oj 
heat  (199  A  3)  or  time  =  in  heat  (199  A  5) ;  Sayana's  explanation 
is  ghrni  iva  like  one  heated  l>y  the  rays  of  the  su/n ;  but  a  word  ghrnin 
N.  ghrni  does  not  occur,  and  the  accent  is  wrong.  For  the  simile 
cp.  vi.  16,  38  :  upa  chayam  iva  ghrner  aganma  sarma  te  vayam 
ive  have  entered  thy  shelter  like  shade  (protecting)  from  heat  (p.  317,  2). 
asiya :  see  2b;  on  the  Sandhi  of  the  final  vowel  of  the  Pada, 
cp.  i.  160,  4  c.     a  vivaseyam  :  op.  ds.  of  van  win. 

^  l>  W  H  ^?;  gae^Tf  ^  #i  i  ^:  i  ^  i  ^f  i  ^^^:  i 

f^  ^  "^  %^wt  ^^f^:  I  f^:  I  ^:  i  ^f^  i  ^^w:  i  m^w,  i 

^w#r  t4^  ^^^t-  TL^I^"^  I  '^^^'  I  %^^  ^ 

'ft  ^  'TT  f  ^H  ^^^^t:  II  ^  I  g  I  m  I  f  w  I  'I'^'ft^-  II 


62 


KUDRA 


[ii.  33,  7 


7  kiia  sya  te,  Rud^ra,  mrlayakur 
has  to  j6  asti  bhesaj6  jalasah  ? 
apabharta  rapaso  daiviasya 
abhi  nii  ma,  vrsabha,  caksam- 
ithah. 


Where,  0  Eudra,  is  that  merciful 
hand  of  thine  tvhich  is  healing  and 
cooling  ?  As  remover  of  injury 
coming  from  the  gods,  do  thou,  0 
Bull,  now  be  compassionate  towards 
me. 


r 

kval  sya  :  see  p.  450,  &.  bhesajas  is  an  adj.  here  and  in  one 
other  passage;  otherwise  it  is  a  n.  noun  meaning  medicine,  apa- 
bharta :  on  the  accent  see  p.  453,  9  d.  daivyasya  :  derived  from  the 
gods,  that  is,  such  as  is  inflicted  by  Rudra  himself ;  on  the  Sandhi 
of  the  final  vowel,  cp.  6  c.  abhi :  final  vowel  metrically  lengthened 
in  the  second  syllable  of  the  Pada,  but  not  in  1  c.  eaksamithas : 
2.  s.  pf.  op.  of  ksam  (p.  156,  3). 


8  pra  babhrave  vrsabhaya  svitic6 
maho  mahim  sustutim  irayami. 
namasya  kalmalikinam  namo- 

bhir. 
grnimasi      tvesam      E-udrasya 

nama. 


IT  I  -^ym  I  f  W-RT  I  f^^%  I 

^f :  I  ^fV^  I  IvJ^fTT^  I  tT^Tf^T  I 

^w^  I  w^tf^^JR:  I  'Thrift:  I 
^Tift^  I  ^^Ji:  I  "i^^;^  I  ^T*t  II 

For  the  ruddy-brown  and  tvhitish 
hull  I  utter  forth  a  mighty  eulogy 
of  the  mighty  one.  I  ivill  adore 
the  radiant  one  tvith  obeisances. 
We  invoke  the  terrible  name  of 
Eudra. 


pra  .  .  .  irayami :  an  example  of  the  prp.  at  the  beginning,  and 
the  vb.  to  which  it  belongs  at  the  end  of  a  hemistich.  svitic6 : 
D.  s.  of  svityanc  (cp.  93).  mahas  :  gen.  s.  m.  of  mah,  beside  the  ace. 
s.  f.  of  the  same  adj.  (Sayana :  mahato  mahatim),  of  the  great  one 
(Rudra) ;  cp.  i.  1,  5  c.  namasya :  according  to  the  Pada  this  form 
has  its  final  syllable  metrically  lengthened  for  namasya,  which  is 
the  2.  s.  ipv.  ;  otherwise  it  is  the  1.  s.  sb.  (p.  128),  which  is  the 
more  likely  because  the  third  syllable  does  not  favour  metrical 
lengthening,  and  because  the  1.  prs.  is  used  both  in  the  preceding 


ii.  33,  lO] 


RUDEA 


63 


9  stliir6bhir     angaih      pururupa 

ugr6 
babhriih  sukr^bhih  pipise  hira- 

nyaih. 
isanad  asya  bhuvanasya  bhurer 
na  va  u  yosad  Rud^rad  asuryam. 


and  the  following  Pada.  The  metre  of  c  is  abnormal  because  the 
caesura  follows  the  third  syllable,  and  there  is  a  secondary  caesura 
after  the  eighth,     grnimasi :  1.  pi.  pr.  of  gr  sing  (p.  138). 

f^Tf^r:  I  ^f :  i  H^i^4:  i  ^:  i 
t^^Tfi:  I  w  I  g^^^  I  ^:  I 
^^^  II 

With  his  firm  limbs,  having 
many  forms,  the  mighty  one,  ruddy- 
brown,  has  adorned  himself  with 
bright  gold  ornaments.  From  the 
ruler  of  this  great  world,  from 
JRudra,  let  not  his  divine  dominion 
depart. 

sthir^bhir  angaih  :  probably  to  be  construed  with  pipise,  by  means 
of  his  firm  limbs  he  has  adorned  himself  tvith  golden  ornaments,  that  is, 
his  limbs  are  adorned  with  golden  ornaments  ;  Sayana  supplies 
yuktas  furnished  with  firm  limbs,  pipise  :  pf.  A.  of  pis.  isanad  : 
pr.  pt.  (agreeing  with  Rudrad)  of  is  rule  over  with  gen.  (202  A  a) ; 
the  pf.  pt.  is  isana.  bhures :  agreeing  with  bhuvanasya ;  cp. 
vii.  95,  2 :  c6tanti  bhuvanasya  bhureh  talcing  note  of  the  tvide 
world  (where  bhiires  could  not  agree  with  any  other  word) ;  Sayana 
takes  it  with  Rudrad.  yosat :  s  ao.  of  yu  separate  (p.  162,  2  ; 
201  A  1).  asuryam  :  an  examination  of  the  occurrences  of  this 
word  indicates  that  as  an  adj.  it  should  be  pronounced  asuria,  but 
as  a  substantive  asurya. 

^I'l:  I  f^»Tf§  I  ^T^^Tf^  I  >^^  I 

^IH I  f^y^K  I  ^^cT^  I  ft^vf  ^^  I 

^H  I  T^l  I  5?%  I  f^^l  I  ^11 

^  I  %  I  W^^:  I  ^f  I  ^cl  I  ^f%  II 


64 


KUDRA 


[ii.  33,  10 


10  arlian  bibharsi  sayakani  dhanva 
arhan  niskam  yajatam  visvaru- 

pam ; 
arhann  idamdayase  visvam  abh- 

vam  : 
na  va  6jiyo,  Iludara,  tvad  asti. 


Worthy  thou  hearest  arrows  and 
how ;  worthy  thy  adorable  all- 
coloured  necMace;  worthy  thou 
ivieldest  all  this  force :  there  is 
nothing  mightier  than  thou,  0 
Budra, 


bibharsi :  2.  s.  pr.  of  bhr  hear ;  this  pr.  stem  is  much  less 
common  than  that  according  to  the  first  class,  bhara.  arhann  :  52. 
idam  :  this,  viz.  that  thou  possessest.  dayase :  2.  s.  A.  pr.  of  2.  da 
divide.  Sayana  interprets  idam  dayase  abhvam  as  thou  protectest 
this  very  extensive  (abhvam)  world,    tvad:  abl.  after  cpv.  (p.  317,  3). 


11  stuhi  srutam  gartasadam  yiiva- 

nam, 
mrgam  na  bhimam  upahatniim, 

ngram. 
mrla  jaritr^  Rud^ra  stavano  : 
anyam  te   asman    ni   vapantu 

s6nah. 


Praise  him,  the  famous,  that  sits 
on  the  car-seat,  the  young,  the 
mighty,  that  slays  like  a  dread 
least  0  Budra,  heing  praised  he 
gracious  to  the  singer:  let  thy 
missiles  lay  low  another  than  us. 


yuvanam :  other  gods  also,  such  as  Agni,  Indra,  the  Maruts,  are 
spoken  of  as  young,  mrgam  na  bhimam :  cp.  note  on  i.  154,  2  b  ; 
either  a  bull  (vrsabho  na  bhimah  vi.  22,  1)  or  a  lion  (simh6  na 
bhimah,  iv.  16,  14)  may  be  meant,  mrla  :  ipv.  of  mrd ;  with  dat., 
p.  311,/.  stavanas  :  here,  as  nearly  always,  in  a  ps.  sense,  asmad  : 
abl.  with  anya,  p.  317,  3.  s6nas :  that  this  word  here  means 
missiles  is  rendered  probable  by  the  parallel  passage  VS.  16,  52  :  yas 
te  sahasram  hetayo  'nyam  asman  ni  vapantu  tah  may  those 
thousand  missiles  of  thine  lay  low  another  than  us. 


ii.  33,  13] 

^rT5^  "it^^T  ^T^^  II 


EUDKA  65 

f  ^T:  I  f^^  I  f^tl  I  ^^^T^T^  I 
3Tf?T  I  ^T^  \  W^  I  ^^vJ^^^  I 

3^:  I  ^?!Ttl  I  ^flvj4f?r^  I  ^tstY^  i 
^cT:  I  ^^1  ^W I  TTft  I  ^if  Xf^  II 


2  kumaras  eit  pitaram  vandama- 
nam 
prati  nanama  Rud'^ropayantam. 
bhurer  dataram  satpatimgrnise : 
stutas  tuam  bhesaja  rasi  asme. 


A  son  hows  towards  Ms  father 
ivlio  approving  approaches  him,  0 
Budra.  I  sing  to  the  true  lord, 
the  giver  of  much :  praised  thou 
givest  remedies  to  us. 


The  interpretation  of  a  b  is  doubtful.  It  seems  to  mean  :  Rudra, 
as  a  father,  approaches  with  approval  the  singer,  as  a  son  ;  Rudra, 
being  addressed  in  the  voc,  is  told  this  in  an  indirect  manner. 
I  cannot  follow  Sayana  (pratinato  'smi  I  have  hoived  doivn  to)  and 
several  translators  in  treating  nanama  as  1.  s.  pf.,  which  in  the  RV. 
could  only  be  nanama  (p.  149,  n.  1).  nanama  :  =pr. ;  the  lengthening 
of  the  first  syllable  is  not  metrical,  see  139,  9.  The  meaning  of  c  d 
appears  to  correspond  to  that  of  ab:  Rudra,  being  praised,  shows 
his  favour  by  bestowing  his  remedies  ;  the  singer  therefore  extols 
him  as  the  giver  of  riches,  grnise :  an  irr.  form  of  the  1.  s.  A.  of 
gr  sing,     asm6  :  dat.,  p.  104  ;  200  A 1. 


^  ^T  ^  %T^^T  TT^rT:  ^^f% 


^T I  ^:  I  ^^_^T  I  ^^<t:  I  ^^f%  I 
^T I  iR,ifT^T  I  i^ig:  I  ^T I  ^^^vjg  I 
^Tf^  I  ^^:  I  ^iwtfT  i  PjfiT  I  ^:  1 

rIT  I  ^^  I  ^  I  ^:  I  ^  I  ^_^^  I  ^'T  II 


13  ya  vo  bhesaja,  Marutah,  siieini.  Your  remedies,  0  Maruts,  that 

ya  samtama,  vrsano,  ya  mayo-  are  pure,  that  are  most  wholesome, 

bhii,  0  mighty  ones,  that  are  heneficent, 

yani  Manur  avrnita,  pita  nas  :  ihatManu,  our  father,  chose:  these 

ta   sam   ca   y6s    ca    Eud'''rasya  and  the  healing   and   blessing  of 

vasmi.  Budra  I  desire. 


1902 


66 


EUDRA 


[ii.  33,  13 


Marutas :  the  Maruts,  as  the  sons  of  Rudra  (cp.  1  a)  are  here 
incidentally  invoked,  and  their  remedies  associated  with  Rudra's. 
mayobhii  :  the  short  form  of  the  N.  pi.  n.  (p.  82,  n.  7,  and  p.  83,  d). 
Manus  :  the  ancestor  of  mankind,  often  spoken  of  as  a  father  or 
'  our  father ',  and  the  institutor  of  sacrifice,  avrnita  :  3.  s.  ipf.  A.  (with 
metrically  lengthened  final  vowel)  of  2.  vr  choose,  sam,  yds  :  these 
words  are  frequently  used  in  combination,  either  as  adverbs  or 
substantives. 


^fr  I  'I- 1  |f^'  I  ^?:^  I  1^-  I 

^  I  ^W  I  f  :i^:  I  ^f^  I  TTfi.i 
^^  I  f^T  I  ^^^ci:i^:  I  ^g^  I 

W\^:  I  rft^T^  I  fM^T^  I  g^  II 


14  pari  no  heti  Rud^asya  vrjyah,  Map  the  dart  ofMudra  pass  us 

pari    tvesasya    durniatir    mahi  hp,  map  the  great  ill  ivill  of  the 

gat.  terrible  one  go  hy  us :  slacken  thy 

ava  sthira  maghavadbhyas  ta-  firm   (weapons)  for  (our)    liberal 

nusva ;  patrons;  0  bounteous  one,  be  merci- 

midhvas,  tokaya  tanayaya  mrla.  ful  to  our  children  and  descendants, 

vrjyas  :  3.  s.  root  ao.  pre.  (p.  172  a)  of  vrj  ticist.  gat :  root  ao.  inj. 
of  ga  go.  maghavadbhyas  :  the  I.  D.  Ab.  pi.  of  maghavan  are 
formed  from  the  supplementary  stem  maghavant  (91,  5).  ava 
tanusva  sthira :  relax  the  taut,  with  reference  to  the  bow,  the 
special  weapon  of  Rudra ;  used  with  the  dat.  because  equivalent  to 
mrla  be  merciful  to  (p.  311/).  midhvas  :  voc.  of  the  old  unredupli- 
cated  pf.  pt.  midhvams,  cp.  p.  66 ;  157  b  (p.  182).  mrla :  =  mrla, 
p.  437,  a  9. 


\^  Jmi  ^^  f^H  %f^?!T^ 


^l^  I  -^  tfri  i  fw  i  %f^^T^  i 
^^f  1 1^  I  ^  I  pff^  I  ^  I  f fit  I 
f^^vj^c^^  I  ^:  I  55  I  Tf  I  ^tf^  I 
f f fi;  I  ^1^  I  ft^«r  I  ivjft^:  ii 


ii.  35]  APAM   NAPAT  67 

15  eva,  babhro  vrsabha  cekitana,  So,  0  ruddy  hrotvn,  far-famed 

yatha,  deva,  na  hrnis6  na  hamsi,  hull,  he  listening  here,  0  Budra,  to 
havanasriin  no  Rud^reha  bodhi.  our  invocation,  inasmuch  as  thou 
brhad  vadema  vidathe  suvirah.     art  not  tvroth  and  slayest  not,  0 

god.    We  would,  with  strong  sons, 
speak  aloud  at  divine  ivorship. 

6va :  to  be  taken  with  c,  since  in  the  normal  sj^ntactical  order 
it  should  follow  yatha  in  the  sense  which  it  here  has  (p.  241,  1)  ; 
when  yatha  meaning  so  that  follows,  it  is  normally  construed  with  the 
sb.  (241,  2),  not  with  the  ind.,  as  here,  cekitana  :  voc.  int.  pr.  pt. 
of  cit  note ;  Sayana  explains  it  as  knowing  all,  but  the  act.  only  has 
this  sense  (e.  g.  cikitvams  Jcnoiving) ;  this  and  the  two  preceding 
vocatives  are  unaccented  because  not  beginning  the  Pada  (p.  466,  18  6). 
Iirnis6 :  2.  s.  A.  pr.  of  2.  hr  he  angry,  hamsi :  2.  s.  pr.  of  han ; 
Sandhi,  Q6  A  2.  bodhi:  2.  s.  root  ao.  ipv.  of  bhu  (p.  172,  n.  1). 
nas :  dat.  to  be  taken  with  bodhi,  lit.  he  invocation-hearing  for  us 
(not  gen.  dependent  on  havana,  lit.  hearing  the  invocation  of  us). 
vadema :  see  note  on  ii.  12,  15  d. 

APAM   NiPAT 

This  deity  is  celebrated  in  one  entire  hymn  (ii.  35),  is  invoked  in  two 
stanzas  of  a  hymn  to  the  Waters,  and  is  often  mentioned  incidentally  else- 
where. Brilliant  and  youthful,  he  shines  without  fuel  in  the  waters  which 
surround  and  nourish  him.  Clothed  in  lightning,  he  is  golden  in  form, 
appearance,  and  colour.  Standing  in  the  highest  place,  he  always  shines 
with  undimmed  splendour.  Steeds,  swift  as  thought,  carry  the  Son  of 
Waters.  In  the  last  stanza  of  his  hymn  he  is  invoked  as  Agni  and  must 
be  identified  with  him ;  Agni,  moreover,  in  some  hymns  addressed  to  him, 
is  spoken  of  as  Apam  napat.  But  the  two  are  also  distinguished ;  for 
example,  '  Agni,  accordant  with  the  Son  of  Waters,  confers  victory  over 
Vrtra '.  The  epithet  asu-h6nian  stviftly -speeding,  applied  three  times  to 
Apam  napat,  in  its  only  other  occurrence  refers  to  Agni.  Hence  Apam 
napat  appears  to  represent  the  lightning  form  of  Agni  which  lurks  in  the 
cloud.  For  Agni,  besides  being  directly  called  Apam  napat,  is  also  termed  the 
embryo  (garbha)  of  the  waters  ;  and  the  third  form  of  Agni  is  described  as 
kindled  in  the  waters. 

This  deity  is  not  a  creation  of  Indian  mythology,  but  goes  back  to  the 
Indo-Iranian  period.      For  in  the  Avesta  Apam  napat  is  a  spirit  of  the 

F  2 


68 


APAM   NAPAT 


[ii.  35,  1 


waters,  who  lives  in  their  depths,  who  is  surrounded  by  females,  who  is 
often  invoked  with  them,  who  drives  with  swift  steeds,  and  is  said  to  have 
seized  the  brightness  in  the  depth  of  the  ocean. 


ii.  35.     Metre  :  Tristubh. 
^^f  ^^rf  ^T^  fiixi  ^  I 


gi*^^^:  I  ^Tf^  I  ^f^^c^  I  ff  II 


1  lipem  asrksi  vajayiir  vacasyam  : 
cano  dadhifca  nadio  giro  me. 
Apam  napad  asuh^ma  kuvit  sa 
^up^sasas  karati  ?  josisad  dhi. 


Desirous  of  gain  I  have  sent 
forth  this  eloquence  (to  him) ;  ma?/ 
the  son  of  streams  gladly  accept 
my  songs.  Will  he,  the  Son  of 
Waters,  ofsivift  impulse,  perchance 
make  (them)  well-adorned?  For 
he  tvill  enjoy  (them). 

asrksi  :  1.  s/A.  s  ,ao.  of  srj,  which  with  upa  may  take  two  ace, 
so  that  nadyam ,  might  be  supplied.  On  im.  see  180  (p.  220). 
dadhita  :  3.  s.  pr.  op.  A.  of  dha,  which  with  canas  takes  the  ace.  or 
loc.  r^adya,  which  occurs,  only  here,  is  evidently  synonymous  with 
apam  napat  in  c.  asuh^ma,  though  a  Bv.,  is  accented  on  the 
second  member :  see  p.  455  c  a.  karati :  3.  s.  sb.  root  ao.  of  kr  : 
unaccented  because  kuvit  necessarily  accents  the  verb  only  if  it  is 
in  the  same  Pada.  sup^sasas  well-adorned  =  well-rewarded ;  cp. 
ii.  34,  6 :  dhi  yam  vajapesasam  a  prayer  adorned  tvith  gain ; 
on  Ihe  accent  see  p.  455  ca;  on  the  Sandhi  (-s  k-)  see  43,  2a. 
josisat :  3.  s.  sb.  is  ao.  of  jus.  hi  explains  why  he  is  likely  to 
accept  them  ;  it  accents  j6sisat,  which,  however,  as  beginning  a  new 
sentence  (p.  466,  19  a),  w^ould  be  accented  without  it. 


f^^M^f  g^^T  ^^T^  II 


TT^i I  g  I  w  1 1^:  I  w  I  gvjcr^i 
^Mn^  I  ^%^  I  ff^ci:  I  w  I  ^^  I 
w^jT{^  I  ^^Tci;  I  ^g^^  I  g^T  i 
f^^lN  I  ^^:  I  g^^  I  ^^T^  II 


ii.  35,  3] 

2  imam   su  asmai  hrda  a  siitas- 

tam 
mantram  vocema :   kuvid  asya 

v^dat  ? 
Apam  napad,  asuriasya  mahna, 
visvani  aryo  bhiivana  jajana. 


APAM   NAP AT 


69 


We  tvoiikl  verily  utter  from  our 
heart  this  tvelJ- fashioned  hymn  for 
him.  Perchance  he  loill  take  note 
of  it.  The  Son  of  Waters,  the  lord, 
hy  the  greatness  of  divine  dominion, 
has  created  all  beings. 


39,  1 


hrda  a :  this  expression  occurs  several  times,  e.  g.  iii. 
matir  hrda  a  vacyamana  a  prayer  ivelUng  from  the  heart,  su- 
tastam  tvellfashioned,  like  a  car,  to  which  the  seers  frequently 
compare  their  hymns  ;  on  the  accent  see  p.  456,  la;  cp.  p.  462,  13  b. 
asmai  and  asya :  unaccented,  p.  452,  8  B  c ;  dat.  of  prs.  with  vac  : 
cp.  200,  1  c.  v^dat:  3.  s.  pr.  sb.  of  vid  Jcnotv,  with  gen.,  cp. 
202  Ac.     asuryasya  :  see  p.  451,  6. 


3  sam    anya     yanti,    lipa     yanti  While  somefloiv  together,  others 

anyah :  flotv  to  (the  sea) ;    the  streams  fill 

samanam    urvam     nadiah    pr-  the  common   receptacle;  Mm   the 

nanti.  pure,  the  shining  Son  of  Waters, 

tam  u  sueim  sucayo  didivam-  the  pure  ivaters  stand  around. 

sam 
Apam    napatam    pari    tasthur 

apah. 

yanti  :  accented  because  of  the  antithesis  expressed  by  anyah — 
anyah,  the  first  vb.  then  being  treated  as  subordinate  (see  p.  468  ^). 
urvam  :  =  ocean,  samanam  :  common,  because  all  streams  flow 
into  it.     nadyas  :   cp.  asuryasya  in  2  c.     prnanti :    from  pr  fill. 


70  APAM  NAPAT  [ii.  35,  3 

u :  u  is  often  lengthened  in  the  second  syllable  of  a  Pada  before 
a  single  consonant  (see  p.  220).  didivamsam  :  pf.  pt.  of  di  shme, 
with  lengthened  red.  vowel  (139,  9)  and  shortened  radical  vowel  ; 
the  sense  is  illustrated  by  4  d.     pari  tasthur  :  =  thei/  tend  him. 


4  tarn  asmera  yuvatayo  yiivanam        Him,     the    youth,     the    young 

marmrjyamanah   pari  yanti  a-  maidens,  the  tvaters,  not  smiling, 

pah :  malcing  him  'bright  surround :    he 

sa    sukr^bhih    sikvabhi    revad  tvith   clear  flames  shines    bounti- 

asme  fully  on  us,   without  fuel  in  the 

didayanidhmo  ghrtanirnig  apsu.  waters,  having  a  garment  of  ghee. 

asmeras  :  it  is  somewhat  uncertain  what  is  the  exact  sense  here 
implied  ;  but  judging  by  iv.  58,  8,  where  the  drops  of  ghee  are 
described  as  hastening  '  to  Agni  like  beauteous  maidens,  smiling, 
to  meeting-places  ',  it  may  mean  that  the  waters  attend  seriously  on 
this  form  of  Agni,  not  as  lovers,  yiivanam  :  a  term  applied  to 
Agni  in  several  passages,  marmrjyamanas :  the  vb.  mrj  is  often 
used  of  making  Agni  bright,  with  ghee,  &c.  sikvabhis  :  the  precise 
sense  is  somewhat  doubtful,  but  it  must  mean  'flames'  or  the  like. 
Note  that  though  in  this  word  the  ending  bhis  is  separated  in  the  Pada 
text,  it  is  not  so  in  sukr^bhis  because  siikre  is  not  a  stem.  asm6  : 
dat.  Pragrhya,  26  c.  didaya:  3.  s.  pf.  of  di  shine,  with  long  red.  vowel 
(139,  9).  an-idhmas  :  accent,  p.  455  c  a  ;  cp.  x.  30,  4  ;  y6  anidhmo 
didayad  apsii  antar  tvho  shone  tvithout  fuel  in  the  ivaters.  ghrta- 
nirnik :  an  epithet  otherwise  applied  only  to  Agni  and  (once)  to  the 
sacrifice  (yajna) :  note  that  the  second  member  appears  in  the  Pada 
text  as  nirnik,  in  accordance  with  the  analysis  nih-nik  when  the 
word  occurs  uncompounded. 


ii.  35,  G]  APAM  NAPAT  71 

On  Mm,  the  immovable  god,  three 


5  asmai  tisr6  avyathiaya  narir 


devaya  devir  didhisanti  annam : 
krta  ivopa  hi  prasarsr^  apsu ; 
sa    piyusam  dhayati  purvasu- 
nam. 


divine  women  desire  to  bestow  food  : 
for  he  has  stretehed  forth  as  it  were 
to  the  breasts  (?)  in  the  waters :  he 
sueJcs  the  milk  of  them  that  first 
bring  forth. 

tisro  devih :  the  waters  in  the  three  worlds  are  probably  meant ; 
in  iii.  56,  5  Agni  is  spoken  of  as  having  three  mothers  (trimata),  and 
three  maidens  of  the  waters  (yosanas  tisro  apyah)  are  there  men- 
tioned :  they  wish  to  feed  him,  while  he  desires  to  drink  their  milk, 
didhisanti :  ds.  of  1.  dha  bestoiv :  this  is  the  usual  form,  while  dhitsa 
is  rare,  krtas :  the  meaning  of  this  word,  which  occurs  here  only, 
is  quite  uncertain.  pra-sarsr6 :  3.  s.  pr.  int.  of  sr.  dhayati : 
8.  s.  pr.  of  2.  dha  suck,  purvasiinam  :  i.  e.  Apani  napat  is  their 
first  offspring  ;  cp.  x.  121,  7  :  apo  janayantir  Agnim  the  tvaters  pro- 
ducing Agni. 

^  ^^rr^  ^fibrRT  "^  -^  ^^  i  ^^  i  ^f^hr  i  ^^  i  ^  i  ^:  i 
|;ft  fr^:  ^^:  Trff  ^'i  i  ^f :  i  fr^:  i  ^^i?^:  i  ^  I  ^^H' 
^m^  i^  ^"^  ^iT^^  wm^  I  i3 1  ^TM  w>j^^m:  i 

^^irf^  ft  ^m^'cfTft  II        ^"i  ^i^^i  I  ft  I  ^_^  I  ^  I  ^- 

mft  II 

6  asvasya  atra  janimasya  ca  svar.         The  birth  of  this  steed  is  here 

druho     risah     samprcah     pahi     and  in  heaven.     Do  thou  protect 

surin.  the  patrons  from  falling  in  tvith 

amasu  piirsu  par6  apramrsyam     malice  and  injury.     Him  that  is 

naratayo  vi  nasan  nanrtani.  not  to  be  forgotten,  far  away  in 

unbaked  citadels,  hostilities  shall 
not  reach  nor  falsehoods. 


72 


APAM   NAP AT 


[ii.  35,  6 


Though  every  word  is  clear  in  this  stanza  the  meaning  of  the 
whole  is  somewhat  uncertain.  It  seems  to  be  this:  Apam  napat 
is  produced  from  both  the  terrestrial  and  the  heavenly  waters.  He 
is  invoked  to  protect  sacrificers  from  injury.  He  himself  dwells 
beyond  the  reach  of  foes,  asvasya  :  Agni  is  often  spoken  of  as 
a  steed,  atra :  here,  i.e.  in  the  waters  of  earth,  svar :  this  is  the 
only  passage  in  the  KV.  in  which  the  word  is  not  to  be  read  as 
siiar ;  it  is  here  a  loc.  without  the  ending  i  (see  82  c).  pahi :  the 
change  from  the  3.  to  the  2.  prs.  in  the  same  stanza  is  common  in 
the  RV.  with  reference  to  deities.  On  this  form  depends  the  abl. 
inf.  samprcas  as  well  as  the  two  preceding  ablatives  :  lit.  protect  the 
patrons  from  malice  and  from  injury,  from  falling  in  tvith  them  (cp. 
p.  337  a),  amasu :  in  the  unJja'ked,  i.  e.  natural  (cloud)  citadels. 
pursii  :  loc.  pi.  of  piir,  82.  paras  :  note  the  difference  of  accent 
between  this  adv.  and  the  N.  s.  adj.  paras  yonder,  other,  nasat ; 
inj.  pr.  of  3.  nas  reach. 


7  sva    a    dame     sudiigha     yasya  IIe,in  ivhose  own  hotise  is  a  cotv 

dhenuh,  yielding  good  milk,  nourishes  his 

svadham  pipaya,  subhu  annam  vital  force,  he   eats   the  excellent 

atti  ;  food  ;  he,  the  Son  of  Waters,  gather- 

s5   'pam  napad  -urjayann  apsii  ing    strength   tvithin    the    tvaters, 

antar,  shines  forth  for   the  granting  of 

vasud^yaya  vidhat^  vi  bhati.  ivcalth   to    the    advantage   of  the 

worshij)per. 

sva  a  dame:  that  is,  within  the  waters;  in  i.  1,  8  sv6  dame 
refers  to  the  sacrificial  altar  on  which  Agni  grows,  that  is,  flames  up. 
The  first  three  Padas  merely  vary  the  sense  of  5.     The  food  that  he 


•  ii.  35,  9]  APAM   NAPAT  73 

eats  is  the  milk  that  he  receives,  and  that  strengthens  him.  sva- 
dham  :  this  word  is  not  analysed  in  the  Padapatha  of  the  RV.  and 
AV.  (as  if  derived  from  a  root  svadh),  but  it  is  separated  in  that 
of  the  TS.  as  sva-dha.  pipaya  :  3.  s.  pf.  of  pi  swell,  with  lengthened 
red.  vowel  (139,  9).  so  apam  must  be  read  as  so  *pani  since  a 
must  here  be  metrically  elided  (21  a  ;  p.  465,  17,  3).  On  apsv 
antar  see  p.  450,  2  h  [where  apsviantah  should  be  corrected  to 
apsvaintah].  vidhat6  :  dat.  of  advantage  (p.  314,  B  1) ;  on  the 
accent  see  p.  458,  11,  3.  vasudh^yaya :  dat.  of  purpose,  ihid.,  B  2. 
vi  bhati  :  here  Apam  napat  is  thought  of  as  the  terrestrial  Agni 
appearing  on  the  sacrificial  altar. 

3T  WT^^  ^^^  Tmfik:  II       IT  I  ^T^%_  I  ^^:  i  ^  \  "ffi^if^r:  ii 

8  y6  apsu  a  sucina  daivlena  Who  in  the  waters,  ivith  bright 

rtavajasra  urviya  vibhati  :  divinity,  holy,  eternal,  ivklely  shines 

vaya  id  any  a  bhuvanani  asya  forth  :    as  offshoots  of  him   other 

pra  jayante  viriidhas  ca  praja-  heings  and  plants  propagate  them- 

bhih.  selves  ivith  progeny. 

sucina  daivyena  :  =  divine  brightness,  rtava :  note  that  in  the 
Padapatha  the  original  short  a  is  restored  (cp.  i.  160,  1).  vayas  : 
other  beings  are  his  offshoots  because  he  produced  them  ;  cp.  2  d  : 
visvani  bhiivana  jajana.  prajabhis  :  cp.  ii.  33,  1,  pra  jayemahi 
prajabhih. 

fft^^T:  xrf^  ^f^  ^M^:  II      cr^  i  #^^  i  ^f|^T^i^  i  ^i^\  i 

fft^^^i:  I  ^fr;  I  ^f^  I  ^^:  ii 


74  APAM    NAPAT  [ii.  35, 9 

9  Apam  napad  a  hi  asthad  upa-  The  Smi  of  JVaters  lias  occupied 

stham  the  lap  of  the  prone  (waters),  (him- 

jihmanam,    urdhv6     vidyutam  self)  upright,   clothing  himself  in 

vasanah.  lightning.       Bearing    his    highest 

tasya     jy^stham     mahimanam  greatness,   golden-hued,    the    swift 

vahantir,  streams  floiv  around  (him). 
hiranyavarnah  pari  yanti  yah- 

vih. 

The  lightning  Agni  is  again  described  in  this  stanza,  jihmanam 
urdhvah :  these  words  are  in  contrast ;  cp.  i.  95,  5  of  Agni : 
vardhate  .  .  .  asu  jihmanam  iirdhvah  .  .  .  upasthe  he  groivs  in 
them,  upright  in  the  lap  of  the  prone,  tasya  mahimanam  his  great- 
ness =  him  the  great  one.  hiranyavarnas :  because  he  is  clothed  in 
lightning,  pari  yanti  :  cp.  3  a  and  4  b.  yahvis  :  the  meaning  of 
the  word  yahva,  though  it  occurs  often,  is  somewhat  uncertain  : 
it  may  be  great  (Naighantuka,  Sayana),  or  swift  (Koth),  or  young 
(Geldner). 

ff T^^T  ^'^^^#  II  ffW^Tci:  I  ^fr  I  ^"^^  I  f^i^^  I 

ff T^^^t:  I  f 5f^  I  iff#^  I  w  II 

10  hiranyariipah,   sa  hiranyasam-  He  is  of  golden  form,  of  golden 

drg ;  aspect ;  this  Son  of  Waters  is  of 

Apam  napat  sed  u  hiranyavar-  golden  hue  ;  to  him  (coming)  from 

nah ;  a  golden  tvomh,  after  he  has  sat 

hiranyayat  pari  yoner  nisadya,  down,  the  givers  of  gold  give  food. 
hiranyada  dadati  annam  asmai. 

In  this  stanza  the  terrestrial  Agni  is  described.  He  is  spoken  of 
as  '  golden  '  because  of  the  colour  of  his  flames.  s6d  :  48  a.  pari 
as  a  prp.  here  governs  the  abl.  (176,  1  a).     The  golden  source  of  Agni 


ii.  35,  11]  APAM   NAP  AT  75 

may  be  the  sun,  as  Durga  thinks ;  thus  the  solar  deity  Savitr  is 
spoken  of  as  distinctively  golden  (cp.  i.  35) ;  but  hiranyaya  y6ni 
may  =  hiranyagarbha  (x.  121,  1)  at  the  creation,  when  Agni  was 
produced  from  the  waters  (x.  121,  7).  Sayana  wishes  to  supply 
rajate  after  ni§adya  =  having  sat  down  shines.  This  is  quite  un- 
necessary ;  it  is  more  natural  to  take  c  and  d  as  one  sentence, 
nisadya  referring  to  asmai  :  to  him,  after  he  has  sat  down,  ihey  give 
(cp.  210).  Note  that  the  Pada  text  shortens  the  final  vowel  of 
nisadya  (cp.  164,  1).  hiranyadas  :  that  is,  those  who  give  gold 
as  a  sacrificial  fee,  the  patrons  of  the  sacrifice.  In  a  hymn  in  praise 
of  the  daksina  the  sacrificial  fee  (x.  107,  2)  it  is  said  hiranyada 
amrtatvam  bhajante  the  givers  of  gold  partalce  of  immortality,  dadati  : 
3.  pi.  pr.  act.  of  da  give  (p.  125,  f.  n.  4).  annam  :  the  oblation 
(cp.  11  d). 

?rf^5^  g^fT^:  ^^T  ^1 1  v^  I  g^fT^:  1  ^'l  1  T^T  1 

j[  tad  asyanikam  uta  caru  nama  That  face  of  his  and  the  dear 

apiciam  vardhate  naptur  apam.  secret  name  of  the  Son  of  Waters 

yam    indhate    yuvatayah.    sam  grow.       Of  him,    tvhom,    golden- 

ittha  coloured,  the  maidens  kindle  thus, 

hiranyavarnam  :  ghrtam  annam  ghee  is  the  food. 

asya. 

anikam  :  the  flaming  aspect  of  Agni  seen  at  the  sacrifice,  apic- 
yam  :  secret ;  cp.  giihyam  caru  nama  the  dear  secret  name  of  Soma 
(ix.  96,  16) ;  the  secret  name  of  the  Son  of  Waters  grmvs  means  that  the 
sacrificial  Agni,  under  his  secret  name  of  Son  of  Waters,  grows  in 
the  waters,  cherished  by  them  ;  another  way  of  expressing  what  is 
said  in  4  and  7.  The  cadence  of  b  is  irregular,  the  last  syllable  but 
one  being  short  instead  of  long  (cp.  p.  440).  yuvatayas  :  the 
waters  (cp.  4  a),  sam  :  the  prp.  after  the  vb.  (p.  468,  20).  ghrtam 
annam  asya  :  cp.  ghrtanirnik  in  4  d  and  subhv  annam  atti  in  7  b. 


76 


APAM   NAP AT 


[ii.  35,  11 


The  general  meaning  of  the  stanza  is :  Agni,  who  in  the  hidden 
form  of  Apam  Napat  is  nourished  in  the  waters,  is  at  the  sacrifice 
fed  with  ghee. 


«^^  ^#  ^^^T?7^m^  5^^ 


^t 


^\iT??it:  ^fr  ^^5"  ^f"T:  II       ^Tf^  I  ^:  i  ^fi  i  ^^  i  ^^if^:  i 


12  asmai    bahunam    avamaya    sa- 
khye 
yajiiair  vidhema  namasa  havi*- 
bhih: 


To  Mm  the  nearest  friend  of 
many  tve  offer  ivorsliip  tvith  sacri- 
fices, Jiomage,  oblations :  I  rub 
bright  (his)  bach  ;  I  supxoort  (him) 


sam   sanu    naarjmi ;    didhisami  tvith  shavings;    I  supply   (him) 

bilmair;  tvith   food;    I    extol  (him)   ivith 

dadhami   annaih. ;    pari   vanda  stanzas. 
rgbhih. 


_       X 


avamaya :  lit.  the  loivest,  that  is,  the  nearest ;  bahunam  (accent, 
p.  458,  2  a):  of  many  (gods).  In  iv.  1,  5  Agni  is  invoked  as  avama 
and  n^distha  nearest',  and  in  AB.  i.  1,  1  Agni  is  called  the  lowest 
(avama)  of  the  gods  (while  Visnu  is  the  highest  parama),  because 
he  is  always  with  men  as  the  terrestrial  fire,  sam  marjmi :  cp. 
marmrjyamanas  in  4b;  on  the  accent  cp.  i.  35,  9  c.  The  prp.  sam 
may  be  supplied  with  the  other  two  following  verbs,  didhisami :  pr. 
ds.  of  d\i2i  put ;  accented  as  first  word  of  a  new  sentence,  bilmais  : 
ivith  shavings,  to  make  the  newly  kindled  fire  flame  up.  annals: 
with  oblations,    dadhami :  pr.  of  dha  put 


vS^^'^f  fi^T  f^^'^  II 


^:  I  til  ftl^:  I  ^^f^ I  fT'ii  fTff'^  I 

W,  I  ^^T^l  ^^TfC  I  ^^P^^TfTi^W*  I 
^^iT^  I  Tf  I  ^^  I  f^'^^  " 


ii.  35,  14] 


APAM   NAP AT 


77 


sa    im    vrsajanayat    tasu    gar-         He,  the  hull,  generated  in  them 

bham ;  that  germ ;   he,  as  a  child,   suchs 

sa  im  sisur  dhayati;    tarn  rih-     them;  they  Jciss  him;  he,  the  Son 


anti; 
s5   'pam    napad    anabhimlata- 

varno 
anyasyeveha  taniia  vivesa. 


of  Waters,  of  unfaded  colour, 
ivorJcs  here  with  the  hodi/  of 
another. 


Ill  a  and  b  Apam  iiapat  reproduces  himself  in  the  waters  ; 
in  c  and  d  he  appears  as  the  sacrificial  fire  on  earth,  im  anticipates 
garbham ;  him,  that  is,  a  son.  tasu  :  in  the  waters,  as  his  wives, 
im  in  b  =  them,  the  waters,  who  here  are  both  the  wives  and 
mothers  of  Apam  napat.  dhayati  :  cp.  5  d.  rihanti  :  lit.  licli, 
as  a  cow  the  calf,  so  apam  :  here  the  a,  though  written  must 
be  dropped  after  o,  as  in  7  c.  anabhimlata-varnas :  he  is  as 
bright  here  as  in  the  waters ;  cp.  hiranyavarnas  in  10  b  ;  on  the 
Sandhi,  cp.  note  on  i.  1,  9  b.  anyasya  iva  :  of  one  who  seems  to  be 
another,  but  is  essentially  the  same,  iha :  on  earth,  in  the  form 
of  the  sacrificial  Agni. 


:  asmin  pad6  parame  tasthivam- 

sam, 
adhvasmabhir  visvaha  didivam- 

sam, 
apo,  naptre  ghrtam  annam  vah- 

antih, 
svayam    atkaih    pari     diyanti 

yabvih. 


^^^ifii:  I  f^W  I  ftf^^^Ml  I 

w^i:  I  ^g  I  ^ffi  I  ^^^  I  M^*  I 
^^»l  I  ^^:  I  ^fr  I  ?l^f^  I  ?^- » 

Him  stationed  in  this  highest 
place,  shining  for  ever  with  un- 
dimmed  (I'ays),  the  Waters,  bringing 
ghee  as  food  to  (their)  son,  sivift, 
themselves  fly  around  with  their 
rohes. 


pad6  param6  :  in  the  abode  of  the  aerial  waters,    adhvasmabhis  : 
a  substantive  has  to  be  supplied  :  flames  or  rays ;  cp.  4  c,  sukr^bhih 


78 


APAM   NAPAT 


[ii.  35,  14 

sikvabhir  didaya.  naptre :  apam  is  omitted  because  apas  im- 
mediately precedes,  atkais :  the  meaning  of  this  word  is  not  quite 
certain,  but  it  most  probably  means  garment ;  the  commentators 
give  several  senses.  The  expression  perhaps  implies  that  the  waters 
cover  him  up  for  protection  or  concealment,  pari  diyanti  {61  fly) ; 
cp.  pari  yanti  in  4  b  and  9  d,  and  pari  tasthur  in  3  d. 


1^^  f%^  gfKr:  II 


^iTT^'^  I  ^  I  ^vjf^fTw:  I  ^^T^  I 
^^imi^  I  ^  ^  I  ^^fi:^^:  I  g 
iffim;i 

f^^^  I  T[\  I  5T^^  I  V^  I  ^?r^fi?T  I 

1^:  I 
1^  I  ^1^  I  ft^^  I  g^^Ti:  II 


15  ayamsam,  Agne,    suksitim    ja- 

naya ; 
ayamsam  u  maghavadbhyah  su- 

vrktim : 
visvam  tad  bhadram  yad  avanti 

devah. 
brhad  vadema  vidathe  suvirah. 


I  have  hestoived,  0  Agni,  safe 
dtvelUng  on  the  people ;  I  have  also 
hestoived  a  song  of  praise  on  the 
patrons  :  auspicious  is  all  that  the 
gods  favour.  We  tvoidd,  with 
strong  sons,  speak  aloud  at  divine 
ivorship. 

ayamsam  :  1.  s.  s  ao.  of  yam.  Agne  :  the  sacrificial  Agni  is  here 
addressed,  janaya  :  07i  (our)  people,  by  means  of  this  hymn,  suvrk- 
tim :  a  hymn  that  will  produce  the  fulfilment  of  their  wishes. 
bhadram :  if  a  hymn  finds  favour  with  the  gods,  it  will  produce 
blessings,  vadema :  the  poet  desires  this  also  as  a  reward  for  his 
hymn.  The  final  hemistich  also  occurs  at  the  end  of  ii.  23  ;  and  the 
last  Pada  is  the  refrain  of  twenty-three  of  the  forty-three  hymns  of 
the  second  Mandala. 

MITRi 

The  association  of  Mitra  with  Varuna  is  so  intimate  that  he  is  addressed 
alone  in  one  hymn  only  (iii.  59).  Owing  to  the  scantiness  of  the  information 
supplied  in  that  hymn  his  separate  character  appears  somewhat  indefinite. 


iii.  59,1]  MITRA  79 

Uttering  his  voice,  he  marshals  men  and  watches  the  tillers  with  unwinking 
eye.  He  is  the  great  Aditya  who  marshals,  yatayati,  the  people,  and  the 
epithet  yatayaj-jana  arraying  men  together  appears  to  be  peculiarly  his. 
Savitr  (i.  35)  is  identified  with  Mitra  because  of  his  laws,  and  Visnu  (i.  154) 
takes  his  three  steps  by  the  laws  of  Mitra  :  statements  indicating  that  Mitra 
regulates  the  course  of  the  sun.  Agni,  who  goes  at  the  head  of  the  dawns 
(that  is  to  say,  is  kindled  before  dawn),  produces  Mitra,  and  when  kindled 
is  Mitra.  In  the  Atharvaveda,  Mitra  at  sunrise  is  contrasted  with  Varuna 
in  the  evening,  and  in  the  Brahmanas  Mitra  is  connected  with  day,  Varuna 
with  night. 

The  conclusion  from  the  Vedic  evidence  that  Mitra  was  a  solar  deity, 
is  corroborated  by  the  Avesta  and  by  Persian  religion  in  general,  where 
Mithra  is  undoubtedly  a  sun-god  or  a  god  of  light  specially  connected  with 
the  sun. 

The  etymology  of  the  name  is  uncertain,  but  it  must  originally  have 
meant  'ally'  or  'friend',  for  the  word  often  means  'friend'  in  the  RV., 
and  the  Avestic  Mithra  is  the  guardian  of  faithfulness.  As  the  kindly 
nature  of  the  god  is  often  referred  to  in  the  Veda,  the  term  must  in  the 
beginning  have  been  applied  to  the  sun-god  in  his  aspect  of  a  benevolent 
power  of  nature. 


iii.  59.     Metre :  Tristubh,  1-5  ;  Gayatri,  6-9. 

fir^-m  f ^  igfT^^ftcf  II  f^^T^t  I  f ^^i  I  ^i^cIC  I  ^i\^  II 

1  Mitro  janan  yatayati  bruvano  ;  Mitra  speaJcing  stirs  men ;  3Iitra 

Mitro    dadhara    prthivim    uta  supports  earth  and  heaven ;  Mitra 

dyam  ;  regards  the  people  tvith  umvinJung 

Mitrah  krstir  animisabhi  caste  :  eye  :    to  Mitra   offer  the  oblation 

Mitraya   havyam   ghrtavaj  ju-  zvith  ghee. 

hota. 

yatayati :  stirs  to  activity,  bruvanas :  by  calling,  that  is, 
arousing  them  ;  cp.  what  is  said  of  Savitr :  *  who  makes  all  beings 
hear  him  by  his  call '  (v.  82,  9)  and  '  he  stretches  out  his  arms  that 


80 


MITKA 


[iii.  59,  1 


all  may  hear  liirn '  (ii.  38,  2).  Sayana  interj^rets  the  word  as  being 
praised  or  maldng  a  noise.  Some  scholars  take  the  pt.  with  Mitras  in 
the  sense  of  lie  tvho  calls  himself  il/ifra,  but  this  in  my  opinion  is 
in  itself  highly  improbable,  while  this  construction  cannot  be  shown 
to  exist  in  the  KV.,  and  even  later  seems  only  to  occur  when  the 
name  immediately  precedes,  i.  e.  Mitro  bruvanah.  This  Pada 
occurs  slightly  modified  in  vii.  36,  2  as  janam  ca  Mitro  yatati 
bruvanah.  dadhara :  pf.  =  pr.  ;  p.  342  a  (cp.  139,  9) ;  note  that 
the  red.  syllable  of  this  pf.  is  never  shortened  in  the  Pada  text 
(cp.  i.  154,  4).  dyam  :  ace.  of  dyo  (102,  3).  animisa :  inst.  of 
a-nimis ;  it  is  characteristic  of  Mitra  and  Varuna  to  regard  men 
wuth  unwinking  eye.  caste  :  3.  s.  of  caks  ;  on  the  Sandhi  see 
66  B  2  a.  juhota  :  2.  pi.  ipv.  irr.  strong  form  occurring  beside  the 
regular  jubuta  (p.  144,  B  3  a). 


•vM 


2  pra  sa,  Mitra,  mart5  astu  pra- 

yasvan, 
yas  ta,  Aditya,  siksati  vratena. 
na  hanyate,  na  jiyate  tu6to  : 
nainam  amho  'snoty  antito  na 

durat. 


Let  that  mortal  offering  ohla- 
tions,  0  Mitra,  le  pre-eyninent  tvho 
pays  obeisance  to  thee,  0  Aditya, 
according  to  (thy)  ordinance.  He 
who  is  aided  by  thee  is  not  slain 
nor  vanquished :  trouble  reaches 
him  neither  from  near  nor  from  far. 


tvotas :  tva  must  often  be  read  as  tua ;  tnotas  is  therefore  more 
natural  than  the  prosodical  shortening  (p.  437  a  4)  of  tva-utas.  The 
fourth  Pada  has  one  syllable  too  many  as  written  in  the  Samhita 
text.  By  dropping  the  a  after  o  the  correct  number  of  syllables  is 
obtained,  but  the  break  ( ^)  remains  quite  irregular  (p.  440,  4  B). 


iii-  59,  5]  MITKA  81 

I  nw^^  ^f^^m  ^f^^T:  I       mrTi^^:  i  ^f^?Tit.  i  ^  i  ^^:  i 

3  anamivasa  ilaya  madanto,  Free  from,  disease,  dcligliting  in 

mitajnavo    varimann   a    prthi-     the  sacred  food,  firm-lmeed  on  the 

'^^^^'  expanse  of  earth,  abiding  hij   the 

Adityasya  vratam  upaksiyanto,     ordinance  of  the  Aditya,  maij  tve 

vayam  Mitrasya  sumatau  siama.     remain  in  the  good  will  of  Mitra. 

variman  :  loc.  (90,  2)  with  a  ;   note  that  variman  is  n.,  variman, 
m.  (p.  453,  9  e).     Adityasya  :  that  is,  of  Mitra. 

i  ^^  f^^  iT^^:  gt^-t  ^^^  i  m^:  ,  ^^^: ,  ^j^^  , 

n  v^  ^^%  ^u  II        ^fti  I H^  I  ^^^^% ,  ;^\^  „ 

t  ayam  Mitro  namasiah  su^^vo,  This  Mitra,  adorable,  most  pro- 

raja  suksatr6  ajanista  vedhdh  :      pitious,  a  king  ivielding  fair  sway, 

tasya    vayam    sumatau    yajni-     has  been  born  as  a  disposer :  may 

y^®^^'  '^ve  remain  in  the  goodivill  of  him 

dpi  bhadr^  saumanas^  siama.        the  holy,   in  his  auspicious  good 

graces. 
ajanista  :  3.  s.  A.  is  ao.  of  Jan.     vedhas  :  that  is,  as  a  wise  moral 
ruler;  on  the  dec.  see  83,  2  a.     api :  to  be  taken  as  a  verbal  prp. 
with  as  be. 

^^^^•ft  ^^  g^^:  I  ^T^ilc^^i^if:  i  ^^  |  g^^cf:  i 

^  f^T^  f mi  ^€tfT  II       wft  I  Tw^vi  I  f  f^:  I  ^  I  ^ftrr:  ii 


1902 


82  MITKA  [iii.  59,  5 

5  maham  Adityo  namasopasadyo         The    great  Aditya,   to    he    ap- 
yatayajjano  grnat6  sus^vah :  proached    tvith    homage,    stirring 

tasma  etat  panyatamaya  jiistam     men,  to  the  singer  most  propitious  : 
agnau  Mitraya  havir  a  juhota.       to  him  most  highly  to  he  praisedf 

to  Mitra,  offer  in  fire  this  accept- 
ahle  ohlation, 

maham  :  39.  yatayajjanas  :  on  the  accent  of  governing  cds.  see 
p.  455  K  grnat^ :  dat.  of  pr.  pt.  of  gr  sing ;  accent,  p.  458,  3. 
jiistam  :  a  j)p.  of  jus  enjoy,  with  shift  of  accent  when  used  as  an  adj. 
meaning  ivelcome  (cp.  p.  384).     juhota  :  cp.  note  on  1  d. 


6  Mitrasya  carsanidhrto, 
avo  devasya  sanasi, 
dyumnam  citrasravastamam. 


OfMitra,  the  god  who  supports 
the  folh  the  favour  hrings  gain, 
(his)  tvealth  hrings  most  hrilliant 
fame. 


carsanidhrtas  :  the  Pada  text  restores  the  metrically  lengthened 
short  Vowel  of  carsani.  -dhrto  'vo  :  p.  465,  17,  3  ;  cp.  note  on 
i.  1,  9b.     citrasravastamam:  see  note  on  i.  1,  5b. 


isrfiT  I  ^:  I  ^ff  ^  I  f^^i  I 
f^^:  I  ^aj^  I  ^iirm:  i 


7  abhi  j6  mahina  divam  Mitra    the    rcnoivncd,    tvho    is 

Mitr6  babhuva  saprathah,  superior  to  heaven  ly  his  greatness, 

abhi  sravobhih  prthivim :  superior  to  earth  hy  his  glories  : 

abhi  bhu  surpass  takes  the  ace.     mahina  for  mahimna  :  90,  2. 
divam :   ucc.  of  dyu,  99,  5  :   cp.  dy6,  102,  3.     babhuva :   the  pf. 


iii.  59,  9] 


BRHASPATI 


83 


here   is   equivalent   to   a    pr.  ;   p.  342  a.     In  c  babhuva  must  be 
supplied  with  the  repeated  prp. ;  cp.  note  on  ii.  33,  2.      The  cadence 

cp.  p.  488,  3  a. 


of  c  is  irregular  :  —  w  w  —  instead  of  ^-  —  w 


8  Mitraya  panca  yemire 
jana  abhistisavase : 
sa  devan  visvan  bibharti. 


panca  janah:    the  five  peoples, 


ftr^'Ri  I  ^  I  ^f^T  I 
^:  I  iBfpTf^>j^^%  I 
w.  I  I^-r:  I  ft^K  I  ff 'ff^  II 

To  3Iitra,  strong  to  help,  the  five 
peoples  submit :  he  supports  all  the 
gods. 

here  =  all   mankind. 


yemire  : 


3.  pi.  pf.  A.  of  yam  (see  p.  150,  f.  n.  1).  bibharti ;  3.  s.  pr.  P.  of 
bhr.  visvan  :  this  is  the  regular  word  for  all  in  the  RV. :  its  place 
begins  to  be  taken  by  sarva  in  late  hymns.  The  general  meaning 
of  the  stanza  is  that  gods  and  men  are  dependent  on  Mitra.  The 
cadence  of  c  is  trochaic  instead  of  iambic  (see  p.  439  a). 


T^  T^^T  ^^:  II 


flr^:  I  f^g  I  ^g^  I 
^^T^  I  i^^^fi"^  I 


9  Mitro,  dev^su  ayiisu, 
janaya  vrktabarhise 
isa  istavrata  akah. 


3IUra,  among  gods  and  mortals, 
has  provided  food,  according  to  the 
ordinances  he  desires,  for  the  man 
tvhose  sacrificial  grass  is  spread. 

ista-vratas :    a   Bv.   agreeing  with   isas,    food  regulated  by  the 
ordinances  which  Mitra  desires,  i.  e.  to  be  eaten  according  to  fixed 


rules. 


BflHASPATI 


This  god  is  addressed  in  eleven  entire  hymns,  and  in  two  others  conjointly 
with  Indra.  He  is  also,  but  less  frequently,  called  Brahmanas  pati,  '  Lord 
of  prayer',  the  doublets  alternating  in  the  same  hymn.  His  physical 
features  are   few :    he  is  sharp-horned  and  blue-backed  ;    golden-coloured 

G    2 


84  BRHASPATI  [iv.  50,  l 

and  ruddy.  He  is  armed  with  bow  and  arrows,  and  wields  a  golden  hatchet 
or  an  iron  axe.  He  has  a  car,  drawn  by  ruddy  steeds,  which  slays  the 
goblins,  bursts  open  the  cow-stalls,  and  wins  the  light.  Called  the  father 
of  the  gods,  he  is  also  said  to  have  blown  forth  their  births  like  a  black- 
smith. Like  Agni,  he  is  both  a  domestic  and  a  brahman  priest.  He  is  the 
generator  of  all  prayers,  and  without  him  sacrifice  does  not  succeed.  His 
song  goes  to  heaven,  and  he  is  associated  with  singers.  In  several  passages 
he  is  identified  with  Agni,  from  whom,  however,  he  is  much  oftener  distin- 
guished. He  is  often  invoked  with  Indra,  some  of  whose  epithets,  such  as 
maghavan  hoimtifid  and  vajrin  ivielder  of  the  holt  he  shares.  He  has  thus 
been  drawn  into  the  Indra  myth  of  the  release  of  the  cows.  Accompanied 
by  his  singing  host  he  rends  Vala  with  a  roar,  and  drives  out  the  cows.  In 
so  doing  he  dispels  the  darkness  and  finds  the  light.  As  regards  his  relation 
to  his  worshippers,  he  is  said  to  help  and  protect  the  pious  man,  to  prolong 
life,  and  to  remove  disease. 

Brhaspati  is  a  purely  Indian  deity.  The  double  accent  and  the  parallel 
name  Brdhmanas  pati  indicate  that  the  first  member  is  the  genitive  of 
a  noun  brh,  from  the  same  root  as  brahman,  and  that  the  name  thus 
means  'Lord  of  prayer'. 

He  seems  originally  to  have  represented  an  aspect  of  Agni,  as  a  divine 
priest,  presiding  over  devotion,  an  aspect  which  had  already  attained  an 
independent  character  by  the  beginning  of  the  Rigvedic  period.  As  the 
divine  brahman  priest  he  seems  to  have  been  the  prototype  of  Brahma,  the 
chief  of  the  later  Hindu  triad. 

iv.  50.    Indra  is  invoked  with  Brhaspati  in  10  and  11. 
Metre  :  Tristubh ;  10  Jagati. 

Hfr  ftiTT  ^fy^  'T^l^^'l  II      BT:  I  f^i^i:  i  ^f^T  i  ^^if^^'l  ii 

2  yds   tastambha   sahasa  vi   jm6  Brhaspati  who  occupying  three 

antau  seats  ivith  roar  has  propped  asunder 

Brhaspatis  trisadhastho  ravena,  tvith  might  the  ends  of  the  earthy 

tarn  pratnasa  rsayo  didhianah  him,    the    charming -tonguedt    the 

puro  vipra  dadhire   mandraji-  ancient  seers,  the  icise,  pondering, 

hvam.  placed  at  their  head. 


iv.  50, 2]  BRHASPATI  85 

vi  tastdmbha  :  the  prp.  here  follows  the  vb.  and  is  separated 
from  It  by  an  intervening  word :  p.  468,  20.  jmas :  gen.  of  jma 
(97,  2).  Pronounce  jm6  antan  (p.  437  a  4).  Cosmic  actions  like 
that  expressed  in  a  are  ascribed  to  various  deities.  Bi^haspatis : 
note  that  this  cd.  is  not  analysed  in  the  Pada  text,  while  its  doublet 
Brahmanas  pati  is  treated  as  two  separate  words,  trisadhasthas : 
refers  to  the  three  sacrificial  fires  and  is  a  term  predominantly 
applied  to  Agni,  cp.  v.  11,  2:  purohitam  Agnim  naras  trisa- 
dhasth^  sam  idhire  men  have  Undled  Agni  as  their  domestic  priest  in 
his  triple  seat ;  on  the  accent  see  p.  455,  10  c  a.  ravena  :  referring  to 
the  loud  sound  of  the  spells  uttered  ;  the  word  is  especially  used  in 
connexion  with  the  release  of  the  cows  from  Vala ;  cp.  4  c  and  5  b. 
pur6  dadhire :  appointed  their  Purohita,  a  term  frequently  applied 
to  Agni,  who  is  also  continually  said  to  have  been  chosen  priest 
by  men. 

^  'g^H^:  ^1^  i^iy^  ^'TiirT^:  I  gi^^rm:  I  ^i^:  I 

2  dhun^tayah    supraketam   mad-         Who  zvlth  resounding  gait,  re- 

^^*°  joicing,  0  Brhaspati,  for  us  have 

B^haspate,  abhi  y^  nas  tatasr^  attacked  the  conspict(ous,variegated, 

prsantam     srpram     adabdham  extensive,  uninjured  herd :  OBrhas- 

urvam ;  p^ti,  protect  its  dtvelling, 
Brhaspate,   raksatad   asya   yo- 


nim. 


This  is  a  very  obscure  stanza,  the  allusions  in  which  can  only  be 
conjectured.  The  subject  of  a-c  is  not  improbably  the  ancient 
priests,  mentioned  in  1  c,  who  with  the  aid  of  Brhaspati  recaptured 
the  cows  confined  in  the  stronghold  of  Vala.  madantas :  being 
exhilarated  with  Soma,  tatasr^  :  3.  pi.  pf.  A.  of  tarns  shake,  p^san- 
tarn  :  perhaps  in  allusion  to  the  dappled  cows  contained  in  it. 
supraketam:    easij  to  recognize,  i.e.   by  their  lowing,  cp.  i.  62,  3 


86 


BRHASPATI 


[iv.  50,  2 


JBrJiaspati  found  the  cows  ;  the  heroes  roared  (vavasanta)  tvith  the  ruddy 
Jdne.  The  fourth  Pada  is  a  j^rayer  to  Brhaspati  to  protect  the 
recovered  kine.  Pada  c  is  a  Dvipada  hemistich  :  see  p.  448  a,  rak- 
satat :   2.  s.  ipv.  of  raks  :  on  the  accent  see  p.  467  Ac, 


f  f  ^^  I  ^T  I  ^T^l  I  xiTTvJ^f!:  I 

^H:  I  w  I  ^  I  ^^^J^^»  I  f^  I  %^: 
g«}^i  wp\v  I  ^^t:  i^f^vj^T^^T: 


3  Bfhaspate,  ya  parama  paravad, 
ata  a  ta  rtasprso  ni  seduh. 
tuthyam  khata  avata  adridug- 

dha 
madhvah  scotanti  abhito  virap- 
sam. 


0  Brhaspati,  that  ivhlch  is  the 
farthest  distance,  from  thence  {com.- 
ing)  those  that  cherish  the  rite 
have  seated  themselves  for  thee. 
For  thee  springs  that  have  been 
dug,  pressed  out  tvith  stones,  drip 
superahundance  of  mead  on  all 
sides. 


ata  a  ni  sedur  :  cp.  ii.  35,  10  c.  rtaspfsas :  perhaps  the  gods  ; 
or  the  ancient  seers  mentioned  in  1  c  and  perhaps  in  2  :  they  have 
come  from  the  farthest  distance  and  have  seated  themselves  at  the 
Soma  libation  offered  to  thee,  khatas  .  . .  adridugdhas  :  two  figures 
alluding  to  the  streams  of  Soma,  which  flows  in  channels  and  is 
pounded  with  stones.  madhvas :  on  this  form  of  the  gen.  see 
p.  81,  f.  n.  12. 


f f ^f?t:  I  w^jm^  I  ^^m^:  I 
TTf :  I  ^f?m:  \  ^t^  i  f^i^^i.  i 


4  Brhaspatih     prathamam    jaya- 
mano 


Brhaspati  ivhcn  first  heing  lorn 
from  the  great  light  in  the  highest 


iv.  50,  5]  BRHASPATI  87 

maho  jyotisah,  param6  vioman,  heaven,   scven-mouiJied,  higJi-horn, 

saptaasyas  tuvijato  ravena  with  his   roar,    seven-rayed,    hleiv 

vi    saptarasmir   adhamat   tarn-  asunder  the  darJcness. 
amsi. 

mahas :  abl.  of  mah,  agreeing  with  jyotisas  (cp.  201  A  1).  The 
Sun  is  probably  meant ;  cp.  ii.  35,  10  c.  saptasyas  in  iv.  51,  4  is  an 
epithet  of  Angira  (in  iv.  40,  1  Brhaspati  is  Angirasa) ;  it  is  parallel 
to  saptarasmi,  an  epithet  applied  also  once  to  Agni  and  once  to 
Indra.  ravena :  cp.  1  b  and  5  b.  vi  adhamat :  ipf.  of  dham, 
Agni  and  Surya  are  also  said  to  dispel  the  darkness. 

^^^^T^^fft^^T^ri;  II  ^fiT^^c^^  I  ^T^T[^:  I  ^c^^  I  "m^Jl  II 

5  sa  sustiibha,  sa  rkvata  gan^na  He  withthe  well-praising, jubilant 

valam  ruroja  phaligam  ravena  :     throng  hurst  open  tvith  roar  the 

Brhaspatir  usriya  havyasudah       enclosing  cave :  Brhaspati  bellowing 

kanikradad  vavasatir  lid  ajat.        drove  out  the   lowing  ruddy  Jdne 

that  sweeten  the  oblation. 

gan^na  :  the  Ahgirases,  who  in  i.  62,  3  are  associated  with  Indra 
and  Brhaspati  in  the  finding  of  the  cows :  Brhaspatir  bhinad 
adrim,  vidad  gah :  sam  usriyabhir  vavasanta  narah  Brhaspati 
cleft  the  mountain,  he  found  the  cows;  the  heroes  (=  the  Ahgirases) 
roared  tvith  the  ruddy  Mne.  phaligam :  the  exact  meaning  of  this 
word  does  not  clearly  appear  from  its  four  occurrences  ;  but  it  must 
have  a  sense  closely  allied  to  i^eceptacle  :  e.  g.  viii.  32,  25,  ya  udnah 
phaligam  bhinan,  nyak  sindhumr  avasrjat  tvho  (Indra)  cleft  the 
receptacle  of  water  (and)  discharged  the  stf  earns  downwards  ;  in  three 
passages  it  is  spoken  of  as  being  rent  or  pierced,  and  twice  is  associated 
with  Vala  ;  and  in  the  Naighantuka  it  is  given  as  a  synonym  of 
megha  cloud,  ravena  :  with  reference  both  to  Brhaspati  and  the 
kine  (cp.  5  d).  havya-sudas :  that  is,  with  milk,  kanikradat : 
intv.  pr.  pt.  of  krand  ;  cp.  173,  3  ;  174  &.  vavasatis  :  intv.  pr.  pt. 
of  vas  (cp.  174). 


88 


BRHASPATI 


[iv.  50,  6 


G  eva  pitr6  visvadevaya  vrsne 
yajnair  vidhema,  namasa,havir- 

bhih. 
Brhaspate,  supraja  viravanto 
vayam  siama  pat  ay  o  rayinam. 


T?^  I  ft%  I  f^il[m^  I  fl^  I 

^^:  I  f^^^  I  ^^^j  I  ff^tifir:  i 
l^w^  I  ^simi:  I  ^i^nr:  i 
^^H.  I  wvf^  I  ^fi^:  I  T^WT^  II 

Then  to  the  father  that  lelongs 
to  all  the  gods,  the  hully  ive  would 
offer  tvorship  tvHh  sacrifices,  obei- 
sance, and  oblations.  0  Brhaspati, 
tvith  good  offspring  and  heroes  tve 
woidd  he  lords  oftvealth. 

eva :  with  final  vowel  metrically  lengthened.  The  sense  of  the 
pel.  here  is:  such  being  the  case  (cp.  180).  pitr6  :  Brhaspati.  The 
term  is  applied  to  Agni,  Indra,  and  other  gods,  viravantas  :  that 
is,  possessing  warrior  sons,  cp.  i.  1,  3  c.  vayam :  this  line  occurs 
several  times  as  the  final  Pada  of  a  hymn ;  cp.  viii.  48,  13. 


^^^^f^  ^^  il^TW^  II 

7  sa  id  raja  pratijanyani  vi^va 
siismena  tasthav  abhi  viriena, 
Brhaspatim   yah   siibhrtam  bi- 

bharti, 
valguyati,    vandate   purvabha- 

jam. 


^*  I  T^i  TT^T  I  Trf?TvJW5«rrf^  i  ft^  i 

g^w  I  ^^^  I  ^fH  I  ^"^W  I 

ff ^5rf?i^  I  ^^:  I  g^^fT^  I  f^'TfTT  I 
^^5^"^  I  ^^^  I  l^^i'T'R^  II 

That  hmg  tvith  his  impulse  and 
his  heroism  overcomes  all  hostile 
forces,  who  Jceeps  Brhaspati  tvcll- 
nourished,  honours  him,  andpraises 
him  as  receiving  the  first  (portion 
of  the  offering). 


abhi  :  the  prp.,  as  often,  here  follows  the  vb.  siibhrtam  bibharti  : 
lit.  cherishes  him  as  ivell-cherished  (predicative).  All  three  verbs 
depend  on  yas,  though  the  last  two,  as  beginning  a  Pada  and  a 
sentence,  would  even  otherwise  be  accented,  valguyati :  note  that 
this  denominative  is  treated  as  a  cd.  in  the  Pada  text  (cp.  175  A  1). 
piirvabhajam :  predicative. 


iv.  50,  9]  BRHASPATI  89 

s  ^  ^7^  ^fy^  wsfefir  ^        w.  I  ^f!:i %f^ I  giNff:  i  ^^  i  ^  i 

'rf^^^lTT  TT^f^  ^  TrfH  II  ^f^^  I  WWT  I  TT^  I  1^:  I  "^  II 

8  sa  it  kseti  siidhita  6kasi  sv6,  That  king  dtvells  ivell-established 

tasma  ila  pinvate  visvadanim ;       in  Ms  own  abodCf  to  him  the  conse- 
tasmai  visah  svayam  eva  nam-     crated   food  altvays  yields  ahim- 
ante,  dance  ;  to  him  his  subjects  hoiv  dotvn 

yasmin  brahma  rajani  purva  6ti.     of  their  oivn  accord,  ivith  whom  the 

priest  has  precedence. 

kseti :  from  1.  ksi  possess  or  dwell,  sii-dhita :  this  form  of  the 
pp.  of  dha  is  still  preserved  as  the  last  member  of  cds.  (otherwise 
hita) ;  the  word  is  explained  as  su-hita  in  the  AB.  okasi  sv6 : 
cp.  8v6  dame  in  i.  1,  8c.  ila:  explained  as  food  (annam)  in  AB. 
viii.  26,  7,  and  as  earth  (bhumi)  by  Sayana.  yasmin  rajani :  the 
loc.  here  =  in  the  presence  of  tvhom,  in  whose  case  ;  the  antecedent  is 
here  put  in  the  relative  clause,  while  in  7  a  it  accompanies  the  corr. 
(sa  id  raja).  purva  ^ti :  with  reference  to  this  line  the  AB. 
viii.  26,  9  remarks,  purohitam  evaitad  aha  thus  one  calls  him  a 
Purohita ;  cp.  also  AB.  viii.  1,  5  :  brahma  khalu  vat  ksatrat 
purvam  the  Brahmana  certainly  precedes  the  Ksatriya. 

J  ^rftfft  ^^f^  4  ^^Tf^  ^itfTT^?:?!:  I  ^^f?T  I  ^^l,  I  ^TTf^  I 

irfT^^RIT^fT  ^T  ^^m  I  Trf?TvJ^^Tf^  I  ^  I  ^T  I  ^^J^^^TT  I 

^^^•%  ^  '^f^^:  ^xiftf^f         ^w"^  i  ^:  i  ^fr^:  i  f^wtf^  i 

^^  TT^T  r!^^f%  5^:  II  W^^  I  TT^T  I  fT^  I  ^^f^  I  |^T:  II 

%  apratito  jayati  sam  dhanani  Unresisted  he  wins  wealth  both 

pratijanyani  uta  ya  sajanya.  belonging  to   his  adversaries  and 

avasyave  j6  varivah  krnoti  to  his  oivn  people.     The  hing  tvho 

brahmane  raja,  tarn  avanti  de-    for  the  priest   desiring  (his)  help 
vah.  procures  prosperity,  Mm  the  gods 

help. 


90 


BRHASPATI 


[iv.  50,  9 


After  the  statement  in  7  that  the  king  who  honours  Brhaspati 
prospers,  it  is  added  in  8  and  9  that  the  king  who  honours  the 
Brahman,  the  counterpart  among  men  of  Brhaspati,  also  prospers. 

jayati  sam :  prp.  after  the  vb.  (p.  285/).  dhanani  :  he  wins 
wealth  both  abroad  and  at  home,  avasyave— avanti  :  both  words 
from  the  same  root  av  :  the  gods  help  the  king  who  helps  the 
Brahman. 


vjf^^t  ii^^T^T  ^^^^  I 


10  Indras     ea     somam     pibatam, 

Brhaspate, 
asmin  yajn6  mandasana,  vrsan- 

vasu  : 
a    vam    visantu   indavah    sua- 

bhiivo ; 
asni6  rayim  sarvaviram  ni  yach- 

atam. 


0  Indra  and  Brhaspati^  drinlz 
the  Soma,  rejoicing  at  this  sacrifice, 
0  ye  of  mighty  wealth ;  let  the 
invigorating  drops  enter  you  two; 
hcstoiv  on  us  riches  accompanied 
altogether  ivith  sons. 


tndras  ca :  nom.  for  voc.  (196  c  a;  cp.  ca,  p.  228,  1  and  la), 
pibatam  :  2.  du.  ipv.  of  pa  drinlx.  mandasana  :  ao.  pt.  of  mand  = 
mad.  vrsan-vasu  :  here  vrsan  =  mighty,  great ;  Sayana  explains 
the  word  as  if  it  were  a  governing  cd.  (189  A),  the  normal  form  of 
which  would,  however,  be  varsan-vasu  (189  A  2  ;  cp.  p.  455  h). 
Note  that  in  the  Pada  text  the  cd.  is  first  marked  as  Pragrhya  with 
iti  and  then  analysed  ;  also  that  in  the  analysis  the  first  member 
here  appears  not  in  its  pause  form  vrsan  (65)  but  in  its  Sandhi  form 
with  n  as  not  final,  rayim  sarvaviram :  that  is,  wealth  with 
offspring  consisting  of  sons  only  ;  a  frequent  prayer  (cp.  i.  1,  3  c). 
yachatam  :    2.  ipv.  pr.  of  yam.      Here  we  have  the  intrusion  of 


I 


IV 


.  50,  11]  BRHASPATI  91 


a  Jagati  stanza  in  a  Tristubh  hymn  (cp.  p.  445,  f.  n.  7).  In  this 
and  the  following  stanza  Indra  is  associated  with  Brhaspati,  as  in 
the  whole  of  the  preceding  hymn,  iv.  49. 

I    ^ftr^  fw  f^^cf  H^vt^  TfH  I 

11  Brhaspata,   Indira,   vardhatam  0  Brhaspati  and  Indra,  came 

nah ;  us  to  prosper  ;  let  that  'benevolence 

saca    sa    vam    sumatir    bhutu  of  yours  he  tvith  us.     Favour  (our) 

asm^.  prayers ;  arouse  rewards  ;  weaken 

avistam  dhiyo ;  jigrtam  puram-  the  hostilities  of  foe  and  rivals. 
dhir ; 

jajastam  ary6  vanusam  aratih. 

Brhaspata  Indra :  contrary  to  the  general  rule  the  second  voc. 
is  here  unaccented  (p.  465,  18  a) ;  this  is  doubtless  because  the  two 
are  here  treated  as  a  dual  divinity,  as  in  the  preceding  hymn  (iv.  49), 
in  every  stanza  of  which  they  are  invoked  as  Indra-Brhaspati. 
Indra  must  be  pronounced  trisyllabically  (cp.  p.  15  d).  vam :  gen. 
(109  a),  bhutu  :  3.  s.  ipv.  root  ao.  of  bhu.  asm6 :  loc.  with  saca 
(177,  5)  and  (as  in  10  d)  Pragrhya  (26  c).  avistam :  2.  s.  du.  ipv.  of 
the  is  ao.  of  av  favour  (145,  5).  jigrtam  :  2.  du.  red.  ao.  of  gr 
ivalzen  ;  accented  because  beginning  a  new  sentence  (p.  467  h). 
dhiyas  .  .  .  piiramdhis :  these  words  often  appear  side  by  side  and 
in  contrast :  the  former  then  meaning  jpraj/ers  for  gifts,  the  latter  the 
hestoival  (dhi  from  dha  hestotv)  of  plenty  (puram  an  ace.  ;  cp.  the  Pada- 
patha).  puramdhTs  here  is  also  opposed  to  aratis  (lit.  lack  of 
liherality)  in  d.  jajastam  :  2.  du.  ipv.  pf.  of  jas.  aryas  :  gen.  of 
ari  (99,  3) ;  cp.  note  on  ii.  12,  4.  The  genitives  aryas  and  vanusam 
are  co-ordinate  and  dependent  on  aratis ;  this  appears  from  various 
parallel  passages,  as  aryo  aratih  hostilities  of  the  foe  (vi.  16,  27) ; 


92  BRHASPATI  [iv.  50,  ii 

aghany  ary6,  vanusam  ar  at  ayah  evil  deeds  of  the  foe,  hostilities  of 
i  ivals  (vii.  83,  5) ;  abhitim  ary6,  vanusam  savamsi  the  onset  of  the 
foe,  the  might  of  rivals  (vii.  21,  9  d).     11  a  =  vii.  97,  9d. 


usis 

The  goddess  of  Dawn  is  addressed  in  about  twenty  hymns.  The  personi- 
fication is  but  slight,  the  physical  phenomenon  always  being  present  to 
the  mind  of  the  poet.  Decked  in  gay  attire  like  a  dancer,  clothed  in  light, 
she  appears  in  the  east  and  unveils  her  charms.  Rising  resplendent  as 
from  a  bath  she  comes  with  light,  driving  away  the  darkness  and  removing 
the  black  robe  of  night.  She  is  young,  being  born  again  and  again,  though 
ancient.  Shining  with  a  uniform  hue,  she  wastes  away  the  life  of  mortals. 
She  illumines  the  ends  of  the  sky  when  she  awakes ;  she  opens  the  gates 
of  heaven ;  her  radiant  beams  appear  like  herds  of  cattle.  She  drives 
away  evil  dreams,  evil  spirits,  and  the  hated  darkness.  She  discloses  the 
treasures  concealed  by  darkness,  and  distributes  them  bountifully.  She 
awakens  every  living  being  to  motion.  When  Usas  shines  forth,  the  birds 
fly  up  from  their  nests  and  men  seek  nourishment.  Day  by  day  appearing 
at  the  appointed  place,  she  never  infringes  the  ordinance  of  nature  and  of 
the  gods.  She  renders  good  service  to  the  gods  by  awakening  all  wor- 
shippers and  causing  the  sacrificial  fires  to  be  kindled.  She  brings  the 
gods  to  drink  the  Soma  draught.  She  is  borne  on  a  shining  car,  drawn  by 
ruddy  steeds  or  kine,  which  probably  represent  the  red  rays  of  morning. 

Usas  is  closely  associated  with  the  Sun.  She  has  opened  paths  for  Surya 
to  travel ;  she  brings  the  eye  of  the  gods,  and  leads  on  the  beautiful  white 
horse.  She  shines  with  the  light  of  the  Sun,  with  the  light  of  her  lover. 
Surya  follows  her  as  a  young  man  a  maiden ;  she  meets  the  god  who 
desires  her.  She  thus  comes  to  be  spoken  of  as  the  wife  of  Surya.  But  as 
preceding  the  Sun,  she  is  occasionally  regarded  as  his  mother;  thus  she  is 
said  to  arrive  with  a  bright  child.  She  is  also  called  the  sister,  or  the  elder 
sister,  of  Night  (x.  127),  and  their  names  are  often  conjoined  as  a  dual 
compound  (usasa-nakta  and  ndktosasa).  She  is  born  in  the  sky,  and  is 
therefore  constantly  called  the  *  daughter  of  Heaven  '.  As  the  sacrificial  fire 
is  kindled  at  dawn,  Usas  is  often  associated  with  Agni,  who  is  sometimes 
called  her  lover.  Usas  causes  Agni  to  be  kindled,  and  Agni  goes  to  meet 
the  shining  Dawn  as  she  approaches.  She  is  also  often  connected  with  the 
twin  gods  of  early  morning,  the  Asvins  (vii.  71).  When  the  Asvins'  car  is 
yoked,  the  daughter  of  the  sky  is  born.  They  are  awakened  by  her, 
accompany  her,  and  are  her  friends. 


iv.  51,  l] 


USAS 


93 


Usas  brings  the  worshipper  wealth  and  children,  bestowing  protection 
and  long  life.  She  confers  renown  and  glory  on  all  liberal  benefactors  of 
the  poet.     She  is  characteristically  bountiful  (maghoni). 

The  name  of  Usas  is  derived  from  the  root  vas,  to  shine,  forms  of 
which  are  often  used  with  reference  to  her  in  the  hymns  in  which  she  is 
invoked. 


iv.  51.     Metre  :  Tristubh. 
Tig  li^^^TBj^  ^iTT^  II 


^Tc!:i 

s^tfir:  I  fTTf^:  i  ^g^i^ri:  i  ^wm:  i 
1^  I  ff  ^:  I  ^f?<Tt- 1  fti'TTff):  I 


TTg^  I  mw^  I  "f  ^^«  I  ^^^  II 

'i  idam  u  tyat  purutamam  puras-         This  familiar  t  most  frequent  liglit 

in  the  east,  tvith  clearness  has  stood 
(forth)  from  the  darkness.  Note 
may  the  Dawns,  the  daughters  of 
the  sky,  shining  afar,  make  a  path 
for  man. 


taj 
jyotis  tamaso  vayunavad  asthat. 
nunam  divo  duhitaro  vibhatir 
gatum  krnavann  TJsaso  janaya. 


tyad :  see  p.  297,  5.  purutamam :  because  appearing  every 
morning  ;  hence  Usasas  the  Dawns  in  d.  tamasas  :  abl.  dependent 
on  asthat  =  lid  asthat.  The  word  vayuna,  though  very  frequently 
used,  is  still  somewhat  uncertain  in  meaning.  The  commentators 
explain  it  variously  as  marga  road,  prajnana  cognition,  and  kanti 
heatttif.  Pischel  favours  the  first  of  these.  Sayana  here  explains 
vayunavat  as  '  very  beautiful  or  possessed  of  knowledge  =  showing 
everything  '.  It  probably  here  means  '  making  the  way  clear ',  cp. 
gatum  in  d.  nunam  :  note  that  in  the  KV.  this  word  always 
means  now.  divo  duhitaras  :  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  daily 
recurrence  of  the  phenomenon.  Dawn  is  pi.  throughout  this  hymn, 
gatum :  cp.  vi.  64,  1 :  'she  makes  all  fair  paths  easy  to  traverse '. 
krnavan :  3.  pi.  sb.  ;  explained  by  Sayana  as  3.  pi.  ipf.  ind., 
akurvan. 


'^^  USAS  [iv.  51,  2 

^  w^  f^^T  ^^^:  ^T^i^^       ^w:  \^x^\  f^^i:  i  '^^^:  \  ht- 

W^T^^f '^^:  ^t^^t:  II  f^  I  ^  f:f?T  I  ww^  I  cT^^:  i  ^tt  i 

^i^^rf^:  I  ^51;  I  ^^:  i  ^T^gRT:  ii 

^  asthur  u  citra  Usasah  purastan,  T/ie  brilliant  Daivns  have  stood 

mita  iva  svaravd  adhvar^su.  in  the  east,  like  posts  set  up   at 

vi  u  vrajasya  tamaso  duara  sacrifices.     Shining  they  have  un- 

uchantir   avran    chiicayah   pa-  closed  the  tivo  doors  of  the  pen  of 

vakah.  darlcness,  bright  and  purifying. 

Usasas  :  that  is,  each  of  the  preceding  Dawns  and  the  present  one. 
mitas :  pp.  of  mi  fix.  svaravas :  that  is,  shining  with  ointment  ; 
cp.  i.  92,  5 :  svarum  na  p^so  vidathesu  anjan,  citram  divo 
duhita  bhanum  asret  the  daughter  of  heaven  has  spread  her  brilliant 
beam,  like  one  ivho  at  divine  ivorship  anoints  the  post,  the  ornament 
(of  the  sacrifice).  Note  that  u  in  c  is  lengthened  though  followed  by- 
two  consonants  (p.  437  a  3).  vrajasya :  a  simile  with  iva  omitted  ; 
cp.  i.  92,  4  ;  gavo  na  vrajam  vi  Usa  avar  tamah  Dawn  has  unclosed 
the  dai'Jmess  as  the  cows  their  stall,  dvara  :  the  two  folds  of  the  door, 
the  dual  of  dvar  often  being  used  thus,  vi  :  to  be  taken  with 
avran,  3.  pi.  root  ao.  of  vr  cover,  uehantis  :  pr.  pt.  of  1.  vas  shine. 
sucayah  pavakah :  these  two  adjectives  very  often  appear  in  juxta- 
position.    On  the  pronunciation  of  pavaka  see  p.  437  a. 

-^T^I^T^ii^T  W3^:  I         -qvii^T^  I  ^4:  \  ^^^ff:  i 
^f^%  ^'fi:  ^iini:  ^^-c^-         ^f^y  I  wftfit  I  ^W^:  i  ^^'g  i 

^^^iTTOH^  mw^  II  ^ftzriTT^T:  I  cTiT^:  I  f^^^t^  II 

t^  uchantir  adya  citayanta  bhojan         Shining  to-day  may  the  bounteous 
radhod^yaya  Usaso  maghonih.       Dawns  stimidate  the  liberal  to  the 


iv.  51,  5] 


USAS 


95 


acitre  antah  panayah  sasantu,       giving  of  ivealtJi.     In  dbsciirity  let 
abudhyamanas    tamaso    vima-     the  niggards  sleep,  unwaJcening  in 
dhye.  the  midst  of  darJmess. 

citayanta  :  3.  pi.  A.  inj. ;  explained  by  Sayana  as  an  indicative : 
prajnapayanti  thei/  instruct. 


8  fftf^*^:  ^^^  ^+  ^T 
^^  W%  ^f^T  ^it^ 


4  kuvit  sa,  devih,  sanayo  navo  va 
yamo     babhuyad,     XJsaso,     v6 

adya  : 
y^na  Navagve,  Angire,  Dasagve 
saptaasye,  revati,  revad  usa  ? 


Shottid  this  he  an  old  course  or 
a  new  for  you  to-day^  0  divine 
Dawns :  (is  it  that)  hy  ivhich  ye 
have  shone  ivealth,  ye  ivealthy  ones, 
upon  JSfavagva,  Angira,  and  JDa- 
sagva  the  seven-mouthed  ? 

babhuyat :  op.  pf.  of  bhu,  accented  on  account  of  kuvit  (cp.  notes 
on  ii.  35, 1.  2).  The  general  meaning  is  the  hope  that  Dawn  will  bring 
wealth  to-day  as  of  old.  Navagva,  Ahgiras,  and  Dasagva  are  the 
names  of  ancients  associated  with  Indra  in  the  release  of  the  cows 
enclosed  by  the  Panis  and  by  Vala.  The  allusion  in  saptasye  is 
uncertain  ;  in  iv.  50,  4  it  is  an  epithet  of  Brhaspati,  who  is  also 
associated  with  the  capture  of  the  cows  and  may  therefore  be  meant 
here.  The  meaning  would  then  be :  bring  us  wealth  to-day  as  ye 
did  to  Navagva,  Ahgiras,  Dasagva  and  Brhaspati.  revati  revat  : 
these  words  are  found  connected  in  other  passages  also,  iisa  :  2.  pi. 
pf.  act.  of  1.  vas  shine. 


^PCii^^T^  I  g4^Tf^  I  ^^:  I 
"ff  i^^^^:  I  ^^:  I  ^^'^  I 


96 


USAS 


[iv.  51, 


5  yiiyam    hi,    devir,    rtayugbhir         For  you,  0  goddesses,  ivitli  your 


asvaih 
pariprayatha     bhuvanani     sa- 

dyah, 
prabodhayantir,  Usasah,  sasan- 

tam, 
dvipac   catuspac   carathaya  ji- 

vam. 


steeds  yoked  in  due  time,  proceed 
around  the  tvorlds  in  one  day, 
atvakening,  0  Batons,  Mm  tvJio 
sleeps,  the  two-footed  and  the  four- 
footed  living  worlds  to  motion. 


pariprayatha :  accented  owing  to  hi ;  on  the  accentuation  of 
verbal  prepositions  see  p.  469  B  a.  prabodhayantis :  cp.  i.  92,  9, 
visvam  jivam  carase  bodhayanti  tvakening  every  living  soul  to 
move,  catuspad  :  note  that  catiir  when  accented  as  first  member 
of  a  cd.  shifts  its  accent  to  the  first  syllable.  This  word,  dvipad 
and  jivam  are  all  neuter. 


ill  I  f^fi:  I  W^T^  I  ^^T  I  H'^TXlf^  I 
^^T  I  f^i^^T  I  f^i?^:  I  ^^TTC I 

if  I  f%  1 111^%  I  ^if  iff :  I  ^^^:  II 


6  kiia  svid  asam  katama  purani 
yaya  vidhana  vidadhiir  rbhu- 

nam? 
siibham    yae    chubhra    TJsasas 

caranti, 
na  vi  jnayante  sadrsir  ajuryah. 


Where,  pray,  and  which  ancient 
one  of  them  (was  it)  at  tvhich  they 
(the  gods)  imposed  the  tasks  of  the 
Ehhus  ?  When  the  beaming  daivns 
proceed  on  their  shining  course,  they 
are  not  distinguished,alike,unaging. 


asam :  of  the  dawns,  yaya  :  in  a  temporal  sense  =  at  whose 
time,  vidadhiir :  they,  the  gods,  enjoined :  this  probably  refers  to 
the  most  distinctive  feat  of  the  Rbhus,  that  of  making  one  bowl  into 
four ;  cp.  i.  161,  2  :  ^kam  camasam  caturah  krnotana,  tad  vo 
deva  abruvan  '  make  the  one  howl  four ',  that  the  gods  said  to  you  ; 
that  was  one  of  their  vidhana  tasks,  siibham  :  cognate  ace.  na  vi 
jnayante  :  they  are  always  the  same  ;  cp.  i.  92,  10,  punah-punar 
jayamana   purani    samanam   varnam   abhi   siimbhamana   being 


iv.  51,  8] 


USAS 


97 


horn  again  and  again^  ancient  of  days,  adorning  herself  with  the  same 
colour,  where  dawn  is,  as  usually,  spoken  of  as  a  single  goddess 
reappearing  day  after  day,  whereas  in  this  hymn  many  individual 
dawns  that  appear  successively  are  referred  to. 


7  ta   gha  ta  bhadra  Usasah  pu- 

rasur, 
abhistidyumna  rtajatasatyah; 
yasu  ijanah  sasamana  ukthaih 
stuvan,  chamsan,  cfravinam  sa- 

dya  apa. 


cTt:  I  '^  I  cTt:  I  3t^t:  i  ^^^:  i  W  i 
^g:  I 

^f^f^vJ^^Tt  I  ^ff^TcT^^^T:  I 

^Tg  I  t^T^:  I  i^^ttt't:  i  ^^t:  i 
^^^  I  ^^1. 1  Ji^w^  I  ^^:  I  ^^  II 

TJiose  indeed,  those  Dawns  have 
formerly  been  auspicious,  splendid 
in  help,  pimctuaUy  true  ;  at  ivhich 
the  strenuous  sacrifcer  ivith  reci- 
tations praising,  chanting,  has  at 
once  obtained  wealth. 


On  pur  a  with  pf.  see  213  A.  ijanas  :  pf.  pt.  A.  of  yaj  sacrifice. 
Sasamana  :  pf.  pt.  A.  of  sam  labour,  stuvan  chamsan  =  stuvan  + 
samsan  (40,  1).  The  general  meaning  of  the  stanza  is :  former 
dawns  have  brought  blessings  to  the  sacrificer ;  may  they  do 
so  now. 


cIT:  I  "^  I  ^Tf^  I  ^^^T  I  HT^Tc!:  I 
^flT^ri:  I  ^^^  I  ^wt^t:  i 
^jm  I  1^:  I  ^^^:  I  l^T^:  I 
i^TJ^:  I  ^  I  ^^t:  I  ^3^^:  I  ^T%  II 


'8  ta  a  caranti  samana  purastat,  They   approach   equally   in   the 

samanatah    samana    papratha-     east,  spreading  themselves  equally 
nah.  from  the  same  place.     The  god- 

rtasya  devih.  sadaso  budhana,        desses  waldng  from   the    seat   of 
gavam  na  sarga,  Usaso  jarante.      order,  like  herds  of  Mne  let  loose, 

the  Daivns  are  active. 


1902 


H 


98  USAS  [iv.  51,  8 

samana :  always  in  the  same  way.  samanatas  ;  cp.  i.  124,  3  : 
prajanati  iva,  na  diso  minati  as  one  icho  knows  (the  way),  she  loses 
not  her  direction,  rtasya  sadasah :  abl.  dependent  on  budhanah 
(cp.  10) ;  cp.  i.  124,  3  ;  rtasya  pantham  anv  eti  sadhii  she  follows 
straight  the  path  of  order,  budhanas  :  ao.  pi,  aivalung  (intr.),  not  = 
bodhayantyas  tvaJcening  (trans.)  according  to  Sayana  ;  when  A.  and 
without  an  object,  budh  is  intr.  ;  cp.  abodhi  has  awoke,  said  of 
Usas  (i.  92,  11  ;  iii.  61,  6;  vii.  80,  2).  gavam  na  sargah:  cp. 
iv.  52,  5,  prati  bhadra  adrksata  gavam  sarga  na  rasmayah  the 
auspicious  rays  (of  dawn)  have  appeared  like  kine  let  loose,  jarante  : 
are  awake  =  are  active,  are  on  the  move  (cp.  a  caranti  in  a  and 
9  a,  b) ;  are  praised  (stuyante)  according  to  Sayana. 

'I^T^^:  ^^^  ^^ifi:  II      g^i:  I  ^^:  i  ^'^^t  I  ^pri:  ii 

9  ta  in  nii  eva  samana  samanir,  Those  Dawns  even  noiv  equally 

amitavarna  Usasas  caranti.  the   same,    of  unchanged    colour, 

guhantir  abhvam  asitam,  riisad-  move    on ;     concealing    the    hlack 

bhih  monster,     bright     tvith    gleaming 

sukras   tanubhih,  siicayo,  rue-  forms,  hrilliant,  beaming. 

an  ah. 

On  the  accentuation  of  nv  eva  see  p.  450,  2b.  abhvam:  cp. 
i.  92,  5,  badhate  krsnam  abhvam  she  drives  away  the  black  monster 
(of  night),  riisadbhis:  m.  form  irregularly  agreeing  with  the  f. 
taniibhis.  Note  that  the  Pada  text  does  not  separate  the  endings 
bhyam,  bhis,  bhyas,  su  from  f.  stems  in  long  vowels,  nor  of  m. 
stems  in  a  because  the  pure  stem  in  these  cases  appears  in  an 
altered  form,  e.  g.  priy6bhis,  but  pitr  ^bhis. 


I 


iv.  51,  11]  USAS  99 

^"^^^  T^fT^:  ^TiT  II  ^i^W  I  ^rf^:  I  ^T^:  II 

0  rayim,  divo  duhitaro,  vibhatih  0  daughters  of  Heaven,  do  ye 
prajavantam  yachatasmasu,  de-     shining  forth  bestow  on  us,  god- 

vih.  desses,  tvealth  accompanied  ht/  off- 

sionadavahpratibiidhyamanah,    spring.     Aivahing  from   our  soft 
suviriasya  patayah  siama.  couch   towards  you,  ive  ivould  he 

lords  of  a  host  of  strong  sons. 

yachata :  pr.  ipv.  of  yam,  here  construed  with  the  loc.  ;  the 
usual  case  is  the  dat.  (200  A  1).  pratibiidhyamanas  :  with  a  and 
fibl.,  cp.  budhana  with  abl.  in  8  c. 

<\  cTfi  f^^  iff ffft  ftHT^'^  fffl^  I  3: 1  ff ^:  I  ff|<TT:  I  f^i mrTt:  i 

^  w^  im^\  ^^'^g:  i  ^4  i  g^  i  ^^^:  i  ^tr^'^g:  i 

^^  ^TFT  ^11^  ^%  ^wi  I  ^T^  I  ^^^:  I  ^"^3  I 

<Tf:^  ^TTt  ^f^ft  ^  1^  H  flcl^  I  ^:  I  ^  I  ^tTT*!:  I  ^f^^  I  ^  I 

l^'^  II 

1  tad  vo,  divo  duhitaro,  vibhatir  For  that  I  whose  banner  is  the 
lipa  bruva,  Usaso,  yajnaketuh :  sacrifice,  0  daughters  of  Heaven, 
vayam  siama  yasaso  janesu;  implore  you  that  shine  forth,  0 
tad  Dyaus  ea  dhattam  Prthivi  Datvns:  we  would  be  famous  among 

ca  devi.  men  ;  let  Heaven  and  the  goddess 

Earth  grant  that. 

vibhatir :  to  be  taken  with  vas.  lipa  bruve :  with  two  ace. 
(p.  304,  2).  yajnaketus :  the  singer  thus  describes  himself;  in 
i.  113,  19  the  Dawn  is  called  yajiiasya  ketiih  the  signal  of  the 
sacrifice,  yasaso  (accent,  p.  453,  9  A  a)  janesu :  this  phrase  fre- 
quently occurs  in  prayers,  vayam :  the  poet  having  in  b  spoken 
in  the  sing,  on  his  own  behalf,  now  changes,  as  often,  to  the  pi.,  so 
as  to  include  the  others  who  are  present,  dhattam :  3.  du.  of  dha, 
accented,  though  not  beginning  a  sentence,  because  of  ea  .  .  .  ca 
(seep.  4G8/3). 

H  2 


100 


AGNI 


[v.  n,  1 


AGNI 


See  Introduction  to  i.  1  on  the  na.ture  of  Agni 
V.  11.     Metre  :  Jagati. 


1  Janasya  gopa  ajanista  jagrvir 
Agnih   sudaksah    suvitaya   na- 
vy as  3. 
ghrtapratiko  brhata  divisprsa 


Guardian  ofthepeople,  ivatchfiil, 
most  sUlfiil,  Agni  has  leen  horn 
for  renewed  tvelfare.  Butter-faced, 
hrigJit,  he  shines  forth  hriUiantly 


dyumad  vi  bhati  bharat^bhiah    for  the  Bharatas  with  lofty,  heaven- 
siicih.  touching  (flame). 

gopas  :  97,  2.  ajanista :  is  ao.  of  jan  generate,  su-daksas : 
a  Bv.  (p.  455  c  a),  suvitaya  :  final  dat.  (p.  314,  B  2).  navyase  : 
dat.  of  cpv.  of  nava  new.  ghrta-pratikas  :  cp.  yasya  pratikam 
ahutam  ghrt^na  tvhose  face  is  sprinlded  with  butter  (vii.  8,  1)  as  an 
analysis  of  the  cd.  brhata :  supply  t6jasa.  bharat^bhyas  :  for 
the  benefit  of  (p.  314,  1)  the  Bharatas,  the  tribe  to  which  the  seer 
belongs. 


2  yajnasya     ketiim,    prathamam  As  banner  of  sacrifice,  as  first 

pur6hitam,  domestic  p'iest,  men  have  Icindlcd 

Agnim  naras,  trisadhasthiS  sam  Agni  in  the  threefold  abode.    (Com- 

idhire.  ing)  on  the  same  car  %vith  Indra 

CAMPBaj^ 


V.  11.  3]  AGNI  101 

Indrena    devaih.    saratham    sa  and  the  gods  may  that  most  wise 

barhisi  InvoJcer  sit  down  on  the  sacrificial 

sidan    ni   h6ta    yajathaya    su-  grass  for  sacrifice. 
kratuh. 

ketiim  :  in  apposition  to  Agnim,  in  allusion  to  the  smoke  of 
sacrifice ;  cp.  viii.  44,  10,  hotaram  .  .  .  dhumaketum  .  .  .  yajnanam 
ketiim  the  InvoJcer,  the  smoJce-hannered  banner  of  sacrifices ;  cp.  3  d. 
prathamam  :  first-appointed  in  order  of  time,  purohitam. :  see 
i.  1,  1.  naras :  N.  pi.  of  nr  (p.  91).  tri-sadhasth6  :  on  the  three 
sacrificial  altars  ;  Sandhi  67  b.  sam  idhire  :  pf.  of  idh  kindle ;  have 
kindled  and  still  kindle  (cp.  p.  342  a),  saratham :  adv.  governing 
Indrena  and  devais  (cp.  p.  309,  2).  sidan  ni :  the  ipf.  expresses 
that  he  sat  down  in  the  past  when  he  became  Purohita ;  the  prp.  as 
often  follows  the  verb  (p.  468,  20).  yajathaya :  final  dat. 
(p.  314,  B  2). 

^  m^i\  WT^%  TRT^:  ^N^      isi^i^^:  l  ^t^%  (  Trft:  i  ^:  i 

3  asammrstojayasemat^rohsucir.         Uncleansed  thou  art  born  bright 

mandrah  kavir  lid  atistho  Vi-  from  thy  tivo  parents.     Thou  didst 

vasvatah.  arise  as  the    gladdening  sage   of 

ghrt^na   tvavardhayann,   Agna  Vivasvant.       With     butter     they 

ahuta,  strengthened  thee,  0  Agni,  in  tvhom 

dhumas  te  ketiir  abhavad  divi  the  offering  is  poured.     Smoke  be- 

sritah.  came  thy  banner  that  reached  to 

the  sky. 

asam-mrstas :  pp.  of  mrj  ivipe,  opposed  to  siicis,  though  un- 
cleansed, yet  bright.  matr6s :  abl.  du.  :  the  two  fire-sticks,  from 
which  Agni  is  produced  by  friction,  lid  atisthas  :  3.  s.  ipf.  of  stha 
stand.  Vivasvatas  :  gen.  dependent  on  kavis ;  the  sage  (a  common 
designation  of  Agni)  of  Vivasvant^   the   first   sacrificer.      tva  :   the 


102  AGNI  .  [v.  11.  3 

caesura,  which  should  follow  this  word  (p.  442,  6),  is  here  only 
apparently  neglected  because  the  following  augment  may  be  treated 
as  dropped,  avardhaj'^an  :  that  is,  made  the  fire  burn  up  with  the 
ghee  poured  into  it  ;  explained  by  a-huta.  dhumas,  &c.  :  aifords 
an  analysis  of  Agni's  epithet  dhumaketu  (cp.  note  on  2  a),  divi  : 
loc.  of  the  goal  (p.  325  h).  Note  the  use  of  the  imperfects  as  referring 
to  past  events  (p.  345,  B). 

^f^  ^mjn  ^w^  ^^^^  II     ^Rm:  i  f  ^"rt:  i  |in%  i  ^i^g^^  ii 

4  Agnir    no     yajnam     lipa    vetu  Let  Agni  come  straiglitivay  to 

sadhuya.  our   sacrifice.     Men    carry   Agni 

Agnim  naro  vi  bharante  grh^-  hither  and  thither  in  every  house. 

grhe.  Agni   became   the    messenger,    the 

Agnir   duto   abhavad    dhavya-  carrier  of  oblations.     In  choosing 

vahano.  Agni  they  choose  one  who  has  the 

Agnim  vrnana  vrnate  kavikra-  ivisdom  of  a  seer. 

turn. 

vetu  :  3.  s.  ipv.  of  vi.  bharante :  see  note  on  bhr,  ii.  33,  10  a. 
grh6-grhe  :  189  C  a.  du-tas  :  Agni  is  characteristically  a  messenger 
as  an  intermediary  between  heaven  and  earth,  dhavyavahanas  : 
Sandhi,  54.  vrnanas :  pr.  pt.  A.  of  2.  vr,  clioosiug  Agni  as  their 
priest,     vrnate  :  3.  pi.  pr.  A  of  2  vr. 

M  gi^^^  ^^^Tm  ^^^  g^  I  T^l I  ^  I  ^^cl.i7fTi^  I  ^=#:  i 

g4  ^^T  ^^%  t  f^  I        g^i  ^^^T I  \^K\  ^^  I  iFii  i^  I 
^  f^^:  m^^fw^^T^ft^       ^Hl  I  M:  I  f^'^liT^  I  ^^^T:  i 

^  I  gwf^  I  l{M^  I  ^^^f^  I  '^  II 


V.  11,  6]  AGNI  103 

5  tubhyedam,  Agne,   madhumat-         For  thee,  0  Agni,  let  this  most 

tamam  vacas,  honied  sxoeecJi,  for  thee  this  prayer 

tubhyam  manisa  iyam  astu  sam  he  a  comfort  to   thy  heart.     The 

hrd6,  songs  fill  thee,  as  the  great  rivers 

tuam  girah,  sindhum  ivavanir  the     Indus,     ivith     potver,     and 

mahir,  strengthen  thee, 
a  prnanti  savasa,  vardhay  anti  ca. 

tiibhya  :  this  form  of  the  dat.  of  tvam  occurs  about  a  dozen  times 
in  the  Samhita  text  beside  the  much  commoner  tubhyam  (as  in  b) ; 
it  occurs  only  before  vowels  with  which  it  is  always  contracted, 
having  only  once  (v.  30,  6)  to  be  read  with  hiatus,  manisa  iyam : 
in  this  and  two  other  passages  of  the  KY.  the  a  of  manisa  is  not 
contracted  in  the  Samhita  text,  because  it  precedes  the  caesura, 
sam :  in  apposition,  as  a  delight  or  comfort,  sindhum  iva :  this 
simile  occurs  elsewhere  also  ;  thus  f  ndram  ukthani  vavrdhuh, 
samudram  iva  sindhavah  the  hymns  strengthen  Indra  as  the  rivers 
the  sea.  a  prnanti  :  from  pr  fll.  savasa :  because  hymns,  like 
oblations,  are  thought  to  give  the  gods  strength,  vardhayanti  :  cs. 
of  vrdh  grow  ;  accent,  p.  466,  19  a. 

6  tuam,    Agne,     Angiraso     guha         Thee,    0    Agni,    the   Ahgirascs 

hitam  discovered  hidden,  abiding  in  every 

anv  avindan  chisriyanam  vane-  ivood.     Thus  thou  art  horn,  tvhen 

vane.  ruhhed  with  mighty  strength :  they 

sa    jayase   mathyamanah   saho  call   thee   the  son  of  strength,  0 

mahat :  Angiras. 
tuam    ahuh    sahasas     putram, 

Angirah. 


104  AGNI  [v.  11, 6 

Angirasas  :  an  ancient  priestly  family  (cp.  x.  14,  3-6),  Agni  being 
regarded  as  their  chief  (cp.  d  and  i.  1,  6).  They  are  said  to  have 
designed  the  first  ordinances  of  sacrifice  (x.  67,  2).  giiha  hitam 
placed  (pp.  of  dha)  in  hiding,  concealed,  explained  by  sisriyanam 
vane ;  having  betaken  himself  (pf.  pt.  of  sri)  to,  resting  in,  all  tvood. 
anv  avindan  :  tliey  found  him  out  as  a  means  of  sacrifice  ;  Sandhi,  40. 
vane-vane  :  189  C  a.  sa  :  as  such  =  as  found  in  wood  (cp.  p.  294  h). 
mathyamanas  :  pr.  pt.  ps.  of  math  stir,  being  produced  by  the 
friction  of  the  kindling  sticks.  saho  mahat :  cognate  B.GC.  =  ivith 
mighty  strength  (cp.  sahasa  yo  mathito  jayate  nrbhih  he  who  ivhen 
ndjbed  hy  men  tvith  strength  is  horn,  vi.  48,  5) ;  this  being  an 
explanation  of  why  he  is  called  sahasas  putram  son  of  strength  : 
this,  or  sahasah  sunuh,  is  a  frequent  epithet  of  Agni  ;  Sandhi, 
43,  2  a.     Angiras  :  see  note  on  a. 


parjAnya 

This  deity  occupies  quite  a  subordinate  position,  being  celebrated  in  only 
three  hymns.  His  name  often  means  '  rain-cloud '  in  the  literal  sense  ; 
but  in  most  passages  it  represents  the  personification,  the  cloud  then 
becoming  an  udder,  a  pail,  or  a  water-skin.  Parjanya  is  frequently 
described  as  a  bull  that  quickens  the  plants  and  the  earth.  The  shedding 
of  rain  is  his  most  prominent  characteristic.  He  flies  around  with  a  watery 
car,  and  loosens  the  water-skin ;  he  sheds  rain-water  as  our  divine  (asura) 
father.  In  this  activity  he  is  associated  with  thunder  and  lightning.  He 
is  in  a  special  degree  the  producer  and  nourisher  of  ve<?etation.  He  also 
produces  fertility  in  cows,  mares,  and  women.  He  is  several  times  referred 
to  as  a  father.  By  implication  his  wife  is  the  Earth,  and  he  is  once  called 
the  son  of  Dyaus. 

V.  83.  Metre  :  1.  5-8.  10.  Tristubh  ;  2-4.  Jagati;  9.  Anustubh. 
^ff  T^^  ^Wr  f^^T^  I  ^ff  I  ^^5?f j^  I  'T^^T  I  w  I  f^^T^  I 


V.  83,  3] 


PARJANYA 


105 


tavasam     girbhir 


Invoice  the  mighty  one  with  these 
songs;  praise  Parjanya ;  seek  to 
tvin  him  ivith  obeisance.  Bellowing, 
the  hull  of  quickening  gifts  places 
seed  in  the  plants  as  a  germ. 


1  acha     vada 
abhih ; 
stuhi  Parjanyam ;    namasa  vi- 

vasa. 
kanikradad  vrsabho  jiradanu 
r6to  dadhati  6sadhisu  garbham. 

acha :  with  final  vowel  metrically  lengthened  in  the  second 
syllable  of  the  Pada.  vada  :  the  poet  addresses  himself,  vivasa : 
ds.  of  van  win.  kanikradat :  see  iv.  50,  5  d.  vrsabhas  :  Parjanya. 
jiradanu  :  Sandhi,  47  ;  his  quickening  gift  is  rain  =  r^tas  in  d. 
garbham :  as  apposition  to  r^tas,  Parjanya  quickens  the  growth 
of  plants  with  rain. 


2  vi  vpksan  hanti  uta  hanti  ra-  He   shatters    the   trees  and  he 

ksaso  :  smites  the  demons  :  the  ivhole  ivorld 

visvam  bibhaya  bhuvanam  ma-  fears  him  of  the  mighty  tveapon. 

havadhat.  Even  the  sinless  man  flees  before 

utanaga  isate  vrsniavato,  the    mighty  one,    ivhen   Parjanya 

yat  Parjanyah  stanayan  hanti  thundering  smites  the  evil-doers. 
duskrtah. 

bibhaya:  pf.  of  bhi  =  pr.  (p.342a).  mahavadhat :  a  Bv.  owing 
to  its  accent  (p.  455  c).  vrsnyavatas  :  Parjanya  ;  abl.  with  verbs 
of  fearing  (p.  316  b).  anagas  :  with  irr.  accentuation  of  the  priva- 
tive an-  in  a  Bv.  (p.  455  ca  and  f.  n.  2).  This  word  is  here  contrasted 
with  duskrtas ;  hence  the  uta  before  it  has  the  force  of  even.  On 
the  internal  Sandhi  of  duskrt  see  43,  2  a. 


108  PAEJANYA  [v.  83,  3 

^fq^5^:  W^  ^^  \  ^»t:  II        ^TTfi:  I  f^f ^  I  ^^m:  I  ^ci;  i  tt^  i 

^f[,  I  ^4^'^  I  ^^%  I  ^^  I  'T^:  II 


3  rathi  iva  kasayasvam  abhiksi- 

pann, 
avir  dutan  krnute  varsiam  aha. 
durat    simhasya     stanatha    ud 

irate, 
yat  Parjanyah  krnute  varsiam 

nabhah. 


LiJce  a  charioteer  lasJdng  his 
horses  ivith  a  whip  he  maJces  mani- 
fest his  messengers  of  rain.  From 
afar  arise  the  thunders  of  the  lion, 
ivhen  Parjanya  maizes  rainy  the 
shy. 


rathi :  N.  of  rathin,  much  less  common  than  rathi,  N.  rathis. 
The  contraction  rathiva  also  occurs  in  x.  51,  6  ;  rathir  iva  is  much 
commoner  and  would  have  been  metrically  better  here,  dutan  : 
the  clouds,  simhasya  stanathah  :  condensed  for  '  the  thunders  of 
Parjanya  like  the  roars  of  a  lion.  varsyam :  predicative  ace.  ; 
on  the  accent  of  this  form  and  of  varsyan  in  b,  see  p.  450,  2  h. 
krnute  :  note  that  kr  follo^YS  the  fifth  class  in  the  RV.,  krnoti,  «&c.  ; 
karoti  does  not  appear  till  the  AV.,  cp.  p.  145,  4. 


TTT  f%^#  g^^T^  ^^'^\ 


IT  I  ^TcTt:  I  mf^  I  ^f^f^  I  f^^^:  I 
^(T^  I  ^^M>:  I  f^f^  I  ftM^  I  ^s 

ftf^r  ^:  I 
^TT  I  f% W  I  g4^T^  I  ^T^^  I 
^i^^:  I  gf^ft^  I  TtT^t  I  ^^fH  II 

4  pra    vata  vanti ;    patayanti  vi-         The  ivinds  blow  forth,  the  light- 

dyiita ;  nings  fall ;  the  plants  shoot  up  ; 

ud6sadhir  jihate;  pinvate  suah.  heaven  overflows.    Nurture  is  horn 

ira  visvasmaibhuvanayajayate,  for  the  tvhole  world  ivhcn  Parjanya 

yat  Parjanyah  prthivim  r^tasa-  quicJcens  the  earth  icith  seed. 

vati. 


V.  83,  6]  PARJANYA  107 

vanti,  jihate  (2.  ha  go)  are  both  accented  as  antithetical  (p.  468, 
19  p)  to  the  two  following  verbs  patayanti  (itv.,  168),  pinvate,  which 
are  accented  as  beginning  new  sentences  (p.  466,  19  A  a) ;  cp.  also  note 
on  badhate,  i.  35,  9  c.  On  the  secondary  root  pinv  see  134,  4  /?. 
ira :  the  rain  shed  by  Parjanya  makes  the  earth  productive  (cp. 
1  c,  d).  Note  that  the  preceding  Jagati  triplet  (2-4)  is  bound 
together  by  a  refrain  beginning  with  yat  Parjanyah  and  varying 
the  idea  *  when  Parjanya  rains  '. 

;Ff  A:  ^-^^  ^ff  i[^  ^1^  11         w.  I  ^:  I  ^^  I  ^ff  I  ^^  I  ^f  II 

5  yasya  vrat6  prthivt  nannamiti ;  In  whose  ordinance  the  earth 
yasya  vrat6  saphavaj  jarbhuriti,  hends  toiv  ;  in  zvhose  ordinance 
yasya     vrata     dsadhir     visva-     hoofed    animals  leap   about;    in 

rupah :  zvhose  ordinance  plants  are  omni- 

sa  nah,  Parjanya,   mahi  sarma    form,  as  such,  0  Parjanya,  hestotv 
yacha.  mighty  shelter  on  us. 

yasya  vrat^ :  that  is,  in  obedience  to  whose  law.  nannamiti : 
int.  of  nam  (see  173,  2  Z>  ;  172  a).  saphavat :  that  tvhich  has  hoofs, 
used  as  a  n.  collective,  jarbhuriti:  int.  of  bhur  quiver  (174a). 
osadhis  :  the  following  adj.  visvarupah  is  most  naturally  to  be  taken 
predicatively,  like  the  verbs  in  a  and  b.  sa  :  as  nom.  corr.  followed 
by  the  voc.  :  as  such,  0  Parjanya.     yacha  :  ipv.  of  yam. 

if  ff^  #r  f f^  ^^^  T^^  f?^:  I  ^:  i  ff^:  i  ^^<t:  i  T'd^^  i 

IT  fxi;^^  ^^  ^^^  ^ttt:  i  it  I  fq^^  I  f ^:  i  ^^w  i  ^ttt:  i 

^#r%^^  ^^f^(5%u;  ^^T^  I  ^%5T  I  ^^f^g^T  I  ^  I  Tff  I 

i»^t  f^f^^^T:  ftm  ^:  II  ^^:  I  t^^f^WI  I  '^iv  I  ftm  I  ^:  ii 

6  divo   no  vrstim,  Maruto,  rari-         Give   us,    0   Maruts,    the   rain 

dhvam  ;  of  heaven  ;  pour  forth  tlie  streams 


108  PARJANYA  [v.  83,  6 

pra  pinvata  vrsno  asvasya  dha-  of  your  stallion.     Hither  with  tJiis 

rah.  thunder  come,  pouring   doivn  the 

arvan  etdna  stanayitnun^hi,  ^vaters    as   the   divine    spirit   our 

apo  nisincann  asurah  pita  nah.  father. 

divas  :  this  might  be  abl.,  from  heaven,  as  it  is  taken  to  be  by 
Sriyana ;  but  it  is  more  probably  gen.,  being  parallel  to  asvasya 
dharah  in  b ;  cp.  ix.  57,  1,  pra  te  dhara,  divo  na,  yanti  vrstayah 
tht/  streams  go  forth  like  the  rains  of  heaven,  raridhvam :  2.  pi.  pr. 
ipv.  of  ra  .give  (cp.  p.  144,  B  1  a).  Marutas  :  the  storm  gods,  as 
associated  with  rain,  are  in  a  b  invoked  to  bestow  rain,  which  is 
described  as  water  shed  by  their  steed  (as  also  in  i.  64,  6  and 
ii.  34,  13).  vrsno  asvasya :  =  stallion.  In  c  d  Parjanya  is  again 
addressed.  stanayitnimehi :  the  accent  alone  (apart  from  the 
Pada  text)  shows  that  this  is  a  contraction  not  of  -na  ihi  (which 
would  be  -nehi),  but  of  -na  6hi,  which  would  normally  be  -naihi; 
-n^hi  is  based  on  the  artificial  contraction  -na  (  =  -na  a)  +  ihi.  The 
same  Sandhi  occurs  in  indr^hi  (i.  9,  1)  for  fndra  a  ihi.  With 
stanayitniina  cp.  stanayan  in  2  d  and  stanathas  in  3  c.  apas  = 
vrstim  in  a  and  dharas  in  b.  asurah  pita  nah :  as  appositional 
subject  of  the  sentence,  with  the  2.  ipv.  ihi;  cp.  sa  in  5  d  with  the 
voc.  Parjanya  and  the  2.  ipv.  yacha.  The  two  epithets  are  applied 
to  other  gods  also,  such  as  Dyaus,  whom  in  his  relation  to  Earth 
Parjanya  most  resembles. 

^  ^fir  ^^  ^^^  ^^TTT  vi         ^fH  I  ^^  I  ^^^  I  ^rnfiki  w  I ^:  i 
^^T  3T^^^  f^^T^i:  II  w:  I  ^^j^  I  ^f!:vl^ct:  I  f^^mj^:  II 

7  abhi  kranda ;  stanaya ;  garbham  Belloiv   toivards  us;    thunder; 

a  dha ;  deposit  the  germ  ;  fly  around  with 

ndanvata  pari  diya  rathena.  tliy  tvater-hearing  car.     Draw  icell 

drtim    sii    karsa    visitam   nia-  thy   tvater-skin    unfastened  down- 

ncam :  ward:  let  the  heights  and  valleys 

sama  bhavantu  udvato  nipadah.  he  level. 


V.  83,  8]  PAKJANYA  109 

stanaya  :  accented  as  forming  a  new  sentence,  garbham  :  cp.  1  d, 
r^to  dadhati  osadhisu  garbham.  dhas :  2.  s.  root  ao.  sb.  of 
1.  dha.  diya :  with  final  vowel  metrically  lengthened,  drtim : 
the  rain-cloud,  here  compared  with  a  water-skin,  doubtless  like  the 
leather  bag  made  of  a  goat-skin  still  used  in  India  by  water-carriers, 
visitam  (from  si  tie) :  untied  so  as  to  let  the  water  run  out.  nyan- 
cam :  predicative :  =  so  that  the  untied  orifice  turns  downward. 
samas  :  that  is,  may  the  high  and  the  low  ground  be  made  level  by 
the  surface  of  the  water  covering  both. 

8  mahantam    kosam   ud   aca,   ni  Draw  up  the  great  bucket,  pour 

sinca ;  it  doivn  ;  let  the  streams  released 

syandantam  kulya  visitah  pu-  flow  forward.     Drench  heaven  and 

rastat.  earth  ivith  ghee  ;  let  there  he  a  good 

ghrt^na  dyavaprthivi  vi  undhi ;  drinJcing  place  for  the  cows. 

suprapanam    bhavatu    aghnia- 
bhyah. 

The  process  of  shedding  rain  is  here  compared  with  the  drawing 
up  of  a  pail  from  a  well  and  pouring  out  its  contents.  aca  : 
metrical  lengthening  of  the  final  a.  ni  sinca  :  Sandhi,  67  c.  puras- 
tat :  according  to  Sayana  eastward,  because  '  rivers  generally  flow 
eastwards';  but  though  this  is  true  of  the  Deccan,  where  he  lived, 
it  is  not  so  of  the  north-west  of  India,  where  the  RV.  was  composed, 
ghrt^na  :  figuratively  of  rain,  because  it  produces  fatness  or  abun- 
dance, dyavaprthivi :  Pragrhya,  but  not  analysed  in  the  Pada 
text  (cp.  i.  35,  1  b).  undhi :  2.  s.  ipv.  of  ud  ivet  —  unddhi.  This 
Pada  is  equivalent  in  sense  to  7  d.     suprapanam  :  note  that  in  the 


no 


PAEJANYA 


[v. 


Pada  text  this  compound  is  written  with  a  dental  n,  indicating  that 
this  was  regarded  by  the  compilers  of  that  text  as  the  normal 
internal  Sandhi  (see  65  h). 


9  yat,  Parjanya,  kanikradat, 
stanayan  hamsi  duskrtah, 
pratidam  visvam  modate, 
yat  kim  ca  prthivyam  adhi. 


^^^n.1  ff^  I  T-^^*  I 
irf?t  I  f ^^  I  f^K  I  ^?^  > 
W[^  I  f^jc  I  ^  I  ^f^^-m:  I  ^f^  II 

When,  0  Parjanya,  hellowing 
aloud,  thundering,  thou  smitest  the 
evil-doers,  this  tt'hole  world  exults, 
ivhatever  is  upon  the  earth. 


yat  Parjanya  :  cp.  2  d.  hamsi  :  2.  s.  pr.  of  han  {m  A  2).  yat 
kim  ca:  indefinite  prn,  whatever  [19  h),  explains  idam  visvam  this 
world  ;  if  a  verb  were  expressed  it  would  be  bhavati. 


^^^:  I  ^^^  I  ^c!:.  I  ^  Tt^  I  g  » 

^m^  I 
^^:  I  ^^Tf^  I  ^f^^?^t  \^\f^\ 
^^^^:  I  -mi^'^  I  »ft^^T-?l  I  ^K\ 
^cT  I  TT^^T«r:  I  ^f^_^:  i  ^^l^T^ » 


lOavarsir   varsam  :    ud  u   sA  gr-         Thou  hast  shed  rain  :  now  wholk, 

^^  •  cease;  thou  hast  made  the  deserts 

akar  dhanvani  atietav4  u.  passable  again.     Thou  hast  made 

ajijana  osadhir  bhojanaya  kam  ;     the  plants  to  grow  for  the  saU  of 

uta  prajibhy o  avido  manis4m.       food  ;  and  thou  hast  found  a  hymn 

of  praise  from  (thy)  creatures. 

This  concluding  stanza,  implying  that  Parjanya  has  shed  abundant 
rain,  describes  its  results. 


vi.  54,  1]  PUSAN  111 

avarsis  :  2.  s.  s  ao.  of  vrs.  u  su :  on  the  Sandhi  see  67  c  ;  on  the 
meaning  of  the  combination,  see  under  u  and  sii,  180.  grbhaya : 
this  pr.  stem  is  sometimes  used  beside  grbhnati.  akar :  2.  s.  root 
ao.  of  kr.  ati-etavai  :  cp.  p.  463,  14  h  a.  ajijanas  :  cp.  I  d  and  4  b. 
kam  :  see  180.  Here  we  have  the  exceptional  intrusion  of  a  Jagati 
Pada  in  a  Tristubh  stanza  (p.  445,  f.  n.  7).  avidas  :  a  ao.  of  vid 
find,  thou  hast  found  =  received.  prajabhyas  :  abl.,  from  creatures 
in  gratitude  for  the  bestowal  of  rain. 


PUS  An 

This  god  is  celebrated  in  eight  hymns,  five  of  which  occar  in  the  sixth 
Mandala.  His  individuality  is  vague,  and  his  anthropomorphic  traits  are 
scanty.  His  foot  and  his  right  hand  are  mentioned  ;  he  wears  braided  hair 
and  a  beard.  He  carries  a  golden  spear,  an  awl,  and  a  goad.  His  car  is 
drawn    by    goats    instead    of   horses.       His   characteristic   food   is   gruel 

^   (karambha). 

He  sees  all  creatures  clearly  and  at  once.  He  is  the  wooer  of  his  mother 
and  the  lover  of  his  sister  (Dawn),  and  was  given  by  the  gods  to  the  Sun- 
maiden  Surya  as  a  husband.  He  is  connected  with  the  marriage  ceremonial 
in  the  wedding  hymn  (x.  85).  With  his  golden  aerial  ships  Piisan  acts  as 
the  messenger  of  Surya.  He  moves  onward  observing  the  universe,  and 
makes  his  abode  in  heaven.  He  is  a  guardian  who  knows  and  beholds  all 
creatures.  As  best  of  charioteers  he  drove  downward  the  golden  wheel  of 
the  sun.  He  traverses  the  distant  path  of  heaven  and  earth ;  he  goes  to 
and  returns  from  both  the  beloved  abodes.     He  conducts  the  dead  on  the 

,  far-off  path  of  the  Fathers.  He  is  a  guardian  of  roads,  removing  dangers 
out  of  the  way;  and  is  called  'son  of  deliverance'  (vimuco  napat).  He 
follows  and  protects  cattle,  bringing  them  home  unhurt  and  driving  back 
the  lost.  His  bounty  is  often  mentioned.  '  Glowing '  (aghrni)  is  one  of  his 
exclusive  epithets.  The  name  means  '  prosperer ',  as  derived  from  pus, 
cause  to  thrive.  The  evidence,  though  not  clear,  indicates  that  Pusan  was 
originally  a  solar  deity,  representing  the  beneficent  power  of  the  sun 
manifested  chiefly  in  its  pastoral  aspect. 

4 

vi.  54.     Metre  :   Gayatri. 

^  ^'^^f'^f^  w^^  II  ^:  I  5^  I  T^  I  Tf?i  I  w^^  ii 


112  PUSAN  [vi.  54,  1 

1  sam,  Pusan,  vidiisa  naya,  Conjoin  us,  0  Pusan,  with  one 
y6  anjasanusasati,  that  knows,  who  shall  straightivay 
ya  ev^dam  iti  bravat.                       instruct  us,  and  tvho  shall  say  (it 

is)  ^just  here '. 

vidiisa  :  inst.  governed  by  the  sense  of  association  produced  by 
the  combination  of  naya  (ni  lead)  with  sam :  cp.  p.  308,  1  a.  The 
meaning  is:  'provide  us  with  a  guide',  anu-sasati  (3.  s.  pr.  sb.)  : 
who  shall  instruct  us  where  to  find  what  we  have  lost,  idam  :  not 
infrequently,  as  here,  used  adverbially  when  it  does  not  refer  to 
a  particular  substantive,     bravat :  3.  s.  pr.  sb.  of  bru. 

T^  ^%f?f  ^  W^^  II  T^  I  ^^  I  Tf^  I  "^  I  ^^^  H 

2  sam  u  Pusna  gamemahi,  We  would  also  go  with  Fiisan, 
yo  grham  abhisasati,  who  shall  guide  us  to  the  houses, 
ima  ev^ti  ea  bravat.                         and  shall  say  (it  is)  ^just  these  \ 

u :  see  p.  221,  2 ;  on  its  treatment  in  the  Pada  text,  p.  25,  f.  n.  2. 
Pusna :  see  note  on  vidiisa,  1  a.  gamemahi  (a  ao.  op.  of  gam) : 
ive  would  preferably  go  with  Fusan  as  our  guide,  grhan  :  that  is,  the 
sheds  in  which  our  lost  cattle  are. 

^  ^^^  ^  Ti^f^  ^:  I  ^wm:  I  ^  I  ft^f^  I 

^  ^^i^  ^^  I  ^  I  ^si:  I  ^4  I  Y^^  I 

^  ^?^  cjj^  ^f%:  II  ^  Tfit  I  ^^  I  ^%  I  ^f%:  II 

3  Pusnas  eakram  na  risyati,  Pumn's  wheel  is  not  injured,  the 
na  k6s6  ava  padyate ;  well  (of  his  car)  falls  not  doivn  ;  nor 
n6  asya  vyathate  pavih.                   does  his  felly  waver, 

no  :  =  na  u,  also  not ;  on  the  Sandhi  cp.  24.  k6s6  va :  on  the 
Sandhi  accent,  see  p.  465,  17,  3.  asya:  unaccented,  p.  452,  Be. 
Sayana  explains  eakram  as  Pusan's  weapon,  and  pavis  as  the  edge 
of  that  weapon.      But   this    is   in    the   highest  degree  improbable 


vi.  54,  6] 


PCS  AN 


113 


because  the  weapon  of  Pusan  is  a  spear,  an  awl,  or  a  goad  ;  while 
his  car  is  elsewhere  mentioned,  as  well  as  the  goats  that  draw  it, 
and  he  is  called  a  charioteer. 


8  ^"V  ^^  f  f%TE(Tfy^i[^ 

"^"^^  N^%  ^^  II 

4  y6  asmai  havisavidhan, 
na  tarn  Piisapi  mrsyate  : 
prathamo  vindate  vasu. 


^:  I  ^#f  I  ff^^  I  ^^fi:  I 
^  I  «T1I  ^  I  ^ft}  I  g^  I 


Him  tvho  Ji  as  tvorshipped  him  icitli 

oUation  Pusan  forgets  not :  he  is 

the  first  that  acquires  wealth. 

asmai:  Pusan;  on  the  syntax,  see  200,  A  If;  on  loss  of  accent, 

see  p.  452  B  c,    dpi  :  verbal  prp.  to  be  taken  with  mrs.    prathamas  : 

the  man  who  worships  Pusan. 


f^  I  tt:  I  ^g  I  ^g  I  ^:  I 
55T  I  T^g  I  ^%rf:  I 
i?T  I  ^Tow:  1  ^g  I  ^:  II 


5  Pusa  ga  anu  etu  nah ; 
Pusa  raksatu  arvatah  ; 
Pusa  vajam  sanotu  nah. 


Let  Pusan  go  after  our  cows  ; 
let  Pusan  protect  our  steeds;  let 
Pusan  gain  looty  for  us. 

anu  etu  :  to  be  with  them  and  prevent  injury  or  loss,     raksatu  ; 
to  prevent  their  being  lost. 


^w^T^^  gj^fT:  I 

^^n^  ^^cTTfrT  II 

6  Pusann,  anu  pra  ga  ihi 
yajamanasya  sunvatah, 
asmakam  stuvatam  uta. 


??^  I  ^  I  TTI  ^:  I  f;f|  I 

^^T^^T^  I  g^ff:  I 

'WNi'l^  I  ^^T3T^  I  ^3^  II 

0  Pusan,  go  forth  after  the  coivs 
of  the  sacrificer  tvho  presses  Soma, 
and  of  us  tvho  xwaise  thee. 

anu  pra  ihi :  cp.  p.  468,  20  a.     yajamanasya :   of  the  institutor 
of  the  sacrifice,     stuvatam  :  of  the  priests  as  a  body. 

1302  T 


114 

^^fr^Tf^TT  'iff  II 
7  makir  nesan ;  makim  risan  ; 


PUSAN  [vi.  54,  7 

^Tf^:  I  %1[r^  I  TTT^I^  I  ft^ci;  I 
W[^H^  I  ^T3F(^  i  I[TfT  I  ^^  I 

^w  I  ^htPt:  I  w  I  iff  II 


makim  sam  sari  k^vate  : 
atharistabhir  a  gahi. 


Let  not  any  one  1)6  lost ;  let  it 
not  he  injured;  let  it  not  suffer 
fracture  in  a  pit:  so  come  hack 
tvith  them  uninjured. 

nesat:  inj.  ao.  of  nas  he  lost  (see  149  a  2).     risat :  a  ao.  inj.  of 
ris.     sari  :  ps.  ao.  inj.  of  sr  crusJi.     aristabhis  :  supply  gobhis. 


t^^  TT^  T^l  II 


^T!^^*?:  I  i^Tjpi  I  '^K I 
^i§f*T^i^ite^%^^Fm:i 
iiTT^fi:  I  TT^:  I  t^l  II 


8  srnvantam  Pfisanam  vayam, 
iryam  anastavedasam, 
isanam  raya  imahe. 


Famn,  who  hears,  the  ivatchful, 
tvhose  property  is  never  lost,  ivlio 
disposes  of  riches,  we  approach. 
anasta-vedasam  :  who  always  recovers  property  that  has  been 
lost ;  he  is  also  called  anasta-pasu  :  whose  cattle  are  never  lost ;  cp. 
1,  2,  5,  6,  7.  rayas  :  gen.  dependent  on  isanam  (see  202  A  a). 
imahe  :  1.  pi.  pr.  A.  of  i  go  governing  the  ace.  Pusanam  : 
cp.  197  A  1. 


^cTlt^  Tf  ^f^  I 


^^  I  fl^  I  ^%  I  ^^^  I 
if  I  f^^^  I  ^^T  I  ^1  I 

^fin;- 1  %  I  Tfi  ^rf^ 


9  Pusan,  tava  vrat6  vayam  0  Pusan,  in  thy  service  may  ice 

na  risyema  kada  cana  :  never  sufftr  injury:    we  are  thy 

stotaras  ta  iha  smasi.  praisers  here. 

Pusan  tava  :    note  the   Sandhi  (40,   2).     vrat6 :    that  is,   while 

abiding  in  thy  ordinance,     smasi  :  1.  pi.  of  as  he ',  c  gives  the  reason 
for  the  hope  expressed  in  a  b. 


vii.  49]  APAS  115 

10  pari  Pusa  parastad  Let  Tusan  put  his  r/^/^^  hand 

dhastam  dadhatu  daksinam  :  around  us  from  afar :  let  him  drive 

piinar  no  nastam  ajatu.  up  for  us  again  what  has  been  lost. 

parastad  :  the  a  to  be  pronounced  dissyllabically  (cp.  p.  437.  a  8). 
pari  dadhatu  :  for  protection,  dhastam  =  hastam  :  54.  nastam: 
from  nas  he  lost;  cp.  anastavedasam  in  8b.  ajatu:  the  meaning 
of  the  vb.  shows  that  by  the  n.  nastam  what  is  lost  cows  are 
intended. 

APAS 

The  Waters  are  addressed  in  four  hymns,  as  well  as  in  a  few  scattered 
verses.  The  personification  is  only  incipient,  hardly  extending  beyond  the 
notion  of  their  being  mothers,  young  wives,  and  goddesses  who  bestow 
boons  and  come  to  the  sacrifice.  They  follow  the  path  of  the  gods.  Indra, 
armed  with  the  bolt,  dug  out  a  channel  for  them,  and  they  never  infringe 
his  ordinances.  They  are  celestial  as  well  as  terrestrial,  and  the  sea  is  their 
goal.  They  abide  where  the  gods  dwell,  in  the  seat  of  Mitra-Varuna,  beside 
the  sun.  King  Varuna  moves  in  their  midst,  looking  down  on  the  truth 
and  the  falsehood  of  men.  They  are  mothers  and  as  such  produce  Agni. 
They  give  their  auspicious  fluid  like  loving  mothers.  They  are  most 
motherly,  the  producers  of  all  that  is  fixed  and  that  moves.  They  purify, 
carrying  away  defilement.  They  even  cleanse  from  moral  guilt,  the  sins 
of  violence,  cursing,  and  lying.  They  also  bestow  remedies,  health,  wealth, 
strength,  long  life,  and  immortality.  Their  blessing  and  aid  are  often 
implored,  and  they  are  invited  to  seat  themselves  on  the  sacrificial  grass  to 
receive  the  offering  of  the  Soma  priest. 

The  Waters  are  several  times  associated  with  honey.  They  mix  their 
milk  with  honey.  Their  wave,  rich  in  honey,  became  the  drink  of  Indra, 
whom  it  exhilarated  and  to  whom  it  gave  heroic  strength.  They  are 
invoked  to  pour  the  wave  which  is  rich  in  honey,  gladdens  the  gods,  is  the 
draught  of  Indra,  and  is  produced  in  the  sky.  Here  the  celestial  Waters 
seem  to  be  identified  with  the  heavenly  Soma,  the  beverage  of  Indra. 
Elsewhere  the  Waters  used  in  preparing  the  terrestrial  Soma  seem  to  be 
nieant.      When    they  appear  bearing   ghee,   milk,   and    honey,   they   are 

I  2 


116 


APAS 


[vii.  49,  1 


accordant  with  the  priests  that  bring  well-pressed  Soma  for  Indra.  Soma 
(viii.  48)  delights  in  them  like  a  young  man  in  lovely  maidens ;  he  ap- 
proaches them  as  a  lover;  they  are  maidens  who  bow  down  before  the 
youth. 

The  deification  of  the  Waters  is  pre-Vedic,  for  they  are  invoked  as  dpo  in 
the  Avesta  also. 


vii.  49.     Metre:  Tristubh. 


err:  i  ^4: 1 1^:  i  vi  i  tt^i  ^^srw 


1  samudrajyesthah  salilasya  ma- 
dhyat 
pun  an  a  yanti  anivisamanah  : 
f  ndro  ya  vajri  vrsabho  rarada, 
ta  apo  devir  iha  mam  avantu. 


Having  the  ocean  as  their  chief, 
from  the  midst  of  the  sea,  xnirify- 
ing,  they  flow  unresting  :  let  those 
Waters,  the  goddesses,  for  whom 
Indra,tlieheareroftlie'bolt,the  might  II 
one,  opened  a  path,  help  me  here. 


samudra-jyesthas :  that  is,  of  which  the  ocean  is  the  largest, 
salilasya :  the  aerial  waters,  referred  to  as  divyas  in  2  a,  are  meant, 
punanas  :  cp.  pavakas  in  c.  anivisamanas :  cp.  i.  32,  10,  where 
the  waters  are  alluded  to  as  atisthantis  and  anivesanas  standing  not 
still  and  resting  not.  rarada  :  of  Indra,  it  is  said  elsewhere  (ii.  15,  3), 
vajrena  khany  atrnan  nadinam  with  his  holt  he  pierced  channels  for 
the  rivers,  ta  apo,  &c.  is  the  refrain  of  all  the  four  stanzas  of  this 
hymn. 

m  ^^T  l^ftl  ^T'i^^  II       m:  I  ^4: 1 1^:  i  p  i  'TT'li  ^^^5  H 


vii.  49,  4]  APAS 

2  ya  Apo  dlvya  uta  va  sravanti 
khanitrima  uta  va  yah  svayam- 

jah ; 
sanmdrartha   yah  siicayah  pa- 

vakas  : 
ta  Apo  devir  iha  mam  avantu. 


117 


Tlie  Waters  that  come  from 
heaven  or  that  flotv  in  channels  or 
that  arise  spontaneoush/,  that  clear 
and  purifying  have  the  ocean  as 
their  goal :  let  those  Waters,  the 
goddesses,  help  me  here. 


divyas :  that  fall  from  the  sky  as  rain  :  cp.  salilasya  madhyat 
in  1  a.  khanitrimas  :  that  flow  in  artificial  channels  :  cp.  Indro 
ya  rarada  in  1  c.  svayamjas :  that  come  from  springs,  samud- 
rarthas  :  that  flow  to  the  sea ;  cp.  samudrajyesthah  punana 
yanti  in  1  a,  b.  pavakas  :  this  word  here  and  elsewhere  in  the 
RV.  must  be  pronounced  pavaka  (p.  437  a  9). 


?  ^T^t  TT^T  ^^Tlit  ^Tf^  ^^ 


^TOTJi  I  TT^T  I  ^^Tn:  I  mf^  I  ^w  I 

iT^vj^:  I  ^^^:  I  ^t:  i  ^lym:  \ 
m:  I  ^4:  i  ^^1: 1 1:1 1  ^J^^  1  ^^irr  ii 


3  yasam    raja   Varuno   yati   ma- 
dhye, 
satyanrt^  avapasyan  jananam, 
madhuscutah  sucayo   yah    pa- 
vakas : 
ta  Apo  devir  iha  mam  avantu. 


In  the  midst  of  ivhom  King 
Varuna  goes  looJdng  dotvn  upon 
the  truth  and  untruth  of  men,  who 
distil  siveetness,  clear  and  purify- 
ing :  let  those  Waters,  the  god- 
desses, help  me  here. 


Varunas :  this  god  (vii.  86)  is  closely  connected  with  the  waters, 
for  the  most  part  those  of  heaven,  avapasyan :  this  shows  that 
the  celestial  waters  are  here  meant ;  on  the  Sandhi  see  40,  1. 
satyanrt^  :  Pragrhya  (26  ;  cp.  p.  437,  note  3) ;  accent :  p.  457,  10  e. 
Note  that  Dvandvas  are  not  analysed  in  the  Pada  text,  madhu- 
sciitas  :  that  is,  inherently  sweet. 

8  ^  TT^I  ^^^  ^Tg  ^^>      ^ig  I  TT^T  I  ^tw:  i  ^ig  i  ^W:  i 


118  APAS  [vii.  49,  4 

m  w?T  l^fTf  ^t4^^  II       m:  i  w4: 1 1^:  i  ff  i  itt^i  ^^^  ii 

4  yasu  raja  Varuno,  yasu  Somo,  In  tvJiom  King  Varum,  imvliom 

Visve   deva   yasu  urjam   mad-  Soma,  in  ivhom  the  All-gods  drink 

anti ;  exhilarating   strength,    into  tvhom 

vaisvanaro     yasu    Agnih    pra-  Agnl  Vaisvdnara  has  entered :  let 

vistas :  those  Waters,  the  goddesses,  helx) 

ta  Apo  devir  iha  mam  avantu.  me  here. 

urjam  :  cognate  ace.  with  madanti  (cp.  197  A4)  =  obtain  vigour 
in  exhilaration,  that  is,  by  drinking  Soma  which  is  associated  with 
the  Waters,  vaisvanaras  :  helonging  to  all  men,  a  frequent  epithet 
of  Agni.  pravistas  :  Agni's  abode  in  the  Waters  is  very  often 
refeiied  to;  cp.  also  his  aspect  as  Apam  napat  'Son  of  Waters' 
(ii.  85). 


MITEA-VAHUNA 

This  is  the  pair  most  frequently  mentioned  next  to  Heaven  and  Earth. 
The  hymns  in  which  they  are  conjointly  invoked  are  much  more  numerous 
than  those  in  which  they  are  separately  addressed.  As  Mitra  (iii.  59}  is 
distinguished  by  hardly  any  individual  traits,  the  two  together  have  prac- 
tically the  same  attributes  and  functions  as  Varuna  alone.  They  are  con- 
ceived as  young.  Their  eye  is  the  sun.  Reaching  out  they  drive  with  the 
rays  of  the  sun  as  with  ai?ms.  They  wear  glistening  garments.  They 
mount  their  car  in  the  highest  heaven.  Their  abode  is  golden  and  is 
located  in  heaven  ;  it  is  great,  very  loft}^  firm,  with  a  thousand  columns 
and  a  thousand  doors.  They  have  spies  that  are  wise  and  cannot  bo 
deceived.  They  are  kings  and  universal  monarchs.  They  are  also  called 
Asuras,  who  wield  dominion  by  means  of  maya  occult  power,  a  term  mainly 
connected  with  them.  By  that  power  they  send  the  dawns;  make  the  sun 
traverse  the  sky,  and  obscure  it  with  cloud  and  rain.  They  are  rulers  and 
guardians  of  the  whole  world.     They  support  heaven,  and  earth,  and  air. 

They  are  lords  of  rivers,  and  they  are  the  gods  most  frequently  thought 
of  and  prayed  to  as  bestowers  of  rain.  They  have  kine  yielding  refresh- 
ment, and  streams  flowing  with  honey.  They  control  the  rainy  skies  and 
the  streaming  waters.    They  bedew  the  pastures  with  ghee  (=  rain)  and  the 


vii.  61, 2]  MITRA-VARUNA  119 

spaces  with  honey.  They  send  rain  and  refreshment  from  the  sky.  Rain 
abounding  in  heavenly  water  comes  from  them.  One  entire  hymn  dwells 
on  their  powers  of  bestowing  rain. 

Their  ordinances  are  fixed  and  cannot  be  obstructed  even  by  the  immortal 
gods.  They  are  upholders  and  cherishers  of  order.  They  are  barriers 
against  falsehood,  which  they  dispel,  hate,  and  punish.  They  afflict  with 
disease  those  who  neglect  their  worship. 

The  dual  invocation  of  these  gods  goes  back  to  the  Indo-Iranian  period, 
for  Ahura  and  Mithra  are  thus  coupled  in  the  Avesta. 

vii.  61.     Metre  :  Tristubh. 

^  ;R5^  TT^^T  f^%cT  II  w  I  ^^K I  Tf(m^  I  w  I  f^"^?!  II 

1  ud  vam  caksur,  Varuna,  supra-         Up  the  lovely   eye  of  you   two 

tikam  gods,  0  (Mitra  and)  Varuna,  rises, 

devayor  eti  Surias  tatanvan.  the  Sun,  having  spread  (his  light); 

abhi  yo  visva  bhuvanani  caste,  he  ivho  regards  all  heings  observes 

sa  manyum  martiesu  a  ciketa.  their  intention  among  mortals. 

caksus :  cp.  vii.  63,  1,  lid  u  eti  .  .  .  Suryah  .  .  .  caksur  Mitrasya 
Varunasya  up  rises  the  Sun,  the  eye  of  Mitra  and  Varuna.  Varuna : 
has  the  form  of  the  voc.  s.,  which  could  be  used  elliptically  ;  but  the 
Padapatha  takes  it  as  the  shortened  form  of  the  elliptical  dual  Varuna 
(cp.  193,  2  a)  ;  cp.  deva  in  7  a.  It  is,  however,  difficult  to  see  why 
the  a  should  have  been  shortened,  because  it  conforms  to  the  normal 
break  (^  w— )  of  the  Tristubh  line  (see  p.  441).  abhi  .  .  .  caste  :  the 
Sun  is  elsewhere  also  said  to  behold  all  beings  and  the  good  and 
bad  deeds  of  mortals,  manyum :  that  is,  their  good  or  evil 
intentions,  ciketa  :  pf.  of  cit  perceive  (cp.  139,  4).  In  d  the  caesura 
irregularly  follows  the  third  syllable. 

5^  IT  ^  ^  fjt^T^^Wr|m^  IT  I  ^V^  I  ^:  I  f^^T^wl  I  ^fTi^  I 

ftift  ^^ff^  ^^^f^^tt  1       f^^^  I  w^jf^  I  ^4^^  I  5^f^  I 


120  MITRA-VARUNA  [vii.  61,  2 

w  I  ^c(^  I  "^mi  I  ^  I  ^T^:  I  ^^ 
Tfiiii 

2  pra    vam    sa,    Mitra-Varunav,         Forth  for  you   two,   0   Mitra- 

rtava  Vanina,  this  pious  priest,   heard 

vipro      manmani  dirghasriid     afar,  sends  his  hymns,  that  ye  may 

iyarti,  favour  his  prayers,  ye  wise  ones, 

yasya    brahmani,  sukratu,    a-     that  ye  may  fiU  his  autumns  as  it 

vatha,  tvere  ivith  ivisdom. 

a   yat  kratva    na  saradah   pr- 

naithe. 

iyarti  :  3.  s.  pr.  of  r  c/o.  yasya  .  .  .  avathas  =  yat  tasya 
avathas  :  on  the  sb.  with  relatives  see  p.  356,  2.  sukratu  :  see 
note  on  rtavari,  i.  160,  1  b.  The  repeated  unaccented  word  in  the 
Pada  text  here  is  not  marked  with  Anudattas  because  all  unaccented 
syllables  following  a  Svarita  are  unmarked,  a  prnaithe  :  2.  du.  sb. 
pr.  of  prn  fill.  The  meaning  of  d  is  not  quite  certain,  but  is 
probably  'that  ye  who  are  wise  may  make  him  full  of  wisdom 
all  his  life '.  saradas  :  autumns,  not  varsani  rains  (which  only 
occurs  in  the  AV.),  regularly  used  in  the  RV.  to  express  years  of 
life,  because  that  was  the  distinctive  season  where  the  RV.  was 
composed. 


^^iT^Tfft  ^f^f^T^  T^^WT 


IT  I  Y^:  I  f^^n^^I  I  ?f^T:  I 
n  I  f5^:  I  ^^Tr[^  I  If  tt:  I  l^Tf  Tf^ 

g^j^Tf  I 

^it:  I  f  ^T%  xf^  I  ^^5  I  ftjl  I 
^^^  I  ^ct:  I  ^fnif^^i  ^^'TTiirT  II 


3  prd  ur6r,  Mitra- Varuna,  prthi- 
vyah, 


From  the  wide  earth,  0  Mitra- 
Varuna,  from  the  high  lofty  sky, 


vii.  61,  4]  MITRA-VARUNA  121 

pra    diva    rsvad    brhatah,    su-  0  bounteous  ones,  ye  have  placed 

danu,  pour  spies  that  go  separately,  in 

spaso  dadhathe  osadhisu  viksii  plants  and  abodes,  ye  that  protect 

rdhag    yato,    'nimisam    raksa-  ivith  unwinMng  eye. 
mana. 

ur6s  :  here  used  as  f.  (as  adjectives  in  u  may  be :  98),  though  the 
f.  of  this  particular  adj.  is  otherwise  formed  with  i  :  urv-i.  sudanu  : 
see  note  on  sukratu  in  2  c.  spasas  :  the  spies  of  Varuna  (and 
Mitra)  are  mentioned  in  several  passages.  dadhathe :  Pragrhya 
(26  b).  osadhisu  :  the  use  of  this  word  seems  to  have  no  special 
force  here  beyond  expressing  that  the  spies  lurk  not  only  in  the 
houses  of  men,  but  also  outside,  yatas :  pr.  pt.  A.  pi.  of  i  go. 
auimisam  :  ace.  of  a-nimis  f.  non-winking,  used  adverbially,  to  be 
distinguished  from  the  adj.  a-nimisa  also  used  adverbially  in  the 
ace.     The  initial  a  must  be  elided  for  the  sake  of  the  metre. 

T{  ^^rt^T  1^^  fTTTT^  II  IT  I  ^^iTT^T  I  ^^^^  I  f^TT^  II 

4  samsa  Mitrasya  Varunasya  dha-         I  will  praise  the  ordinance  of 

ma  :  3Iitra  and    Varuna  :    their  force 

siismo  rodasi  badbadhe  mahitva.   presses  apart  the  tivo  ivorlds  ivith 

ayan  masa  ayajvanam  avirah ;        might.     May  the  months  of  non- 

pra  yajnamanma  vrjanam  tirate.     sacrificers  pass  ivithout  sons  ;  may 

he  whose  heart  is  set  on  sacrifice 
extend  his  circle. 

samsa :  this  form  may  be  the  2.  s.  P.  ipv.  with  metrically 
lengthened  final  vowel,  as  the  Pada  text  interprets  it ;  or  the  1.  s. 
sb.  P.  (p.  125).  The  latter  seems  more  likely  because  the  poet 
speaks  of  himself  in  the  1.  prs.  (twice)  in  6  a,  b  also,  badbadhe  : 
int.  of  badh  (174  a) ;  cp.  vii.  23,  3,  vi  badhista  sya  rodasi  mahitva 
he  has  pressed  asunder  the  two  ivorlds  with  his  might,     mahitva  :  inst. 


122  MITRA-VARUNA  [vii.  61,  i 

(p.  77).  ayan  :  3.  pi.  pr.  sb.  of  i  go  (p.  130).  aviras  :  predicative  = 
as  sonless ;  on  the  accent  see  p.  455,  10  c  a.  yajnamanma  :  con- 
trasted with  ayajvanam  (accent  p.  455,  f.  n.  2).  pra  tirate  :  3.  s. 
sb.  pr.  of  tf  cross ;  this  cd.  vb.  is  often  used  in  the  sense  of  pro- 
longing life  (A.  one's  own,  P.  that  of  others),  here  of  increasing 
the  number  of  one's  sons  (as  opposed  to  aviras  in  c) ;  cp.  pra  y6 
bandhum  tirante,  gavya  prncanto  asvya  m^SLghsnod  tvJio  further  their 
Idn,  giving  abundantly  gifts  ofcoivs  and  horses  (vii.  67,  9). 


^f :  ^^  ^^m  ^RT^t 


visva, 


vrsanav,     ima 

•   •        •  ^ 


5  amura, 

vam, 
na  yasu  citram  dadrse,  na  ya- 

ksam. 
driihah  sacante  anrta  jananam  : 
na  vam  ninyani  acite  abhuvan. 


0  tvise  mighty  ones,  all  tliese 
(praises)  are /or  you  two,  in  which 
no  marvel  is  seen  nor  mystery. 
Avengers  follow  the  falsehoods  of 
men :  there  have  been  no  secrets 
for  you  not  to  Imow. 


The  interpretation  of  this  stanza  is  uncertain.  Following  the 
Padapatha  I  take  amura  to  be  a  du.  m.  agreeing  with  vrsanau,  but 
visva  for  visvas  (contrary  to  the  Pada)  f.  pi.  N.  agreeing  with  imas 
these  (sc.  stutayas).  na  citram  :  that  is,  no  deceit  or  falsehood. 
dadrse  :  3.  s.  pf.  A.  with  ps.  sense,  as  often  (cp.  p.  842  a),  driihas  : 
the  spies  of  Varuna  (cp.  3  c).  na  ninyani  :  explains  c  :  there  is 
nothing  hidden  from  you.     a-cite  :  dat.  inf.  (cp.  167,  1  a). 


^%  I  i^T*^  I  f^^m^T  I  ^i^T^:  I 
3T  I  ^T^  I  ^^Tf^  I  ^^"^  I  ^f^  I 


VI 


ii.  61,  7] 


MITRA-VARUNA 


123 


•  sam   u   vam  yajnam  mahayam 

namobhir ; 
huv6   vam,    Mitra-Varuna,   sa- 

badhah. 
pra  vam  manmani  rcase  navani  ; 
krtani  brahma  jujusann  imani. 


With  reverence  I  ivill  consecrate 
for  you  the  sacrifice  ;  I  call  on  you 
two,  Mitra-Varuna,  with  seal. 
(These)  netv  thoughts  are  to  ^praise 
you  ;  may  these  prayers  that  have 
heen  offered  he  pleasing. 


sam  mahayam  :  1.  s.  inj.  cs.  of  mah.  huve  :  1.  s.  pr.  A.  of 
hu  call,  sabadhas :  note  that  the  pel.  sa  is  separated  in  the  Pada 
text,  though  the  privative  pel.  a  is  not.  pra  .  .  .  rcase  :  dat.  inf. 
from  arc  praise  (see  p.  192,  hi;  cp.  p.  463^  notes  2  and  8).  navani  : 
the  seers  often  emphasize  the  importance  of  new  prayers,  brahma  : 
n.  pi. ;  see  90,  p.  67  (bottom)  and  note  4.  jujusan :  3.  pi.  sb.  pf.  of 
jus  (140,  1). 


f%^Tf^  %h  fq^ri  ftfr  ^ 


T^T^  I  I^T  I  HT^^fff^:  I  ^^vf^Till 

ft^f^  I  f  ti^T  I  f^^Tm,  I  ^x:  I  ^:  i 
•^^5r;  I  mjT  I  ^f^if^:  I  ^^T  I  ^:  ii 


I  iyam,    deva,    purohitir    yuva-         This  priestly  service,  0  gods,  has 

bhyam  he  en  rendered  to  you  two  at  sacri- 

yajn^su,  Mitra- Varunav,  akari  ;  fices,  0  Mitra-  Varuna.     TaJce  us 

visvani  durga  piprtam  tiro  no.  across  all  hardships.    Do  ye  protect 

yuyam    pata    suastibhih    sada  us  evermore  with  hlessings. 

nah. 

This  final  stanza  is  a  repetition  of  the  final  stanza  of  the  preceding 
hymn  (vii.  60) ;  d  is  the  refrain  characteristic  of  the  hymns  of  the 
Vasistha  family,  concluding  three-fourths  of  the  hymns  of  the  seventh 
Mandala. 

deva  :  voc.  du.,  shortened  for  deva  (cp.  Varuna  in  1  a)  as  restored 
in  the  Pada  text,  yuvabhyam  :  note  the  difference  between  this 
form  and  yuvabhyam,  dat.  du.  of  yiivan  youth.  Mitra- Varunau  : 
note  that  in  the  older  parts  of  the  RV.  the  du.  ending  au  occurs 


124  MITRA-VARUNA  [vii.  6i,  7 

only  within  a  Pada  before  vowels,  in  the  Sandhi  form  of  av. 
akari :  ps.  ao.  of  kr  do.  piprtam  :  2.  du.  ipv.  pr.  of  pr  put  across. 
yuyam :  pi.,  scil.  devas,  because  the  line  is  a  general  refrain 
addressed  to  the  gods,  not  to  Mitra-Varuna. 


SURYA 

Some  ten  hymns  are  addressed  to  Surya.  Since  the  name  designates  the 
orb  of  the  sun  as  well  as  the  god,  Surya  is  the  most  concrete  of  the  solar 
deities,  his  connexion  with  the  luminary  always  being  present  to  the  mind 
of  the  seers.  The  eye  of  Surya  is  several  times  mentioned  ;  but  Surya 
himself  is  also  often  called  the  eye  of  Mitra  and  Varuna,  as  well  as  of 
Agni  and  of  the  gods.  He  is  far-seeing,  all-seeing,  the  spy  of  the  whole 
world  ;  he  beholds  all  beings,  and  the  good  and  bad  deeds  of  mortals.  He 
arouses  men  to  perform  their  activities.  He  is  the  soul  or  guardian  of  all 
that  moves  or  is  stationary.  His  car  is  drawn  by  one  steed  called  etasa, 
or  by  seven  swift  mares  called  harit  haijs. 

The  Dawn  or  Dawns  reveal  or  produce  Surya ;  he  shines  from  the  lap  of 
the  Dawns ;  but  Dawn  is  also  sometimes  Surya's  wife.  He  also  bears  the 
metronymic  Aditya  or  Aditeya,  son  of  the  goddess  Aditi.  His  father  is 
Dyaus  or  Heaven.  The  gods  raised  him  who  had  been  hidden  in  the  ocean, 
and  they  placed  him  in  the  sky ;  various  individual  gods,  too,  are  said  to 
have  produced  Surya  or  raised  him  to  heaven. 

Surya  is  in  various  passages  conceived  as  a  bird  traversing  space ;  he  is 
a  ruddy  bird  that  flies  ;  or  he  is  a  flying  eagle.  He  is  also  called  a  mottled 
bull,  or  a  white  and  brilliant  steed  brought  by  Dawn.  Occasionally  he  is 
described  as  an  inanimate  object :  he  is  a  gem  of  the  sk}^  or  a  variegated 
stone  set  in  the  midst  of  heaven.  He  is  a  brilliant  weapon  (ayudha)  which 
Mitra-Varuna  conceal  with  cloud  and  rain,  or  their  felly  (pavi),  or  a  bril- 
liant car  placed  by  them  in  heaven.  Surya  is  also  sometimes  spoken  of  as 
a  wheel  (cakra),  though  otherwise  the  wheel  of  Surya  is  mentioned.  Surya 
shines  for  all  the  world,  for  men  and  gods.  He  dispels  the  darkness, 
which  he  rolls  up  like  a  skin,  or  which  his  rays  throw  off"  like  a  skin  into 
the  waters.  He  measures  the  days  and  prolongs  life.  He  drives  away 
sickness,  disease,  and  evil  dreams.  All  creatures  depend  on  him,  and  the 
epithet  'all-creating'  (visvd-karman)  is  once  applied  to  him.  By  his 
greatness  he  is  the  divine  priest  (asury^  purohita)  of  the  gods.  At  his 
rising  he  is  besought  to  declare  men  sinless  to  Mitra-Varuna  and  to  other 
gods. 

The  name  Surya  is  a  derivative  of  svlir  light,  and  cognate  with  the  Avestic 
hvare  sun,  which  has  swift  horses  and  is  the  eye  of  Ahura  Mazda. 


vii.  63,  2]  SDKYA 

vii.  63.     Metre  :  Tristubh. 


125 


ud  u  eti  subhago  visvacaksah  Up  rises   the   genial   all-seeivg 

sadharanah  Surio  manusanam,  Sun^  common  to  all  men,  the  eye 

caksur     Mitrasya     Varunasya  of  Mitra  and  Varum,  the  god  who 

devas,  rolled    up    the     darkness    like    a 

carmeva    yah   samavivyak   ta-  shin, 

mamsi. 

visvacaksas  :  cp.  urucaksas  in  4a;  on  the  accentuation  of  these 
two  words  cp.  p.  454,  10  and  p.  455,  10  c  a.  caksus  :  cp.  vii.  61,  1. 
sam-avivyak  :  3.  s.  ipf.  of  vyac  extend,  carm'a  iva  :  cp.  iv.  13,  4, 
rasmayah  Suriasya  carmevavadhus  tamo  apsii  antah  the  rays 
of  the  sun  have  deposited  the  darkness  like  a  skin  tvithin  the  waters. 


^fi;  I  ^  Tf^  I  i^f^  I  Pfi^f^m  I  WiTT- 

^j\^  I  ^g:  I  ^4^'  1 15'^  I 
^^T^  I  ^w^  I  ^fr^^f^ff^^  I 

'^<l  I  ^<T^:  I  -^ifff  I  ^:ig  I  g^:  II 


2  lid  u  eti  prasavita  jananam  Up  rises  the  rouser  of  the  people, 

mahan  ketiir  arnavah  Suriasya,  the  great  waving  banner  of  the  Sun, 
samanam  cakram  pariavivrtsan,  desiring  to  revolve  hither  the  uni- 
yad  Etas6  vahati  dhursu  yuktah.   form  wheel,  which  EtaSa,  yoked  to 

the  pole,  draws. 


126 


SUKYA 


[vii.  63, 


prasavita :  with  metrically  lengthened  i  (cp.  p.  440,  4)  for 
prasavita  as  restored  by  the  Padapatha ;  cp.  4  c,  janah  Suryena 
prasutah.  samanam  :  uniform,  with  reference  to  the  regularity 
of  the  sun's  course,  cakram  :  a  single  w^heel  of  the  sun,  doubtless 
with  reference  to  the  shape  of  the  luminary,  is  regularly  spoken  of. 
paryavivrtsan  :  ds.  of  vrt  turn  ;  cp.  p.  462,  13  a.  Etasas  :  as  the 
name  of  the  sun's  steed,  is  several  times  mentioned  ;  but  Surya  is  also 
often  said  to  be  drawn  by  seven  steeds ;  cp.  i.  164,  2,  sapta  yunjanti 
ratham  ^kacakram,  6k6  asvo  vahati  saptanama  seven  yoke  the 
one-ivJieeled  car,  one  steed  with  seven  names  draws  if.  dhursu  :  the  loc. 
pi.  as  well  as  the  s.  of  this  word  is  used  in  this  way. 


3  ftW^m'T  ^^^ig^^T^ 


3  vibhrajamana  usasam  upasthad 
rebhair  lid  eti  anumadyamanah. 
esa  me  devah  Savita  cachanda, 
yah  samanam  na  praminati  dha- 
ma. 


Shining  forth  he  rises  from  the 
lap  of  the  datcns,  greeted  tvith 
gladness  hy  singers.  He  has  seemed 
to  me  god  Savitr  icho  infringes  not 
the  uniform  laiv. 


cachanda :  here  the  more  concrete  god  Surya  is  approximated  to 
Savitr  (i.  35),  who  is  in  several  passages  spoken  of  as  observing 
fixed  laws.  In  this  hymn  Sfuya  is  also  referred  to  with  terms 
(prasavita,  prasutas)  specially  applicable  to  Savitr.  na  praminati : 
cp.  what  is  said  of  Dawn  in  i.  123,  9,  rtasya  na  minati  dhama  she 
infringes  not  the  law  of  Order, 


8  f^^t  W  ^^^T  ^'^?f 

f^  ^^t:  ^ht  w^i 


-^j^^  I  ^^t:  I  ^"^V  I  TT^^m:  i 
•^■M.  I  ^^if^  I  liW^T  I  ^^ftr  II 


vii.  63,  6]  StRYA  127 

4  div6  rukma  urueaksa  lid  eti,  The  golden  gem  of  the  shy,  far- 
durearthas       taranir       bhraja-     seeing  rises,  tvhose  goal  is  distant, 

manah.  speeding   onward,    shining.      Notv 

nunam  janah  Suriena  prasuta  may  men,    aroused    by   the   Sun, 

ayann    arthani,     krnavann    a-  attain  their  goals  and  perform  their 

pamsi.  labours. 

divo  rukmah  :  cp.  vi.  51,  1,  rukm6  na  diva  udita  vy  adyaut 
like  a  golden  gem  of  the  sJcy  he  has  shone  forth  at  sunrise ;  and 
V.  47,  3,  madhye  divo  nihitah  prsnir  asma  the  variegated  stone 
set  in  the  middle  of  the  shj.  durearthas :  Surya  has  far  to  travel 
before  he  reaches  sunset,  ayan :  8.  pi.  pr.  sb.  of  i  go.  arthani  : 
note  that  this  word  is  always  n.  in  the  RV.  except  in  two  hymns 
of  the  tenth  book,  in  which  it  is  m.  krnavan  :  3.  pi.  pr.  sb.  of  kr 
do  ;  accented  because  beginning  a  new  sentence  (p.  465,  18  a). 

^^  ^  ^^^^f^  ^T^:  I  tf^:  I  ^  I  -^-^-^ I  ^g  I  i^fn im^: i 

T^TfHfS^T^^xnYrr  f%:  II  ^T^ivjfir:  i  f^^T^^^J  i  ^  i  f  t:  ii 

5  yatra     cakriir     amrta     gatiim         Where  the  immortals  have  made 

asmai,  a  ivay  for  him,  like  a  flying  eagle 

syeno   na   diyann  anu  eti   pa-  he  folloivs  his  path.     To  you  tivo, 

thah.  ivhen  the  sun  has  risen,  ive  ivould 

prati  vam,  sura  lidite,  vidhema  pay   ivorship    ivith    adorations,    0 

namobhir   Mitra- Varnnota   ha-  Mitra-  Varuna,  and  iviih  offerings. 

vyaih. 

yatra  :  the  final  vowel  metrically  lengthened,  amrtas :  various 
gods,  as  Varuna,  Mitra,  and  Aryaman  (vii.  60,  4),  are  said  to  have 
made  paths  for  the  sun.  prati  to  be  taken  with  vidhema.  sura 
udite  :  loc.  abs.  (205  b). 

%  1^  fMt  ^^irt  ^^''T  ^  g  I  fw^\  I  ^^Tir:  I  ^^m  I  ^:  I 

w^  <ft^T^  ^V^  ^[^  I        cR^  I  cf\^T^  I  ^fr:^:  i  5^^  1 


128  SURYA  [vii.  63, 6 

6  nu  Mitro  Varun6  Aryama  nas  Now  may  Mitra,  Varum,  and 

traane  tokaya  varivo  dadhantu  :     Aryaman  grant  wide  space  to  us 
suga  no  visva  supathani  santu.      ourselves    and   to    our   offspring. 
yuyam    pata    suastibhih    sada     Let  all  our  paths  he  fair  and  easy 
nah.  to  traverse.    Do  ye  protect  us  ever- 

more tvith  blessings. 

nu :  to  be  pronounced  with  a  slur  as  equivalent  to  two  syllables 
(^  — ,  cp.  p.  437  aS) ;  only  nu  occurs  as  the  first  word. of  a  sentence, 
never  nii  (p.  238) ;  the  Pada  text  always  has  nu.  tmane  :  this 
word  (cp.  90,  2,  p.  69)  is  often  used  in  the  sense  of  self,  while  atman 
is  only  just  beginning  to  be  thus  used  in  the  RV.  (115  ?>  a)  and  later 
supplants  tanu  fcot/?/ altogether,  dadhantu:  3.  pi.  pr.  according  to 
the  a  conj.  (p.  144,  B3)S)  instead  of  dadhatu.  suga:  lit.  may  all 
(paths)  he  easy  to  travel  and  easy  to  traverse.  This  final  stanza  is 
a  repetition  of  the  final  stanza  of  the  preceding  hymn  (vii.  62). 
On  d  see  note  on  vii.  61,  6. 

ASVlNA 

These  two  deities  are  the  most  prominent  gods  after  Indra,  Agni,  and 
Soma,  being  invoked  in  more  than  fifty  entire  hymns  and  in  parts  of  several 
others.  Though  their  name  (a^v-in  horseman)  is  purely  Indian,  and 
though  they  undoubtedly  belong  to  the  group  of  the  deities  of  light,  the 
phenomenon  which  they  represent  is  uncertain,  because  in  all  probability 
their  origin  is  to  be  sought  in  a  very  early  pre-Vedic  age. 

They  are  twins  and  inseparable,  though  two  or  three  passages  suggest 
that  they  may  at  one  time  have  been  regarded  as  distinct.  They  are 
young  and  yet  ancient.  They  are  bright,  lords  of  lustre,  of  golden  bril- 
liancy, beautiful,  and  adorned  with  lotus-garlands.  They  are  the  only  gods 
called  golden-pathed  (hiranya-vartani).  They  are  strong  and  agile,  fleet 
as  thought  or  as  an  eagle.  They  possess  profound  wisdom  and  occult 
power.  Their  two  most  distinctive  and  frequent  epithets  are  dasrd  won- 
drous and  nasatya  true. 

They  are  more  closely  associated  with  honey  (madhu)  than  any  of  the 
other  gods.    They  desire  honey  and  are  drinkers  of  it.    They  have  a  skin 


vii.  71]  ASVINS  129 

filled  witli  honey ;  they  poured  out  a  hundred  jars  of  honey.  They  have 
a  honey-goad ;  and  their  car  is  honey-hued  and  honey-bearing.  They  give 
honey  to  the  bee  and  are  compared  with  bees.  They  are,  however,  also 
fond  of  Soma,  being  invited  to  drink  it  with  Usas  and  Surya.  Their  car  is 
sunlike  and,  together  with  all  its  parts,  golden.  It  is  threefold  and  has 
three  wheels.  It  is  swifter  than  thought,  than  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  It 
was  fashioned  by  the  three  divine  artificers,  the  Rbhus.  It  is  drawn  by 
horses,  more  commonly  by  birds  or  winged  steeds ;  sometimes  by  one  or 
more  buffaloes,  or  by  a  single  ass  (rasabha).  It  passes  over  the  five 
countries ;  it  moves  around  the  sky ;  it  traverses  heaven  and  earth  in  one 
day  ;  it  goes  round  the  sun  in  the  distance.  Their  revolving  course  (vartis), 
a  term  almost  exclusively  applicable  to  them,  is  often  mentioned.  They 
come  from  heaven,  air,  and  earth,  or  from  the  ocean  ;  they  abide  in  the 
sea  of  heaven,  but  sometimes  their  locality  is  referred  to  as  unknown. 
The  time  of  their  appearance  is  between  dawn  and  sunrise :  when  darkness 
stands  among  the  ruddy  cows  ;  Usas  awakens  them ;  they  follow  after  her 
in  their  car ;  at  its  yoking  Usas  is  born.  They  yoke  their  car  to  descend  to 
earth  and  receive  the  offerings  of  worshippers.  They  come  not  only  in  the 
morning,  but  also  at  noon  and  sunset.  They  dispel  darkness  and  chase 
away  evil  spirits. 

The  Asvins  are  children  of  Heaven;  but  they  are  also  once  said  to  be 
the  twin  sons  of  Vivasvant  and  Tvastr's  daughter  Saranyu  (probably  the 
rising  Sun  and  Dawn).  Pusan  is  once  said  to  be  their  son ;  and  Dawn  seems 
to  be  meant  by  their  sister.  They  are  often  associated  with  the  Sun  con- 
ceived as  a  female  called  either  Surja  or  more  commonly  the  daughter  of 
Surya.  They  are  Surya's  two  husbands  whom  she  chose  and  whose  car  she 
mounts.  Surya's  companionship  on  their  car  is  indeed  characteristic. 
Hence  in  the  wedding  hymn  (x.  85)  the  Asvins  are  invoked  to  conduct  the 
bride  home  on  their  car,  and  they  (with  other  gods)  are  besought  to  bestow 
fertility  on  her. 

The  Asvins  are  typically  succouring  divinities.  They  are  the  speediest 
deliverers  from  distress  in  general.  The  various  rescues  they  effect  are  of 
a  peaceful  kind,  not  deliverance  from  the  dangers  of  battle.  They  are 
characteristically  divine  physicians,  healing  diseases  with  their  remedies, 
restoring  sight,  curing  the  sick  and  the  maimed.  Several  legends  are 
mentioned  about  those  whom  they  restored  to  youth,  cured  of  various 
physical  defects,  or  befriended  in  other  ways.  The  name  oftenest  mentioned 
is  that  of  Bhujyu,  whom  they  saved  from  the  ocean  in  a  ship. 

The  physical  basis  of  the  Asvins  has  been  a  puzzle  from  the  time  of  the 
earliest  interpreters  before  Yaska,  who  offered  various  explanations,  while 
modern  scholars  also  have  suggested  several  theories.  The  two  most 
probable  are  that  the  Asvins  represented  either  the  morning  twilight,  as 

1902  K 


130  ASVINS  [vii.  71,  i 

half  light  and  half  dark,  or  the  morning  and  the  evening  star.  It  is 
probable  that  the  Asvins  date  from  the  Indo-European  period.  The  two 
horsemen,  sons  of  Dyaus,  who  drive  across  the  heaven  with  their  steeds, 
and  who  have  a  sister,  are  parallel  to  the  two  famous  horsemen  of  Greek 
mythology,  sons  of  Zeus,  brothers  of  Helena ;  and  to  the  two  Lettic  God's 
sons  who  come  riding  on  their  steeds  to  woo  the  daughter  of  the  Sun.  In 
the  Lettic  myth  the  morning  star  comes  to  look  at  the  daughter  of  the  Sun. 
As  the  two  Asvins  wed  the  one  Siirya,  so  the  two  Lettic  God's  sons  wed  the 
one  daughter  of  the  Sun;  the  latter  also  (like  the  Dioskouroi  and  the 
Asvins)  are  rescuers  from  the  ocean,  delivering  the  daughter  of  the  Sun  or 
the  Sun  himself. 

« 

vii.  71.     Metre  :  Tristubh. 

f^^T  ^  ^^^^rW:  II  f^^  I  T^  I  ^J^  I  -^SfWl  I  ^^^1 II 

1  apa  svasur  Usaso  Nag  jihite :  Night  depatis  from  her  sister 

rinakti  krsnir  arusaya  pantham.  Daivn.     TJie   Hack    one  yields   a 

asvamagha,  g6inagha,  vam  hu-  path  to  the  ruddy  (sun).    0  ye  that 

vema :  are  rich  in  horses,  rich  in  coivs, 

diva  naktam  sarum  asmad  yu-  on  you  two  we  ivould  call :  hy  day 

yotam.  and   night    ivard    off  the    arrow 

from  us, 

Nak  (N.  of  nas) :  this  word  occurs  here  only,  apa  jihite  :  3.  s.  A. 
from  2.  ha.  Usasas :  abl.,  w^ith  which  svasur  agrees.  Night  and 
Dawn  are  often  called  sisters,  e.  g.  svasa  svasre  jyayasyai  yonim 
araik  the  (one)  sister  has  yielded  her  place  to  her  greater  sister  (i.  124,  8) ; 
and  their  names  are  often  joined  as  a  dual  divinity,  naktosasa. 
The  hymn  opens  thus  because  the  Asvins  are  deities  of  the  early 
dawn,  krsnis  (dec,  p.  87):  night ;  cp.  i.  113,  2,  svetya  agad  araig 
u  krsna  sadanani  asyah  the  bright  one  has  come ;  the  hlack  one  has 
yielded  her  abodes  to  her.  rinakti :  3.  s.  pr.  of  ric  leave,  arusaya : 
to  the  sun  ;  cp.  i.  113,  16,  araik  pantham  yatave  suryaya  she  has 


vii.  7],  3]  ASVINS  131 

yielded  a  path  for  the  sun  to  go.  pantham  :  on  the  dec.  see  97,  2  a. 
gomagha:  on  the  accentuation  of  this  second  voc,  see  p.  465,  18  a. 
sarum :  the  arroiv  of  death  and  disease ;  for  the  Asvins  are  charac- 
teristically healers  and  rescuers,  asmad :  p.  104.  yuyotam  :  2.  du. 
of  yu  separate,  for  yuyutam ;  cp.  2  c  and  note  on  ii.  33,  1  b. 

^:  II 

2  upayatam  dasuse  martiaya  Come  hither  to  the  aid  of  the 
rathena   vamam,  Asvina,   vah-     pious  mortal,   bringing  wealth  on 

anta.  gour  car,  0  Asvins.     Ward    off 

yuyutam    asmad   aniram   ami-  from    its    languor    and    disease  : 

vam :  day  and  night,  0  lovers  of  honey, 

diva    naktam,    madhvi,    trasi-  may  you  protect  us, 

tham  nah.  • 

upa-a-yatam :  2.  du.  ipv.  of  ya  go ;  on  the  accent  see  p.  469, 
20  A  a  a.  madhvi :  an  epithet  peculiar  to  the  Asvins.  trasitham  : 
2.  du.  A.  s  ao.  op.  of  tra  protect  (143,  4) ;  irregularly  accented  as  if 
beginning  a  new  sentence. 

^  ^  ^T  -^iT^^^  ^^  W  I  ^^  I  T^»l  I  ^^^^TJl  I   f% 

g^^^  ^^ifr  ^^^  I  ^^^  I 

^^itN^t  ^g^5?T  ^^rm:  ii         ^^i'wf^  i  ^^g^vSf^r:  i  ^W:  i 

^  I  ^^f  T  I  ^^vJ^'tw:  I  ^1^T«^  II 

3  a  vam  ratham  avamasyam  viu-         Let  your  kindly  stallions  whirl 

stau  hither  your  car  at  (this)  latest  day- 

sumnayavo  vrsano  vartayantu.      hreaJc,     Do  ye,  0  ASvins,  bring  it 

K  2 


132  ASVINS  [vii.  71,  3 

syumagabhastim  rtayiigbhir  as-     that  is  drawn  with  thongs  ivith  your 
vair,  horses  yoJced  in  due  time,  hither, 

a,Asvina,vasumantamvahetham.  laden  tvith  tvealth. 

avamasyam  :  prn.  adj.  (120  c  1).  sumnayavas  :  the  vowel  is 
metrically  lengthened  in  the  second  syllable,  but,  when  this  word 
occupies  another  position  in  the  Pada,  the  short  vowel  remains. 

^^  ^^f  f%^^^  f^'iifff  II     w  I  ^:  I  ^^  I  ^WWT I  ^4 1  T(Tr{i^  I 

^f»T  I  ^n^  I  ^^  I  f%^vJR5?i:  I  f^- 

TTfTf  II 

4  yo     vam    ratho,     nrpati,    asti  The  car,  0  lords  of  men,  that  is 

volha,  your  vehicle,  three-seated,  filled  tvith 

trivandhuro     vasumam     usra-  r khes,  faring  at  dayhrealc,  with  that 

yama,  come   hither  to  us,  Nasatyas,   in 

a  na  ena,  Nasatya,  upa  yatam,  order  that,  laden  with  all  food,  for 

abhi  yad  vam  visvapsnio  jigati.  you  it  may  approach  us. 

trivandhuras  :  accent,  p.  455  c  a.  vasuman  :  Sand  hi,  39.  a 
lipa  yatam :  p.  468,  20  a  ;  cp.  note  on  upayatam  in  2  a.  ena  : 
p.  108.  yad :  p.  357.  vam :  ethical  dat.  visvapsnyas :  the 
meaning  of  this  word  being  doubtful,  the  sense  of  the  whole  Pada 
remains  uncertain,  jigati  3.  s.  sb.  of  ga  go,  indistinguishable  from 
the  ind. 

M  g^  ^^i^  ^wti^^  ^^K I  '^Rt^'l  I  ^T^:  I  ^gw^  I 

f^  q^  ^f ^T^'T^^  I  fif  I  "^^  I  ^1^:  I  'W^n.  I  i^r^i  i 

t^t^^^4^:  w^^Vi  f^:  I  ^t^:  i  <T^^:  i  ^ii  i  ^N^  i 

f^  ^TF^  T^t:  w^:  11      f^  I  ^1^5*^  I  f^f^  I  MT<T^  I  ^- 

r^m  II 


vii.  71,  6] 


ASVINS 


133 


5  yuvam  Cyavanam  jaraso  'mu-         Ye  two  released  Cyavdna  from 

muktam,  old  age,  ye  hroiiglit  a  stvift  Jiorse 

ni    Pedava  uhathur   asiim   as-     to  Pedu ;    ye  rescued   Atri  from 

vam;  distress  and  darkness;  ye  placed 

nir  amhasas   tamasah.  spartam    Jdliusa  in  freedom, 

Atrim, 
ni     Jahusam     sithird     dhatam 

autah. 

yuvam  :  note  that  this  is  the  nom.,  yuvam  being  the  ace. :  p.  105. 
Cyavana  is  several  times  mentioned  as  having  been  rejuvenated 
by  the  Asvins.  jarasas :  abl.  (p.  316  h).  amumuktam  :  ppf.  of 
muc  (140,  6,  p.  158).  ni  uhathur :  2.  du.  pf.  of  vah.  Pedave : 
Pedu  is  several  times  mentioned  as  having  received  a  swift,  white, 
serpent-killing  steed  from  the  Asvins.  nih  spartam :  2.  du.  root 
ao.  of  spr  (cp.  148,  1  a).  The  ao.  in  c  and  d  is  irregularly  used  in 
a  narrative  sense,  ni  dhatam  :  2.  du.  root  ao.  of  dha.  In  i.  116,  20 
it  is  said  of  the  Asvins  :  *  ye  carried  away  at  night  Jahusa  who  was 
encompassed  on  all  sides '. 


T^iT^  I  ^jft^  I  "^^  I  ^f^'iT  I  ^:  I 
^v\  I  giffim:  i  f^wr  i  ^^^^r^i 

T^T  I  W^tftF  I  ^^i^f^  I  ^^1 

^5fl^  I  ^T^  I  ^f^vjf^:  I  ^  I  't:  II 


6  iyam  manisa,  iyam,  Asvina,  gir. 
imam   suvrktim,   vrsana,  juse- 

tham. 
ima  brahmani  yuvayuni  agman. 
yuyam    pata    suastibhih    sada 
nah. 


This  is  my  thought,  this,  0 
Asvins,  my  song.  Accept  gladly 
this  song  of  praise,  ye  mighty  ones. 
These  prayers  have  gone  addressed 
to  you.  Do  ye  protect  us  evermore 
ivith  blessings. 


manisa :  this  is  one  of  the  four  passages  in  which  the  nom.  of  the 
der.  a  dec.  does  not  contract  with  a  following  vowel  in  the  Samhita 
text,  here  owing  to  its  preceding  the  caesura  (cp.  note  on  v.  11,  5  b). 


134  A^VINS  [vii.  71,  6 

gir:  82.  agman :  3.  pi.  root  ao.  of  gam  (148,  1  c).  This  stanza 
is  a  repetition  of  the  last  stanza  of  the  preceding  hymn  (vii.  70), 
which  also  is  addressed  to  the  Asvins.     On  d  see  note  on  vii.  61,  6. 


VARUNA 

Beside  Indra  (ii.  12)  Varuna  is  the  greatest  of  the  gods  of  the  RV., 
though  the  number  of  the  hymns  in  which  he  is  celebrated  alone  (apart 
fiom  Mitra)  is  small,  numbering  hardly  a  dozeia. 

His  face,  eye,  arms,  hands,  and  feet  are  mentioned.  He  moves  his  arms, 
walks,  drives,  sits,  eats,  and  drinks.  His  eye  with  which  he  observes 
mankind  is  the  sun.  He  is  far-sighted  and  thousand-eyed.  He  treads 
down  wiles  with  shining  foot.  He  sits  on  the  strewn  grass  at  the  sacrifice. 
He  wears  a  golden  mantle  and  puts  on  a  shining  robe.  His  car,  which  is 
often  mentioned,  shines  like  the  sun,  and  is  drawn  by  well-yoked  steeds. 
Varuna  sits  in  his  mansions  looking  on  all  deeds.  The  Fathers  behold 
him  in  the  highest  heaven.  The  spies  of  Varuna  are  sometimes  referred 
to  :  they  sit  down  around  him  ;  they  observe  the  two  worlds  ;  they  stimulate 
prayer.  By  the  golden-winged  messenger  of  Varuna  the  sun  is  meant. 
Varuna  is  often  called  a  king,  but  especially  a  universal  monarch  (samraj). 
The  attribute  of  sovereignty  (ksatra)  and  the  term  asura  are  predomi- 
nantly applicable  to  him.  His  divine  dominion  is  often  alluded  to  by  the 
word  maya  occult  potver-,  the  epithet  mayin  crafty  is  accordingly  used 
chiefly  of  him. 

Varuna  is  mainly  lauded  as  upholder  of  physical  and  moral  order.  He 
is  a  great  lord  of  the  laws  of  nature.  He  established  heaven  and  earth, 
and  by  his  law  heaven  and  earth  are  held  apart.  He  made  the  golden 
swing  (the  sun)  to  shine  in  heaven ;  he  has  made  a  wide  path  for  the  sun  ; 
he  placed  fire  in  the  waters,  the  sun  in  the  sky,  Soma  on  the  rock.  The 
wind  which  resounds  through  the  air  is  Varuna's  breath.  By  his  ordinances 
the  moon  shining  brightly  moves  at  night,  and  the  stars  placed  up  on  high  are 
seen  at  night,  but  disappear  by  day.  Thus  Varuna  is  lord  of  light  both  by 
day  and  by  night.  He  is  also  a  regulator  of  the  waters.  He- caused  the 
rivers  to  flow  ;  by  his  occult  power  they  pour  swiftly  into  the  ocean  without 
filling  it.  It  is,  however,  with  the  aerial  waters  that  he  is  usually  connected. 
Thus  he  makes  the  inverted  cask  (the  cloud)  to  pour  its  waters  on  heaven, 
earth,  and  air,  and  to  moisten  the  ground. 

Varuna's  ordinances  being  constantly  said  to  be  fixed,  he  is  pre-eminently 
called  dhrtavrata  tvliose  laws  are  established.  The  gods  themselves  follow 
his  ordinances.  His  power  is  so  great  that  neither  the  birds  as  they  fly  nor 
the  rivers  as  they  flow  can  reach  the  limits  of  his  dominion.     He  embraces 


vii.  86,  1]  VARUNA  135 

the  universe,  and  the  abodes  of  all  beings.  He  is  all-knowing,  and  his 
omniscience  is  typical.  He  knows  the  flight  of  the  birds  in  the  sky,  the 
path  of  the  ships  in  the  ocean,  the  course  of  the  far-travelling  wind, 
beholding  all  the  secret  things  that  have  been  or  shall  be  done,  he  wit- 
nesses men's  truth  and  falsehood.  No  creature  can  even  wink  without  his 
knowledge. 

As  a  moiul  governor  Varuna  stands  far  above  any  other  deity.  His  wrath 
is  aroused  by  sin,  the  infringement  of  his  ordinances,  which  he  severely 
punishes.  The  fetters  (pasas)  with  which  he  binds  sinners  are  often  men- 
tioned, and  are  characteristic  of  him.  On  the  other  hand,  Varuna  is 
gracious  to  the  penitent.  He  removes  sin  as  if  untying  a  rope.  He  releases 
even  from  the  sin  committed  by  men's  fathers.  He  spares  him  who  daily 
transgresses  his  laws  when  a  suppliant,  and  is  gracious  to  those  who  have 
broken  his  laws  by  thoughtlessness.  There  is  in  fact  no  hymn  to  Varuna 
in  which  the  prayer  for  forgiveness  of  guilt  does  not  occur.  Varuna  is  on 
a  footing  of  friendship  with  his  worshipper,  who  communes  with  him  in  his 
celestial  abode,  and  sometimes  sees  him  with  the  mental  eye.  The  righteous 
hope  to  behold  in  the  next  world  Varuna  and  Yama,  the  two  kings  who 
reign  in  bliss. 

The  original  conception  of  Varuna  seems  to  have  been  the  encompassing 
sky.  It  has,  however,  become  obscured,  because  it  dates  from  an  earlier 
a^-e.  For  it  goes  back  to  the  Indo-Iranian  period  at  least,  since  the  Ahura 
Mazda  (the  wise  spirit)  of  the  Avesta  agrees  with  the  Asura  Varuna  in 
character,  though  not  in  name.  It  may  even  be  older  still;  for  the  name 
Varuna  is  perhaps  identical  with  the  Greek  ovpavos  sky.  In  any  case,  the 
word  appears  to  be  derived  from  the  root  vr  cover  or  encompass. 

vii.  86.     Metre :  Tristubh. 

1  dhira  tii  asya  mahina  janumsi,  Intelligent  indeed  are  the  genera- 

vi    yas    tastambha    r6dasi   cid     tions  hg  the  might  of  him  who  has 

urvi,  propped  asunder  even  the  two  wide 


136  VARUNA  [vii.  86,  l 

pra  nakam  rsvam  nunude  brh-  worlds.     He  has  pmhed  atvay  the 

dntam,  hig\  lofty  firmament  and  the  day- 

dvita  naksatram ;  paprathac  ca  star  as  well;   and  he  sjyread  out 

bhuma.  the  earth. 

dhira :  cp.  7  c,  acetayad  acitah ;  and  vii.  60,  6,  acetasam  cic 
citayanti  daksaih  they  ivith  their  sJcill  maize  even  tho  unthinVing  think. 
asya  =  Varunasya.  mahina  —  mahimna  (see  90,  2,  p.  69).  Varuna 
(as  well  as  other  gods)  is  several  times  said  to  hold  apart  heaven  and 
earth  (e.  g.  vi.  70,  1),  which  were  supposed  to  have  originally  been 
united,  pra  nunude :  pushed  away  from  the  earth  ;  cp.  vii.  99,  2 
of  Visnu  :  ud  astabhna  nakam  rsvam  brhantam  tJiou  didst  prop  up 
the  high  lofty  firmament,  nakam  :  means  the  vault  of  heaven  ;  there 
is  nothing  te  show  that  it  ever  has  the  sense  of  sun  which  Sayana 
gives  it  here.  Sayana  also  makes  the  verb  nunude,  though  unaccented, 
depend  on  the  relative  in  b  ;  c  is,  however,  equivalent  to  a  relative 
clause  (cp.  ii.  12,  5  b.  8  d).  naksatram :  in  the  sing,  this  word 
regularly  refers  to  the  sun,  in  the  pi.  to  the  stars.  Yaruna  and  other 
gods  are  often  said  to  have  raised  the  sun  to,  or  to  have  placed  it 
in,  heaven,  dvita:  doubly  to  be  taken  with  nunude;  that  is,  he 
raised  up  from  the  earth  both  the  vault  of  heaven  and  the  sun. 
paprathat :  ppf  of  prath  (140,  6) ;  accented  because  it  begins  a 
new  sentence.  bhuma :  note  the  difference  between  bhuman  n. 
earth  and  bhuman  m.  multitude  (p.  259). 

2  uta  svaya  taniia  sam  vade  tat :  And  I  converse  thus  tvith  myself: 

kada    nu    antar   Varune    bhu-  ^  when,  pray,  shall  I  he  in  com- 

vani  ?  miinion  tvith  Varuna  ?   What  ohla- 

kimmehavyamahrnanojuseta?  tion  of  mine  tvould  he,  free  from 

kada    mrlikam     sumana    abhi  tvrath,  enjoy?     When  shall  I,  of 

khyam  ?  good  cheer,  perceive  his  mercy  ? ' 


Vll. 


M] 


VAKUNA 


137 


svaya  tanva :  ivltli  my  own  tody  =  ivitli  myself  (cp.  p.  450,  2  V). 
nv  an  tar ;  loc.  ciL  Note  that  when  a  final  original  r  appears  in  the 
Samhita  text,  it  is  represented  by  Visarjanlya  only  in  the  Pada  text ; 
on  the  other  hand,  antah  in  vii.  71,  5  appears  as  antar  iti ;  tvithin 
Varuna  =  united  tvith  Varum,  bhuvani :  1.  s.  sb.  root  ao.  of  bhu  he. 
khyam :  1.  s.  inj.  a  ao.  of  khya. 


—  —  ^^ 


^  I  ^fl  I  H^:  I  ^^  I  f^f  1 1 
^^"^  Tf^  1 5[f^  I  f^g^:  I  f^i^iN:i 
^^T'T^iT^i^i  ^^^:  I  f^fi^i  ^¥:  I 
"^K I  f  I  g«il  I  ^t^»  1 1^^  H 


3  prch6    tad    6no,    Varuna,    di- 

drksu  ; 
lipo  emi  cikitiiso  viprcham  ; 
samanam    in  me  kavayas   cid 

ahur : 
ayam  ha  tiibhyam  Varuno  hr- 

nite. 


/  asJc  about  that  sin,  0  Varuna, 
tvith  a  desire  to  find  out ;  I  ap- 
proach the  ivise  in  order  to  asJc ; 
the  sages  say  one  and  the  same 
thing  to  me  :  '  this  Varuna  is  tvrotli 
tvith  thee.' 


prch^ :  1.  s.  pr.  ind.  A.  of  prach  asTc.  didfksu  is  a  difficulty : 
it  has  been  explained  as  L.  pi.  of  a  supposed  word  didrs,  a  very 
improbable  formation  =  among  those  who  see  ;  also  as  N.  s.  of  a  ds. 
adj.  didrksu,  with  wrong  accent  (p.  461/)  and  wrong  Sandhi,  for 
didrksur  (lipo)  =  desirous  of  seeing  (i.  e.  finding  out).  It  is  probably 
best,  following  the  Padapatha,  to  take  the  word  as  n.  of  the  ds.  adj. 
used  adverbially  (with  adv.  shift  of  accent)  =  with  a  desire  to  see,  i.  e, 
find  out.  lipo  =  lipa  u  (24).  cikitusas  :  A.  pi.  of  the  pf.  pt.  of  cit 
perceive,  vi-prcham  ace.  inf.  (167,  2  a),  hrnite :  3.  s.  pr.  A.  of  hr 
1)6  angry ;  w.  dat.  (200  I). 


138  VARUNA  [vii.  86,  i 

T^T^l  II 


4  kiin  aga  asa,  Varuna,  jyistham 
yat  stotaram  jighamsasi  sakha- 

yam? 
pra  tan  me  voco,  dulabha  sva- 

dhavo : 
ava  tvanena  namasa  tura^iyam. 


What  has  been  that  chief  sin, 
0  Varuna,  that  thou  desirest  to 
slay  thy  praiser,  a  friend  ?  Pro- 
claim that  to  me,  thou  that  art  hard 
to  deceive,  self-dependent  one  :  thee 
woidd  I,  free  front  sin,  eagerly 
appease  tvith  adoration. 


jydstham  =  jyaistham,  lo  be  pronounced  as  a  trisyllable  (15,  1/). 
yat :  that  as  a  cj.  (p.  242).  jighamsasi :  ds.  of  ban  slay,  pra  voeas  : 
inj.  ao.  of  vac  say.  dulabha :  49  c.  tura^iyam  =  turah  iyam  (op. 
of  i  go),  to  be  pronounced,  with  irr.  secondary  contraction  (cp.  22  a  : 
48  a),  as  tur^yam.     ava  to  be  taken  with  iyam  (cp.  5  a-c). 


^^  -m  -^  ^gfTTT  ^ffn:  I 
^^T  ^m  ^  ^^  ^M^  II 


Q-  -  -    — 

^^  I  ^T I  ^^'l  I  ^^'T I  ^^:  I 

^^  I  TT^I  I  ^ig^l  I  ^  I  ^I^ 

^5r  I  ^f^fl  I  ^  I  ^T^:  I  ^fii^  II 


5  ava  drugdhani  pitria  srja  no, 

J.  —  — 

ava   ya    vayam    cakrma   tanu- 

bhih. 

ava,    raj  an,   pasutrpam    na   ta- 

srja,  vatsam  na  dam^no,  Vasi- 
stham. 


5^6^  us  free  from  the  misdeeds 
of  our  fathers,  from  those  that  ive 
have  committed  hy  ourselves.  Tte- 
lease  Vasistha,  0  King,  like  a 
cattle-stealing  thief  lilce  a  calf  from 
a  rope. 


ava  srja  (metrically  lengthened  final,  also  in  d):  note  the  different 
construction  in  a:  ace.  of  object  and  dat.  of  prs.;  and  in  c  d:  ace.  of 
prs.  and  abl.  of  that  from  which  V.  is  set  free,     drugdhani :  pp. 


vii.  86, 6]  VARUNA  139 

of  druh.  cakrma :  metrical  lengthening  of  final  vowel,  tanubhis: 
in  the  sense  of  a  ref.  prn.  ava  srja :  i.  e.  from  sin.  tayum :  as 
one  releases  (after  he  has  expiated  his  crime)  a  thief  who  has  been 
bound ;  cp.  viii.  67,  14 :  t6  na,  Adityaso,  mumocata  stenam 
baddham  iva  as  such  set  us  free,  0  Adityas,  like  a  thief  who  is  hound. 
damnas :  distinguish  daman  n.  bond  and  daman  n.  act  of  giving 
from  daman  m.  giver  and  gift. 

§  'T  ^  ^  ^^  ^^W  wf^:  ^T      f  I  ^:  I  ^:  I  ^:  I  ^^w  I  ^Ri:  i  ^T  i 
^i^^^^H^  3T^m  11  ^^:  I  ^'f  I  T^  t  ^^?!^  I  i5[.j^fiT  II 

6  na  sa  sv6  dakso,  Varuna,  dhrii-  It  tvas  not  my  own  intent,  0 

tih  sa :  Varuna,  it  zvas  seduction :  liquor. 

siira  manyur  vibhidako  acittih;  anger,    dice,    thoughtlessness;   the 

asti  jyayan  kaniyasa  upar6  ;  elder  is  in  the  offence  of  the  younger; 

svapnas    can6d    anrtasya   pra-  not  even  sleep  is  the  icarder  off  of 

yota.  wrong. 

The  general  meaning  of  this  stanza  is  clear :  the  sin  with  which 
Varuna  is  angry  has  not  been  due  to  Vasistha's  intention,  but  to 
seduction  of  one  kind  or  another.  The  exact  sense  of  three  impor- 
tant words  is,  however,  somewhat  doubtful,  because  none  of  them 
occurs  in  any  other  passage.  It  can  therefore  be  made  out  from  the 
etymology  and  the  context  only,  dhriitis  :  from  the  root  dhru  = 
dhvr  (cp.  167  h,  9  ;  171,  2),  which  occurs  at  the  end  of  one  or  two 
cds.,  as  Varuna-dhrii-t  deceiving  Varuna ;  cp.  also  v.  12,  5 :  adhur- 
sata  svayam  et6  vacobhir  rjuyate  vrjinani  bruvantah  these  have 
deceived  themselves  tvith  their  own  words,  uttering  crooked  things  to  the 
sfraightfonvard  man.  Thus  the  meaning  of  dhriiti  appears  to  be 
deception,  seduction.  The  meaning  of  c  depends  on  the  interpretation 
of  upar6.  This  word  is  naturally  to  be  derived  (in  accordance  with 
the  analysis  of  the  Pada  text)  from  upa  +  ara  (r  go).  The  cd.  vb. 
lipa  r  occurs  two  or  three  times,  e.  g.  AY.  vii.  106,  1 :  yad  asmrti 
cakrma  kim  cid,  uparima  carane  if  through  forgetfulness  we  have 


uo 


VARUNA 


[vii.  86,  6 


done  anyililng,  have  offended  in  our  conduct.  The  sense  of  the  noun 
would  therefore  be  offence,  the  whole  Pada  meaning :  the  elder  is  (in- 
volved) in  the  (=  is  the  cause  of  the)  offence  of  the  younger,  that  is,  an 
elder  has  led  me,  the  younger,  astray.  The  use  of  the  loc.  here  is 
illustrated  by  vi.  71,  2:  ydh  .  .  .  prasav6  .  .  .  asi  bhumanah  who 
(Savitr)  art  in  the  stimulation  of  the  world,  i.  e.  art  the  cause  of  the 
stimidation  of  the  world,  prayota :  this  word  might  be  derived  from 
pra  +  yu  join  or  pra  +  yu  separate  ;  the  latter  occurs  in  the  RV.  in 
the  sense  of  drive  aivay,  while  the  former  does  not  occur  in  the  RV., 
and  later  means  stir,  mingle.  The  probability  is  therefore  in  favour 
of  the  sense  tvarder  off.  cand  then  would  have  the  original  sense  of 
not  even  (pp.  229-30).     svapnas  :  i.  e.  by  producing  evil  dreams. 


-J 


7  dram,  das6  na,  milhuse  karani 
aham  devaya  bhurnaye  anagah. 
acetayad  acito  dev6  aryo  ; 
grtsam  ray6  kavitaro  junati. 


I  will,  like  a  slave,  do  service 
sinless  to  the  bounteous  angry  god. 
The  noble  god  made  the  thoughtless 
think;  he,  the  tviser,  speeds  the 
experienced  man  to  ivealtli. 

milhuse :  dat.  s.  of  midhvams.  karani :  1.  s.  sb.  root  ao.  of  kr 
do  ',  to  be  taken  with  the  adv.  dram  (p.  313,  4).  dcetayat :  see  cit. 
grtsam :  even  the  thoughtful  man  Varuna  with  his  greater  wisdom 
urges  on.  ray^ :  final  dat.  (of  rdi),  p.  314,  2.  junati :  3.  s.  pr.  of 
ju  speed. 


^  ^:  ^  Tig  ^"^  ^  "^ 


^Pl  I  ^:  I  %^  iiR  I  ^  Tf^  I  "^  I 


vii.  103,  l] 


MANDUKAS 


141 


8  ayam  sii  tiibhyam,  Varuna  sva- 

dhavo, 
hrdi  stoma  lipasritas  cid  astu. 
sam  nah  ks6me,  sam  u  yoge  n6 

astu. 


Let  this  praise  he  well  inij)ressed 
on  thy  hearty  0  self-dependent 
Vai'una.  Let  us  have  prosperity 
in  possession,  prosperity  also  in 
acquisition.    Bo  ye  protect  us  ever- 


yuyam  pata  suastibhihsada  nah.     more  with  Nessings. 

tiibhyam:  dat.  of  advantage  (p.  314,  B  1).     astu  nah:   p.  320/. 
On  d  see  note  on  vii.  61,  6. 


MANDUKAS 

The  following  liymn,  intended  as  a  spell  to  produce  rain,  is  a  panegyric 
of  frogs,  who  are  compared  during  the  drought  to  heated  kettles,  and  are 
described  as  raising  their  voices  together  at  the  commencement  of  the  rains 
like  Brahmin  pupils  repeating  the  lessons  of  their  teacher. 

vii.  103.     Metre:  Tristubh;  1.  Anustubh. 


1  samvatsaram  sasayana 
brahmana  vratacarinah, 

•  •  •    7 

vacam  Parjanyajinvitam 
pra  mandiika  avadisuh. 


TJie  frogs  having  lain  for  a  year. 
like  Brdhmans  practising  a  voiv, 
have  uttered  forth  their  voice  roused 
by  Parjanya. 


samvatsaram  :  ace.  of  duration  of  time  (197,  2).  sasayanas  :  pf. 
pt.  A.  of  si  lie  (p.  155,  f.  n.  1).  brahmanas :  i.  e.  like  Brahmins, 
vratacarinas  :  i.  e.  practising  a  vow  of  silence.  Parjanya-jinvitam  : 
because  the  frogs  begin  to  croak  at  the  commencement  of  the  rain}'- 
season ;  on  the  accent  see  p.  456,  2  a.  avadisur  :  is  ao.  of  vad 
(145,  1). 


142  MANDUKAS  [vii.  103,  2 

'TTT'l.l  ^  I  'Tl  m^:  I  ^f^^ini:  I 
Tns^5fiT'fTi  I  ^^:  I  ^  I  ^'i:  mft  II 

2  divya  apo  abhi  yad  enam  ay  an,         When  the  heavenly  waters  came 
drtim  na  suskam,  sarasi  saya-     upon  him  lying  like  a  dry  leather- 

nam,  hag  in  a  lake,  then  the  sound  of  the 

gavam  aha  na  mayiir  vatsini-    frogs  unites  like  the  lotving  of  coivs 

nam,  accompanied  hy  calves. 

mandukanam  vagnur  atra  sam 

eti. 

divya  apah:  the  rains,  enam:  collective  =  the  frogs;  cp.  the 
sing,  mandukah  in  4  c  used  collectively,  ayan  :  ipf.  of  i  (p.  130). 
sarasi:  loc.  of  sarasi  according  to  the  primary  idee.  (cp.  p.  87).  A  dried- 
up  lake  is  doubtless  meant,  gavam:  102,  2;  p.  458,  c.  1.  atra 
(metrically  lengthened):  here  as  corr.  to  yad  (cp.  p.  214). 

^  ^0%^T  ^cfr  ^«r^^ri:  ^ci;  I   t?^  I   ipiljl  I   ^^^*   I  ^f^  I 

^«Tt  ^^^  ^ifi%f?r  II  ^^^^  I  fMdW  I  ^  I H^:  I 

^^:  I  -^^^^^  I  ^  I  ^^'fm:  I  ^f^  II 

3  yad  im  enam  usat6  abhy  avar-         When  he  has  rained  upon  them 

sit  the   eager,    the  thirsty,   the  rainy 

trsyavatah,  pravrsi  agatayam,  season  having  come,    one  ivith   a 

akhkhalikrtya,  pitaram  na  pu-  croak  of  joy  approaches  the  other 

tr6,  ivhile    he   speaks,   as  a   son  (ap- 

any6  anyam  lipa  vadantam  eti.  preaches)  his  father. 


vii.  103,  5] 


MANDUKAS 


143 


im  :  see  p.  220,  2.  usatas  (pr.  pt.  A.  pi.  of  vas  desire) :  longing  for 
rain,  avarsit :  is  ao.  of  vrs  :  if  the  subject  were  expressed  it  would 
be  Parjanya.  pravrsi :  loc.  abs.  (see  205,  1  h).  akhkhalikrtya :  see 
184  d ;  the  final  of  this  gd.  may  be  regarded  as  retaining  the  original 
long  vowel  rather  than  metrically  lengthening  a  short  vowel,  though 
it  always  appears  with  a  in  the  Pada  text,    anyas  :  i.  e.  mandukas. 


8  ^^  ^5?mg  53>-TTrT^^^ 


^^■m:  I  m^  I  '^<l  i  ^jfT^^^Tfrm:  i 
'nsf^:  I  wi  I  ^?rf>T^#:  i  ^fwi^i 
gf^:  I  ^^?%  I  f  ft^  I  ^T^l  II 


4  anyo  anyam  anu  grbhnati  enor,  One  of  the  Uvo  greets  the  other 

apam  prasarg^  yad  amandisa-  tvhen  they  have  revelled  in  the  dis- 

tam.  charge  of  the  tvaters.     When  the 

manduko  yad  abhivrstah  kan-  frog,  rained  upon,  leaps  ahout,  the 

iskan,  speckled  one  mingles  his  voice  with 

prsnih  samprnkt^  haritena  va-  (that  of)  the  yellow  one. 

cam. 

enos  :  gen.  du.,  of  them  two  (112  a).  grbhnati:  3.  s.  pr.  of  grabh. 
amandisatam  :  3.  du.  A.  is  ao.  of  mand  exhilarate,  mandukas  :  in 
a  collective  sense,  kaniskau :  3.  s.  inj.  int.  of  skand  leai)  {=  Is-sl- 
niskandt),  see  174  h.  Note  that  this  form  in  the  Pada  text  is 
kaniskan,  because  in  the  later  Sandhi  s  is  not  cerebralized  before  k 
(cp.  67).  The  use  of  the  inj.  with  yad  is  rare.  sam-prnkt6  :  3.  s.  A. 
pr.  of  pre  mix. 


^  I  ^pi  I  ^^:  I  ^^R^  I  wr^^^\ 
TTW^^T^  I  ^^f?f  I  fn^^w:  I 
^^^^  I  ^<i  I  5^T^  I  ^^TiT^  I  ^^  I 
'^^\  gi^"N:  I  ^^^^  I  ^f^  I  ^R.ig  II 


5  yad  esam  anyo  aniasya  vacam,  WJien  one  of  them  repeats  the 

saktasyeva  vadati  siksamanah,      sj)eech  of  the  other,  as  the  learner 


Ui  MANDUKAS  [vii.  103,  5 

sarvam    tad    esam    samrdheva     that  of  Jiis  teacher,  all  that  of  them 

parva  is  in  unison  liJce    a  lesson  that 

yat  suvaco  vadathanadhi  apsii.      eloquent  ye  repeat  upmi  the  tvatcrs. 

esam  :  cp.  enos  in  4  a.  samrdha :  the  interpretation  of  c  is 
uncertain  because  of  the  doubt  as  to  the  form  and  meaning  of  this 
word,  and  because  of  the  many  senses  of  parva.  It  has  accordingly 
been  very  variously  explained.  The  above  rendering  is  perhaps  the 
most  probable,  samrdha  :  inst.  of  samrdh,  lit.  growing  together,  then 
unison,  harmony,  parvan,  joint,  then  a  section  in  Vedic  recitation. 
Thus  c  would  be  an  explanation  of  b,  the  voices  of  the  frogs  sounding 
together  like  those  of  pupils  reciting  a  lesson  after  their  teacher. 
vadathana :  see  p.  125,  f.  n.  3  ;  change,  as  often,  from  3.  prs.  to  2. 
adhi :  176,  2  a  (p.  209). 

H^TT  m^'  ftft^^:  II  H^^"^"^  •  ^f'^'l  I  fqft^:  I  ^'tt:  ii 

6  gomayur  6ko,  ajamayur  6kah ;  One  loivs  like  a  coiv,  one  bleats 

prsnir  6ko ;  harita  6ka  esam.  lUce  a  goat ;  one  is  speckled,  one  of 

samanam    nama    bibhrato    vi-  them  is  yellow.    Bearing  a  common 

rupah.  name,  they  have  different  colours. 

purutra    vacam    pipisur    vad-  In  many  tvays   they  adorn   their 

antah.  voice  in  speaking. 

g6mayus  :  cp.  2  c.  prsnis,  haritas :  cp.  4  d.  samanam  :  they 
are  all  called  frogs,  though  they  have  different  voices  and  colours, 
bibhratas  :  N.  pi.  pr.  pt.  of  bhr  (p.  132).  purutra :  note  that  the 
suffix  in  words  in  which  the  vowel  is  always  long  in  the  Samhita  text 
(as  in  devatra,  asmatra,  &c.)  is  long  in  the  Pada  text  also  ;  while  in 
others  like  atra,in  which  it  is  only  occasionally  lengthened  metrically, 
the  vowel  is  always  short  in  that  text,  pipisur  :  they  modulate  the 
sound  of  their  voices  (cp.  a). 


vii.  103,  8]  MANDUKAS  145 

^^xs^^t:  iTTf fl"!^  ^^5  II         ^ri:  I  'Tx?!;^!:  i  inf ^'^  i  ^3J5  ii 

7  brahmanaso  atiratre  na  soma,  Like  Brahmins  at  the  over-night 
saro  na  purnam    abhito,   vad-     Soma  sacrifice  speaking  around  as 

antah,  it  were  a  full  lahe,  ye  celebrate  that 

samvatsarasya   tad    ahah   pari     day  of  the  year  ivhich,  0  Frogs,  has 

stha,  begun  the  rains. 

yan,  mandukah,  pravrsinam  ba- 

bhuva. 

atiratrd :  this  is  the  name  of  a  part  of  the  Soma  sacrifice  in  the 
ritual  of  the  Yajurveda.  Its  performance  lasted  a  day  and  the  fol- 
lowing night.  Its  mention  in  the  RV.  shows  that  it  is  ancient. 
saro  na  :  as  it  were  a  lake,  a  hyperbolic  expression  for  a  large  vessel 
filled  with  Soma,  abhitas :  177,  1.  pari  stha :  lit.  be  around,  then 
celebrate ;  cp.  pari  car  go  round,  then  attend  upon,  honour ;  on  the 
Sandhi,  cp.  67  c.  pravrsinam  babhilva:  has  become  one  that  belongs 
to  the  rainy  season. 

c  WT^W:  iMw^  ^T^^^^      ^T^WT^:  i  ^f^^:  i  mM^  i  ^f  ^  i 
^  ^w^:  irflc|(MOwi  I       WW  I  ^^'Tf :  I  ^fTW<Wl  I 

^fw^^f^  girr  ^ %  f^c^^  ii      wfw:  i  Hwf^  i  gui:  i  ^ i%  i  f^c^w 

8  brahmanasah.     somino     vacam         Soma-pressing    Brahmins,    they 

akrata,  have   raised    their   voice,  offering 

brahma    krnvantah    parivatsa-  their  yearly   prayer.      Adhvaryu 

rinam.  priests,     heated,     siceating,     they 

adhvaryavo  gharminah  sisvid-  appear;  none  of  them  are  hidden. 

ana, 
avir  bhavanti ;  giihia  na  k6  cit. 

1902  L 


146  JVIANDUKAS  [vii.  103,  8 

brahmanasas  :  na  need  not  be  supplied  (as  in  1  b),  the  frogs  being 
identified  with  priests,  somiuas  :  celebrating  a  Soma  sacrifice,  Avhich 
expresses  much  the  same  as  saro  na  ptirnam  abhitah  in  7  b. 
vacam  akrata :  cp.  vadantas  in  7  b.  akrata :  3.  pi.  A.  root  ao.  of 
kr  (148,  1  b).  brahma  :  with  b  cp.  7  c,  d.  gharminas  is  meant  to 
be  ambiguous  :  oppressed  with  the  heat  of  the  sun  (frogs),  timed 
with  hot  milk  (priests).  Here  we  already  have  a  reference  to  the 
Pravargya  ceremony  in  which  milk  was  heated  in  a  pot,  and  which 
was  familiar  in  the  ritual  of  the  Brahmanas.  sisvidanas  :  pf.  pt.  A. 
of  svid ;  note  that  the  cerebralized  initial  of  the  root  is  restored  in 
the  Pada  text ;  cp.  kaniskan  in  4  c.     avis  :  see  p.  266,  h. 

^HT  ^HT  ^^^  f^^?l  II        ^^t:  I  ^^t:  I  ^^%  I  f^^€^^  II 

9  devahitim  jugupur  dvadasasya  :  Thep  have  guarded   the   divine 

rtiim  naro  na  pra  minanti  et6.  order  of  the   ttcelvemonth :    these 

samvatsar^,  pravrsi  agatayam,  men  infringe  not  the  season.     In  a 

tapta   gharma   asnuvate   visar-  year,  the  rain  time  having  come,  the 

gam.  heated  milJc-offerings  obtain  release. 

devahitim  :  on  the  accent  see  p.  456,  2  a.  jugupur :  pf.  of  gup 
protect,  dvadasasya :  note  the  difference  of  accent  and  inflexion 
between  dvadasa  twelve  (104)  and  dvadasa  consisting  oftivelve,  twelfth 
(107) ;  supply  samvatsarasya  from  c.  In  the  Aitareya  Brahmana 
the  year,  samvatsara,  is  called  dvadasa  consisting  of  twelve  months 
and  caturvimsa  consisting  of  ttventy-four  half-months.  The  gen. 
naturally  depends  on  devahitim,  as  being  in  the  same  Pada.  Prof. 
Jacobi  understands  dvadasasya  as  the  ordinal  twelfth  supplying 
masasya  month,  and  making  it  depend  on  rtum  in  the  next  Pada. 
This  interpretation  is  then  used  as  evidence  to  show  that  the 
beginning  of  the  year  was  held  in  the  period  of  the  KV.  to  com- 
mence with  the  rainy  season  at  the  time  of  the  summer  solstice,  and 
taken  in  conjunction  with  another  reference  in  the  KV.  to  the 
rainy  season  at  the  period  io  furnish  an  argument  for  the  very  early 
date  of  the  RV.     But  there  is  no  trace  here  of  any  reference  to  the 


viii.  29]  VISVE   DEVAH  147 

end  of  the  year  :  samvatsar^  in  c  denotes  '  in  the  course  of  the  year  at 
the  rainy  season '.  naras  :  here  again  no  particle  of  comparison,  mi- 
nanti :  from  mi  damage ;  cp.  7  c,  d.  samvatsar6 :  cp.  203,  3  a. 
pravrsi  agatayam  :  loc.  abs.  as  in  3  b.  tapta  gharmah  is  meant  to 
be  ambiguous:  heated  milJc-pots  with  reference  to  the  priests  (cp. 
adhvaryavo  gharminah  in  8  c)  and  dried  up  cavities  with  reference 
to  the  frogs  (cp.  trsyavatas  in  3  b).  asnuvate  (3.  pi.  A.  pr.  of  ams 
obtain)  visargam  obtain  release  or  discharge,  i.  e.  the  milk-pots  are 
emptied  (and  become  cool),  and  the  cavities  in  which  the  frogs  are 
hidden  let  them  out  (and  are  cooled  by  the  rain),  cp.  avir  bhavanti 
in8d. 

^f^^T%  IT  ft'T^  w^:  II         ^f ^vf^T%  I  Ti  I  ftT^  I  ^^:  II 

10  gomayur  adad,  ajamayur  adat,         He  that  loivs  like  a  cow  has  given 

prsnir  adad,  dharito  no  vasuni.     tis  riches,  he  that  bleats  lilce  a  goat 

gavam    manduka   dadatah   sa-     has  ghcn  them,  the  specJded  one 

tani,  has  given  them,   and  the  yellow 

sahasrasav^  pra  tiranta  ayuh.        one.    The  frogs  giving  us  hundreds 

of  cows  prolong   our   life   in   a 
thousandfold  Soma  pressing. 

g6mayus  &c.  (cp.  6  a) :  the  various  kinds  of  frogs  are  here  repre- 
sented as  taking  the  place  of  liberal  institutors  of  sacrifice  in  giving 
bountiful  gifts,  dadatas :  N.  pi.  of  pr.  pt.  of  da  give  (cp.  156). 
sahasrasav^  :  loc.  of  time  like  samvatsar^  in  9  c  ;  the  term  probably 
refers  to  a  Soma  sacrifice  lasting  a  year  with  three  pressings  a  day 
(amounting  roughly  to  a  thousand),     d  is  identical  with  iii.  53,  7  d. 

VISVE   DEVAH 

The  comprehensive  group  called  Visve  devah  or  All-Gods  occupies  an 
important  position,  for  at  least  forty  entire  hymns  are  addressed  to  them. 
It  is  an  artificial  sacrificial  group  intended  to  include  all  the  gods  in  order 

L   2 


148  VISVE   DEVAH  [viii.  29,  i 

tliat  none  should  be  left  out  in  laudations  meant  for  the  whole  pantheon. 
The  following  hymn  though  traditionally  regarded  as  meant  for  the  Visve 
devah  is  a  collection  of  riddles,  in  which  each  stanza  describes  a  deity  by 
his  characteristic  marks,  leaving  his  name  to  be  guessed.  The  deities  meant 
in  the  successive  stanzas  are :  1.  Soma,  2.  Agni,  3.  Tvastr,  4.  Indra,  5.  Rudra, 
6.  Pusan,  7.  Visnu,  8.  Asvins,  9.  Mitra-Varuna,  10.  Afigirases. 

viii.  29.     Metre  :  Distichs  of  a  Jagati  +  G-ayatri  (p.  445,  a.). 

'^1  ff ^^^^  II  "^f^  I  ^%  I  ffT^^'l  II 

1  babhriir    6ko    visunah   sunaro         One  is  hrown,  varied  in  form, 

•        •        •  ' 

yiiva.  hountiful,  young.    He  adorns  him- 

anji  aukte  hiranyayam.  self  ivltlt  golden  ornament, 

babhrus  :  this  epithet  is  distinctive  of  Soma,  to  whom  it  is  applied 
eight  times,  while  it  otherwise  refers  to  Agni  only  once,  and  to 
Eudra  in  one  hymn  only  (ii.  33).  It  alludes  to  the  colour  of  the 
juice,  otherwise  described  as  aruna  ruddy,  but  most  often  as  hari 
tawny,  visunas :  probably  referring  to  the  difference  between  the 
plant  and  the  juice,  and  the  mixtures  of  the  latter  with  milk  and 
honey,  yuva :  here  and  in  a  few  other  passages  Soma,  like  Agni, 
is  called  a  youth,  as  produced  anew  every  day.  anji :  cognate  ace. 
(p.  300,  4).  ankte  :  3.  s.  A.  of  anj  anoint,  with  middle  sense  anoints 
liimself.  hiranyayam  :  cp.  ix.  86,  43,  madhuna  abhi  anj  ate  .  . 
hiranyapava  asu  grbhnate  they  anoint  him  (Soma)  ivith  mead ;  puri- 
fying with  gold,  they  seize  him  in  them  (the  waters),  in  allusion  to 
fingers  with  golden  rings. 

;^  4tf^^  ^  ^^Tf  ^i^_         ^frf^  I  H^:  I  W  I  ^^T^  I  ^>cT^:  I 
^s^f^^  ^ty^:  II  ^J^'  I  ?^9  I  ^r>iT:  u 

2  y6nim  6ka  a  sasada  dy6tano,  One  has,  shining,  occupied  his 
antar  dev6su  m^dhirah.                   receptacle,  the  ivisc  among  the  gods. 

y6nim :  the  sacrificial  fireplace  ;  cp.  iii.  29,  10,  ayam  te  yonir 
rtviyo,  yato  jato  arocathah  :  tarn  janann,  Agna,  a  sida  this  is  thy 
regular  receptacle,  horn  from  which  thou  didst  shine :  hiowing  it,  Agni, 


viii.  29,  5]  VISVE   DEVAH  149 

occupy  it.  dy6tanas  :  the  brightness  of  Agni  is  constantly  dwelt  on. 
m^dhiras :  the  wisdom  of  Agni  is  very  frequently  mentioned  ;  in 
i.  142,  11  he  is  called  devo  dev^su  m6dhirah^/«e  ivise  god  among 
the  gods, 

^inrfl^  f^f%:  II  ^:  1 1^^  i  fifi^ft:  ii 

3  vasim  6ko  bibharti  hasta  aya-         One  hears  in  his  hand  an  iron 

sim,  axe,  strenuous  among  the  gods. 

antar  dev6su  nidhruvih. 

vasim :  this  weapon  is  connected  elsewhere  only  with  Agni,  the 
Rbhus,  and  the  Maruts.  But  Agni  cannot  be  meant  because  he  has 
already  been  described  in  2  ;  while  the  Rbhus  and  the  Maruts  would 
only  be  referred  to  in  the  plural  (cp.  10).  But  x.  53,  9  indicates 
sufficiently  what  god  is  here  meant :  Tvasta . .  apasam  apastamah  . , 
sisite  nunam  parasiim  suayasam  2\mtr,  most  active  of  workers,  noiv 
sharpens  his  axe  made  of  good  iron,  nidhruvis :  strenuous  as  the 
artificer  of  the  gods,  a  sense  supported  by  apastamas  in  the  above 
quotation. 

8  ^^^€r  f^^rf^  f^  wfi^        '^;4(^^  ^^:  i  f^^^  i  f ^  i  Wiff  fT^i  i 
^A  i^Tftr  t^^%  II  ^  I  i^Tfw  I  fw^_  II 

4  vajram  6ko  bibharti  hasta  ahi-         One  hears  a  holt  placed  in  his 

tarn  :  hand :  ivith  it  he  slays  his  foes, 

t6na  vrtrani  jighnate. 

a-hitam  :  pp.  of  dha  place  ;  accent,  p.  462,  13  h.  jighnate  :  3.  s. 
pr.  A.  of  ban  slay,  see  p.  432.  vajram ;  this,  as  his  distinctive 
weapon,  shows  that  Indra  is  meant. 

M  t^T^^^  t%^  f^  "w^^     fti^T^m^:  I  f^^f^  I  f^  I  ^wi:i 

^f%^  ^^^^^^:  II  ^f^:  I  ^^:  i  w^ki^^^:  ii 

5  tigmam  6ko  bibharti  hasta  ayu-         One,  hright,  fierce,  ivith  cooling 

dham,  remedies,  hears  in  his  hand  a  sharp 

siicir  ugro  jalasabhesajah.  tvcapon. 


150  VISVE   DEVAH  [viii.  29,  5 

ayudham  :  bow  and  arrows  are  usually  the  weapons  of  Kudra  ;  in 
vii.  46,  1  he  is  described  by  the  epithets  sthiradhanvan  having  a 
strong  how,  ksipr^su  stvift-arroived,  tigmayudha  having  a  sharp  tveapon, 
and  in  vii.  46,  3  his  lightning  shaft,  didyiit,  is  mentioned,  ugras : 
this  epithet  is  several  times  applied  to  Kudra  (cp.  ii.  33).  jalasa- 
bhesajas  :  this  epithet  is  apj^lied  to  Kudra  in  i.  43,  4  ;  Kudra  is  also 
called  jalasa,  and  his  hand  is  described  as  jalasa  (as  well  as  bhesaja) 
in  ii.  33,  7  ;  these  terms  are  applied  to  no  other  deit}''.  b  has  the 
irregularity  of  two  redundant  syllables  (p.  438,  2  a). 

^^^^  f^^^T*i  II  Tim  1  55  1  f^vj^i^^iJi  h 

6  patha    6kah    pipaya;     taskaro         One  maizes  the  paths  prosperous ; 

yatha  like  a  thief  he  knoivs  of  treasures. 

esa  veda  nidhmam. 

pathas  :  it  is  characteristic  of  Pusan  (vi.  54)  to  be  a  knower  and 
guardian  of  paths,  pipaya :  pf.,  with  lengthened  red.  vowel,  from 
pi  [=  Pya)  mahe  full  or  abundant ;  cp.  vi.  53,  4  :  vi  patho  vajasa- 
taye  cinuhi  clear  the  paths  for  the  gain  of  wealth  (addressed  to  Pusan) ; 
and  X.  59,  7  :  dadatu  piinah  Pusa  pathiam  ya  suastih  let  Fusan 
give  us  hack  the  pat! i  that  is  propitious,  taskaras  :  to  be  taken  with  b  ; 
like  a  thief  he  knows  where  hidden  treasure  is  to  be  found  ;  cp. 
vi.  48,  15  (addressed  to  Pusan) :  avir  gulha  vasu  karat,  suv^da  no 
vasu  karat  may  he  make  hidden  ivealth  manifest,  may  he  make  ivealth 
easy  for  us  to  find ;  he  also  finds  lost  cattle  ;  cp.  vi.  54,  5-10.  ya- 
tham  :  unaccented  (p.  453,  8  B  d)  ;  nasalized  to  avoid  hiatus  (p.  23, 
f.  n.  1).  veda  :  with  gen.  (202  A  c).  nidhinam :  accent  (p.  458, 
2  a) ;  the  final  syllable  to  be  pronounced  dissyllabically. 

NO  ^#BR  ^^^T^  f^  ^^%  ^ftf  I  ^^:  I  ^^iTT^:  i  ft  i  ^^  i 

■•^^  l^r^  ^^f%  II  ^^  I  l^r^:  i  ^^  ii 

7  trini  6ka  urugayo  vi  cakrame,  One,   wide-pacing,  makes  three 
yatra  devaso  madanti.                      strides  to  ivhere  the  gods  are  ex- 
hilarated. 


viii.  29,  9]  VISVE   DEVAH  151 

trini :  cognate  ace.  (p.  300,  4)  supply  vikramanani  (cp.  yasya 
uriisu  trisu  vikramanesu,  i.  154,  2).  The  three  strides  are 
characteristic  of  Visnu  (see  i.  154).  urugaya  :  an  epithet  distinctive 
of  Visnu  (cp.  i.  154,  1.  3.  5).  yatra  :  to  the  place  (the  highest  step) 
tvJiere  (p.  240)  the  gods  drink  Soma  (cp.  i.  154,  5).  b  has  the  trochaic 
variety  of  the  Gayatrl  cadence  (see  p.  439,  3  a,  a). 

8  vibhir  dua  carata,  6kaya  saha  :  With  birds   two  fare,   together 
pra  pravas^va  vasatah.                     ivith  one  woman  :  liJce  tivo  travellers 

they  go  on  journeys. 

vibhis :  cp.  i.  118,  5,  pari  vam  asvah  patamga,  vayo  vahantu 
arusah  let  the  flying  steeds,  the  ruddy  birds,  drive  you  (Asvins)  round. 
dva  .  .  6kaya  saha :  the  two  Asvins  with  their  one  companion, 
Snrya ;  cp.  I.e.;  a  vam  ratham  yuvatis  tisthad  .  .,  duhita  Sur- 
yasya  the  maiden,  the  daughter  of  the  Sun,  mounted  your  car ;  also 
V.  73,  5 :  a  yad  vam  Surya  ratham  tisthat  ivhen  Suryd  mounted 
your  car.  pra  vasatas  :  they  go  on  a  journey  in  traversing  the  sky  in 
their  car.  pravasa :  this  word  occurs  here  only,  apparently  in  the 
sense  of  one  who  is  abroad  on  travels  (like  the  post-Vedic  pravasin) ; 
in  the  Sutras  and  in  classical  Sanskrit  it  means  sojourn  abroad.  Some 
scholars  regard  pravasdva  as  irr.  contraction  for  pravasam  iva : 
they  travel  as  it  tvere  on  a  journey. 

a  ^^  ^T  ^^T^  ^^y^  f^f%       ^^:  i  ^  i  ^^t^_  ^f?t  i  "^^jfu  \ 
w^^i  ^fqT:+g<ft  II  f^f%  I 

9  sado  dua  cakrate  upama  divi  :  Two,  as  highest,  have  made  for 
samraja  sarpirasuti.                          themselves  a  seat  in  heaven :   two 

sovereign  kings  who  receive  melted 
butter  as  their  draught. 


152  VISVE   DEVAH  [viii.  29,  9 

samraja,  as  N.  du.,  is  applied  to  Mitra-Varuna  exclusively, 
cakrate :  3.  du.  pf.  A.  of  kr  with  middle  sense,  malce  for  oneself. 
upama :  N.  du.  in  apposition  to  dva,  further  explained  by  samraja. 

10  arcanta   6ke   mahi  sama   man-         Singing,  some  tJwught  of  a  great 
vata  :  chant :  hy  it  they  caused  the  sun  to 

t^na  suryam  arocayan.  shine. 

arcantas  :  singing  is  characteristic  of  the  Angirases  ;  e.  g.  i.  62,  2, 
sama  y^na  .  .  arcanta  Angiraso  ga  avindan  tlie  chant  hy  which  the 
Angirases,  singing,  found  the  cows ;  the  Maruts  are  described  in  x.  78,  5 
as  visvarupa  Angiraso  na  samabhih  manifold  ivith  chants  like  the 
Angirases.  The  Angirases  again  are  those  ya  rt6na  suryam  aroh- 
ayan  divi  tvho  hy  their  rite  caused  the  sun  to  mount  to  heaven  (x.  62,  3). 
Sayana  and  some  other  interpreters  think  that  the  Atris  are  meant. 
But  nothing  is  ever  said  of  the  singing  or  the  chants  of  the  Atris. 
Again,  though  in  one  hymn  (v.  40)  it  is  said  in  the  last  stanza  that 
the  Atris  found  the  sun :  yam  vai  suryam  Svarbhanus  tamasa 
avidhyad,  Atrayas  tam  anv  avindan  the  Atris  found  the  sun  tvhich 
Svarhhdnit  had  assailed  ivith  darkness  (9),  this  is  only  a  repetition  of 
what  is  attributed  to  Atri  in  the  sing. :  gulham  suryam  tamasa  .  . 
brahmana  avindad  AtrihAtri  hy  prayer  found  the  sun  hidden  hy  dark- 
ness (6)  and  Atrih  suryasya  divi  caksur  adhat  Atris  placed  the  eye  of 
the  sun  in  heaven  (8) ;  and  in  the  AV.  and  the  SB.,  it  is  Atri  (not  the 
Atris)  who  performed  a  similar  act.  Thus  even  this  deed  is  not 
characteristic  of  the  Atris  (plural),  but  at  most  of  Atri  (singular). 
The  Angirases  must  therefore  undoubtedly  be  meant  here.  6ke  :  the 
pi.  is  here  used  to  express  an  indefinite  group  beside  ^kas  and  dva  in 
the  rest  of  the  hymn  (cp.  105).  manvata :  3.  pi.  ipf.  A.  (without 
augment)  of  man  think,     arocayan  :  ipf.  cs.  of  rue  shine. 

s6ma 

As  the  Soma  sacrifice  formed  the  centre  of  the  ritual  of  the  RV.,  the 
god  Soma  is  one  of  the  most  prominent  deities.  With  rather  more  than 
120  hymns  (all  those  in  Mandala  ix,  and  about  half  a  dozen  in  others) 


viii.  48]  SOMA  153 

addressed  to  him,  he  comes  next  to  Agni  (i.  1)  in  importance.  The  anthropo- 
morphism of  his  character  is  less  developed  than  that  of  Indra  or  Varuna 
because  the  plant  and  its  juice  are  constantly  present  to  the  mind  of  the 
poet..  Soma  has  terrible  and  sharp  weapons,  which  he  grasps  in  his  hand  ; 
he  wields  a  bow  and  a  thousand-pointed  shaft.  He  has  a  car  which  is 
heavenly,  drawn  by  a  team  like  Vayu's.  He  is  also  said  to  ride  on  the  same 
car  as  Indra.  He  is  the  best  of  charioteers.  In  about  half  a  dozen  hymns 
he  is  associated  with  Indra,  Agni,  Tusan,  and  Rudra  respectively  as  a  dual 
divinity.  He  is  sometimes  attended  by  the  Maruts,  the  close  allies  of 
Indra.  He  comes  to  the  sacrifice  and  receives  offerings  on  the  sacred 
grass. 

The  Soma  juice,  which  is  intoxicating,  is  frequently  termed  mMhu  or 
sweet  draught,  but  oftenest  called  indu  the  hright  drop.  The  colour  of  Soma 
is  brown  (babhru),  ruddy  (aruna),  or  more  usually  tawny  (hari).  The 
whole  of  the  ninth  book  consists  of  incantations  chanted  over  the  tangible 
Soma,  while  the  stalks  are  being  pounded  by  stones,  the  juice  passes 
through  a  woollen  strainer,  and  flows  into  wooden  vats,  in  which  it  is 
offered  to  the  gods  on  the  litter  of  sacred  grass  (barhis).  These  processes 
are  overlaid  with  confused  and  mystical  imagery  in  endless  variation.  The 
pressing  stones  with  which  the  shoot  (amsu)  is  crushed  are  called  adri  or 
gravan.  The  pressed  juice  as  it  passes  through  the  filter  of  sheep's  wool  is 
usually  called  pavamana  or  punana  floiving  dear.  This  purified  (un- 
mixed) Soma  is  sometimes  called  suddha,  pure,  but  much  oftener  ^ukra  or 
suci  hright ;  it  is  offered  almost  exclusively  to  Vayu  or  Indra.  The  filtered 
Soma  flows  into  jars  (kalasa)  or  vats  (drona),  where  it  is  mixed  with  water 
and  also  with  milk,  by  which  it  is  sweetened.  The  verb  mrj  cleanse  is 
used  with  reference  to  this  addition  of  water  and  milk.  Soma  is  spoken 
of  as  having  three  kinds  of  admixture  (asir) :  milk  (go),  sour  milk  (dadhi), 
and  barley  (yava).  The  admixture  being  alluded  to  as  a  garment  or  bright 
robe,  Soma  is  described  as  'decked  with  beauty'.  Soma  is  pressed  three 
times  a  day:  the  K-bhus  are  invited  to  the  evening  pressing,  Indra  to  the 
midday  one,  which  is  his  exclusively,  while  the  morning  libation  is  his  first 
drink.  The  three  abodes  (sadhastha)  of  Soma  which  are  mentioned  pro- 
bably refer  to  three  tubs  used  in  the  ritual. 

Soma's  connexion  with  the  waters,  resulting  from  the  admixture,  is  ex- 
pressed in  the  most  various  ways.  He  is  the  drop  that  grows  in  the  waters  ; 
he  is  the  embryo  of  the  waters  or  tbeir  child  ;  they  are  his  mothers  or  his 
sisters ;  he  is  lord  and  king  of  streams ;  he  produces  waters  and  causes 
heaven  and  earth  to  rain.  The  sound  made  by  the  trickling  Soma  is  often 
alluded  to,  generally  in  hyperbolical  language,  with  verbs  meaning  to  roar  or 
bellow,  or  even  thunder.  He  is  thus  commonly  called  a  bull  among  the 
waters,  which  figure  as  cows.  Soma  is  moreover  swift,  being  often  compared 
with  a  steed,  sometimes  with  a  bird  flying  to  the  wood.    Owing  to  his 


154  SOMA  [viii.  48 

yellow  colour  Soma's  brilliance  is  the  physical  aspect  most  dwelt  upon  by 
the  poets.     He  is  then  often  likened  to  or  associated  with  the  sun. 

The  exhilarating  power  of  Soma  led  to  its  being  regarded  as  a  divine 
drink  bestowing  immortal  life.  Hence  it  is  called  amrta  draught  of  immor- 
tality. All  the  gods  drink  Soma ;  they  drank  it  to  gain  immortality  ;  it 
confers  immortality  not  only  on  gods,  but  on  men.  It  has,  moreover, 
medicinal  powers:  Soma  heals  whatever  is  sick,  making  the  blind  to  see 
and  the  lame  to  walk.  Soma  also  stimulates  the  voice,  and  is  called  '  lord 
of  speech '.  He  awakens  eager  thought :  he  is  a  generator  of  hymns,  a 
leader  of  poets,  a  seer  among  priests.  Hence  his  wisdom  is  much  dwelt 
upon ;  thus  he  is  a  wise  seer,  and  he  knows  the  races  of  the  gods. 

The  intoxicating  effect  of  Soma  most  emphasized  by  the  poets  is  the 
stimulus  it  imparts  to  Indra  in  his  conflict  with  hostile  powers.  That 
Soma  invigorates  Indra  for  the  fight  with  Vrtra  is  mentioned  in  innumer- 
able passages.  Through  this  association  Indra's  warlike  exploits  and  cosmic 
actions  come  to  be  attributed  to  Soma  independently.  He  is  a  victor  un- 
conquered  in  fight,  born  for  battle.  As  a  warrior  he  wins  all  kinds  of 
wealth  for  his  worshippers. 

Though  Soma  is  several  times  regarded  as  dwelling  or  growing  on  the 
mountains  (like  Haoma  in  the  Avesta),  his  true  origin  and  abode  are 
regarded  as  in  heaven.  Soma  is  the  child  of  heaven,  is  the  milk  of  heaven, 
and  is  purified  in  heaven.  He  is  the  lord  of  heaven  ;  he  occupies  heaven, 
and  his  place  is  the  highest  heaven.  Thence  he  was  brought  to  earth.  The 
myth  embodying  this  belief  is  that  of  the  eagle  that  brings  Soma  to  Indra, 
and  is  most  fully  dealt  with  in  the  two  hymns  iv.  26  and  27.  Being  the 
most  important  of  herbs,  Soma  is  said  to  have  been  born  as  the  lord  (pati) 
of  plants,  which  also  have  him  as  their  king;  he  is  a  lord  of  the  wood 
(vanaspati),  and  has  generated  all  plants.  But  quite  apart  from  his  con- 
nexion with  herbs.  Soma  is,  like  other  leading  gods,  called  a  king:  he  is 
a  king  of  rivers  ;  a  king  of  the  whole  earth  ;  a  king  or  father  of  the  gods  ; 
a  king  of  gods  and  mortals.  In  a  few  of  the  latest  hymns  of  the  RV.  Soma 
begins  to  be  mystically  identified  with  the  moon  ;  in  the  AV.  Soma  several 
times  means  the  moon  ;  and  in  the  Brahmanas  this  identification  has  already 
become  a  commonplace. 

We  know  that  the  preparation  and  the  offering  of  Soma  (the  Avestan 
Haoma)  was  already  an  important  feature  of  Indo-Iranian  worship.  In  both 
the  RV.  and  the  Avesta  it  is  stated  that  the  stalks  were  pressed,  that  the 
juice  was  yellow,  and  was  mixed  with  milk  ;  in  both  it  grows  on  mountains, 
and  its  mythical  home  is  in  heaven,  whence  it  comes  down  to  earth  ;  in  both 
the  Soma  draught  has  become  a  mighty  god  and  is  called  a  king;  in  both 
there  are  many  other  identical  mythological  traits  relating  to  Soma. 

It  is  possible  that  the  belief  in  an  intoxicating  divine  bevemge,  the 
home  of  which  was  in  heaven,  goes  back  to  the  Indo-European  period.     It 


viii.  48, 2]  SOMA  155 

must  then  have  been  regarded  as  a  kind  of  honey  mead  (Skt.  madhu,  Gk. 
fjL^dv,  Anglo-Saxon  nieclu). 

The  name  of  Soma  (=  Haoma)  means  pressed  juice,  being  derived  from 
the  root  su  (=  Av.  hu)  p7'ess. 

viii.  48.     Metre:  Tristubh ;  5.  Jagati. 

^^  w^^  ^fir  w^tl^  II         ^^  I  ^^M:  \  ^f^  i  ^11:^^x1%  ii 

1  svador  abhaksi  vayasah  sume-         Wisely  I  have  partaken  of  the 

dhah  sweet  food  that  stirs  good  thoughts, 

suadhio  varivovittarasya,  hest  hanisher  of  care,  to  which  all 

visve  yam  deva  uta  inartiaso,  gods  and  mortals,  calling  it  honey, 

madhu  bruvanto,  abhi  samcar-  come  together. 

anti. 

abhaksi :  1.  s.  A.  s  ao.  of  bhaj  share  ;  with  partitive  gen.  (202  A  e). 
sumedhas :  appositionally,  as  a  tvise  man ;  svadhyas :  gen.  of 
svadhi  (declined  like  rathi,  p.  85,  f.  n.  4).  yam  :  m.  referring  to  the 
n.  vayas,  as  if  to  s6ma.     abhi  samcaranti  :  p.  469,  B  a. 

^^^m  f  t^  ^^  I  1^1^^ ' 

^ft^  '^'^i  TT^  ^^t:  II       T^Tr  ^ftf  I  T^^  i  ^^^w:  I  ^^TW:  i 

^itvJT^  I  ^\iT.i  "^i  I  TT%  I  ^^t:  II 

2  antas  ca  praga,  Aditir  bhavasi,  If  thou  hast  entered  ivithin,  thou 
avayata  haraso  daiviasya.  shall  he  Aditi,  appeaser  of  divine 
Indav,    fndrasya   sakhiam  ju-     icrath.      May  est    thou,    0    Indu, 

sanah,  enjoying  the  friendship  of  Indra, 

sraustiva     dhiiram,    anu    raya     like    an   ohedient  mare   the  p)ole, 
rdhyah.  advance  us  to  ivealth. 


156  SOMA  [viii.  48,  2 

antas  :  cp.  note  on  vii.  86,  2  b.  Soma  is  here  addressed,  pragas  : 
the  Padapatha  analysis  of  this  as  pra  agah  is  evidently  wrong, 
because  in  a  principal  sentence  it  must  be  pra  agah  (p.  468,  20)  or  in 
a  subordinate  one  pra-agah  (p.  469,  20  B) ;  here  it  is  the  latter, 
because  of  ea  =  «/(p.  229,  3).  Aditis :  because  Aditi  releases  from 
sin  (e.  g.  anagastvam  no  Aditih  krnotu  may  Aditi  produce  slnlessness 
for  us,  i.  162,  22) ;  that  is,  may  Soma  purify  us  within.  Indav : 
vocatives  in  o  are  always  given  as  Pragrhya  in  the  Pada  text  (o  iti) 
even  though  their  Sandhi  before  vowels  may  be  av  or  a  in  the 
Samhita  text ;  cp.  note  on  ii.  33,  3  b.  srausti  :  this  word  occurs  only 
here,  and  its  meaning  is  uncertain  ;  the  most  probable  sense  is 
obedient  mare.  ray6  :  this  analysis  of  the  Padapatha  makes  the  con- 
struction doubtful  because  an  ace.  is  wanted  as  parallel  to  dhiiram ; 
nas  may  be  supplied  ;  then  the  sense  would  be  :  ^  as  a  willing  mare 
advances  the  yoke  (of  a  car),  so  mayst  thou  advance  (us  or  the  yoke 
of  the  sacrifice)  for  the  attainment  of  wealth.'  rdhyas  :  root  ao.  op.  of 
rdh  thrive, 

f^g  ^f^Tl<l  ^'^  II  f^  I  ^  Tf^  I  ^:  I  ^^  I  ^%  II 

3  apama  sdmam  ;  amrta  abliuma;         We  have  dritnJc  Soma  ;  ive  have 

aganma  jy6tir ;  avidama  devan.  become  immortal ;  tve  have  gone  to 

kim  nunam  asman  krnavad  a-  the  light ;  tve  have  found  the  gods. 

ratih?  What  can  hostility  noiv  do  to  us, 

kim  u   dhurtir,   amrta,  marti-  and  what  the  malice  of  mortal  man, 

asya  ?  0  immortal  one  ? 

This  stanza  describes  the  mental  exaltation  produced  by  drinking 
Soma.  Note  the  use  of  the  aorist  four  times  and  its  characteristic 
sense  (p.  345,  C).  apama :  root  ao.  of  pa  drink,  abhuma  :  root  ao.  of 
bhu  become,  aganma :  root  ao.  of  gam  go.  jy6tis :  ace.  of  the  goal 
(197  A  1).  avidama :  a  ap.  of  2.  Yid  find,  krnavat :  3.  s.  pr.  sb.  of 
kr  do  (p.  134).     amrta  :  Soma. 


viii.  48,  5]  SOMA  157 

^  ^  #r  ^T^  1^  ^  4^  t^       i[T(.  I  ^:  I  Ji^  I  1^  I  w  I  ^ct:  i 
f^^  ^H  ^^  ^4:  I  T'^^^  I 

IT  w  ^^^"^  ^'T  m^:  II     ^'liiT^  I  ^^  1 55^^f  i  ^T*  i 

TTi  ^:  I  w^:  I  ^^"^ I  ^H I  mft:  ii 

4  sam  no    bhava    hrda    a    pita,  Do  good  to  our  heart  tvhen  drunJc, 

Indo;  0  Indu;    hindly  like  a  father,  0 

pit6va,  Soma,  sunave  sus^vah.  Soma,-  to  his  son,  thoughtful  Wee  a 

sakheva  sakhya,  urusamsa,  dhi-  friend  to  his  friend,  0  farfamed 

rah,  one,  prolong  our  years  that  tve  may 

pra  na  ayur  jivase,  Soma,  tarih,  live,  0  Soma. 

sam  hrd6  refreshing  to  the  heart  occurs  several  tijnes ;  the  empha- 
sizing pel.  a  is  here  added  to  the  dat.  pra  nah :  Sandhi,  65  c. 
jivase  :  dat.  inf.  of  jiv  live,     taris  :  is  ao.  inj.  from  t?  cross. 

M  <%  ^T  ^(TT  '^ji^  ^^^        ^^  I  m  I  ^SYfTT:  I  '^Jll^:  \  f  ^^#:  i 
jyi  if  ^:  ^^^f  q^'^  I         T^^  I  ^  I  ^T^:  i  ^^  i  ^^Tf  i 

^cT  w[_  w[^T^^'^f^^^:  ii      ^  i  ^i  i  t^^  i  f%i^^:  i  '^ft^t?!:! 

^7f  I  ^T  I  wmtc!:  I  ^^^  I T^:^* » 


5  im6  ma  pita  yasasa  urusyavo,  These    glorious,    freedom-giving 

ratham   na   gavah,   sam   anaha  (drops),  ye  have  knit  me  together 

parvasu ;  in  my  joints  like  straps  a  car ;    let 

t6  ma  raksantu  visrasas  cari-  those  drops  protect  me  froin  break- 

trad,  ing   a    leg    and    save    me  from 

uta  ma  sramad  yavayantu  in-  disease. 

davah. 

im6 :  supply  indavas  from  d.  yasasas :  p.  59.     urusyavas:  cp. 

varivovittarasya  in  1  b.     anaha :  this  seems  to  be  an  irregular  pf. 


158 


SOMA 


[viii.  48, 


form  from  nah  hind  for  nanaha ;  cp.  gobhih  samnaddho  asi  fJwic 
art  bound  together  ivith  straps  (said  of  a  car) ;  another  irregularity  is 
the  2.  pi.  strong  radical  vowel  (cp.  137,  2).  visrasas  :  abl.  inf.  (of 
vi-srams)  with  attracted  object  in  the  abl.  caritrad :  p.  337,  3  a. 
Note  that  Pada  c  is  a  Tristubh.  yavayantu  :  cs.  ipv.  of  yu  separate. 
Change  in  c  and  d,  as  often,  from  2.  to  3.  prs. 


IT  ^^^  if^ff  ^^^  if:  I 


^f^^  I   'T   I    ^T   I   ?Tf^rT^  I   5ER^ 

ff  ^ti:  I 
^  I  ^^^  I  ^^  I  ^^^:  I  't:  I 
^^  I  ff  I  ^  I  ?f^  I  ^  I  ^  I J^ 
\m^^i:^  1 1?  I  '^T  I  Hf^  I  ^w  II 


6  agnim   na   ma    mathitarn    sam  Like   fire    Idndled    hij  friction 

didipah ;  inflame  me  ;    illumine  us ;    malce 

pra   caksaya ;    krnuhi   vasyaso  us  ivealtUier.     For   then,   in    thy 

nah.  intoxication,    0   Soma,    I    regard 

atha    hi     te     mada    a,    Soma,  myself  as  rich.     Enter  (into  us) 

manye  for  prosperity, 
revam    iva.     pra    cara   pustim 

acha. 

didipas  :  red.  ao.  inj.  of  dip  shine,  pra  caksaya :  cs.  of  caks  sec 
(cp.  3b).  krnuhi:  cp.  p.  134;  accented  as  beginning  a  sentence. 
vasyasas  :  A.  pi.  of  vasyams  (cpv.  of  vasu,  103,  2  a),  atha  (metri- 
cally lengthened) :  then,  when  inflamed  by  Soma,  revan  :  predica- 
tively  with  manye  (196  a),  iva  being  sometimes  added,  pra  cara 
(metrically  lengthened) :  cp.  2  a,  antas  ca  pragah.  pustim  acha  : 
give  us  actual  prosperity  also. 


Tf^^  I  ^  I  'T^m  I  grT^  I 

H^^f^  I  ft^^^f;^  I  TT^: 


viii.  48,  8]  SOMA  159 

^itf^iT^  I  ^:  I  ^TOTTftr  II 


7  isir^na  te  manasa  sutasya 
bhaksimahi,  pitriasyeva  ray  ah. 
S6ma    rajan,    pra    na    ayumsi 

tarir, 
ahaniva  surio  vasarani. 


Of  thee  pressed  ivHli  devoted  mind 
ive  ivould  partake  as  of  paternal 
ivcaltli.  King  Soma,  prolong  our 
years  as  the  sun  the  days  of 
spring. 


bhaksimahi:  s  ao.  op.  of  bhaj  share,  pitryasya  iva:  because  Soma 
is  regarded  as  a  father,  cp.  4  b.  Soma  rajan :  being  a  single  voc. 
(rajan  is  in  apposition),  Soma  alone  is  accented  (p.  465,  18).  pra 
nas  :  cp.  4  d.     taris  :  cp.  4  d.     ahani :  91,  2. 

^  ^>rr  TT^'gao^T  ^:  ^f%  Bt*}  i  Tni  I  ?3o^  I  ^:  I  ^f%  i 

7f^  ^f%  W(€it4^^  ftfir  I      M  I  ^f%  I  W(?it:  I  T[-m  i  ftft  i 
^^f^  ^  ^r!  ^^^R;^  ^^<i  I  ^^:  i  ^cT  i  ^^g:  i  ^•^  ^tt  i 

^T  ^  ^^f  ^gsRTJt  x^^i  ^t:  II    ^T  I  ^:  I  ir^:  i  ^g^^'T^  i  ^tt  i 

^t:  11 

8  Soma    rajan,   mrlaya    nah   su-  King  Soma,  he  graeious  to  us 

asti ;  for  tvelfare  ;  ive  are  thy  devotees : 

tava  smasi  vratias  :   tasya  vid-  Mow  that.     There  arise  might  and 

dhi,  tvrath,  0  Indu :    abandon  us  not 

alarti  daksa  uta  manyiir,  Indo;  according    to    the    desire    of  our 

ma   nd   aryo    anukamam   para  foe. 
dah. 

mrlaya :  accented  as  beginning  a  sentence  after  an  initial  voc. 
(p.  467,  19  Ac);  final  vowel  metrically  lengthened.  svasti : 
shortened  inst.  s.  (p.  80,  f.  n.  2)  used  adverbially  like  a  dat.  ;  this 
word  though  obviously  =  su  +  asti  is  not  analysed  in  the  Padapatha 
(cp.  note  on  i.  1,  9).     smasi :   1.  pi.  pr.  of  as  he.     tasya :   with  vid 


IGO 


SOMA 


[viii.  48,  8 


hnoiv  about,  202  A  c.  viddhi :  2.  s.  ipv.  of  vid  Jcnow.  alarti :  3.  s. 
pr.  int.  of  r  go  (174  a).  aryas :  gen.  of  ari  foe  (cp.  p.  81,  f.  n.  1  ; 
99,  3),  dependent  on  anukamam  ;  cp.  aratis  in  3  c.  dah :  2.  s.  root 
ao.  inj .  of  da  give. 


9  tuam  hi  nas  tanuas,  Soma,  gopa, 
gatre-gatre  nisasattha  nrcaksah. 
yat  te  vayam  praminama  vra- 

tani, 
sa  no  mrla  susakha,  deva,  va- 

syah. 


Since  thou  art  the  ])rotector  of 
our  body,  0  Soma,  thou  as  sur- 
veyor of  men  hast  settled  in 
every  limb.  If  tve  infringe  thine 
ordinances,  then  be  gracious  to  us 
as  our  good  friend,  0  god,  for 
higher  welfare. 


taniias  :  gon.  of  tanu  body,  gopas  :  97  A  2  (p.  79).  gatre-gatre  : 
189  C.  ni-sasattha :  2.  s.  pf.  of  sad  ;  cerebralization  of  s  (67  a) ; 
metrical  lengthening  of  final  a  (p.  441,  a),  yad:  p.  242,  3.  pra- 
minama :  sb.  pr.  of  pra-mi.  sa :  p.  294,  b.  su-sakha ;  on  the 
cerebralization  of  s  see  67  b  ;  the  accent  is  that  of  a  Bv.  (p.  455,  c  a) ; 
that  of  a  Karmadharaya  (p.  455,  d  1)  is  su-sakha ;  the  former  is 
irregularly  used  in  the  latter  sense,  vasyas :  the  cpv.  adj.  is  here 
used  as  an  ace.  adverb  (p.  301,  b). 


^0  ^fX^W  ^'^t  ^%^ 


viii.  48,  li] 


SOMA 


161 


LO  rdudarena  sakhia  saceya, 
yo    ma   na   risyed,   dhariasva, 

pitah. 
ay  am  ya  somo  niadhayi  asmd, 
tasma    fndram    pratiram.    emi 

ayuh. 


I  would  associate  with  the  whole- 
some friend  who  having  been  drunk 
would  not  injure  me,  0  lord  of  the 
hays.  For  (the  enjoyment  of)  that 
Soma  which  has  been  deposited  in 
us  J  I  approach  Indra  to  prolong 
our  years. 

rdudarena :  not  analysed  in  the  Padapatha  (cp.  note  onii.  33,  5  c); 
cp.  tvam  nas  tanvo  gopah  in  9  a.  sakhya  :  99,  2.  y6  na  risyet : 
cp.  4  a.  haryasva :  a  characteristic  epithet  of  Indra,  who  as  the 
great  Soma  drinker  is  here  addressed,  nyadhayi  :  3.  s.  ao.  ps.  of 
dha  put ;  this  (like  pragas  in  2  a)  is  irregularly  analysed  in  the 
Padapatha  as  ni  adhayi  instead  of  ni-adhayi  (p.  469,  B).  asm6 : 
loc.  (p.  104) ;  Pragrhya  (26  c).  emi  :  1.  s.  pr.  of  i  go  to  with  ace. 
(197,  A 1).  pratiram :  ace.  inf.  of  tf  cross  (p.  336,  2  a)  governing 
the  ace.  ayus  (cp.  11  d).  tasmai  :  for  the  sake  of  that  =  to  obtain  or 
enjoy  that,  final  dat.  (p.  314,  B  2). 


^  Ht^  wf  ^^f  f^f  i^T 


11  apa  tya  asthur  anira,  amiva 
nir  atrasan,  tamisicir  abhaisuh. 
a  s6m6  asmam  aruhad  vihaya  ; 
aganma  yatra  pratiranta  ayuh. 


Those  ailments  have  started  off, 
diseases  have  sped  away,  the  powers 
of  darkness  have  been  affrighted. 
Soma  has  mounted  in  us  tvith 
might :  we  have  gone  to  where  men 
prolong  their  years. 

asthur :  3.  pi.  root  ao.  of  stha.  atrasan :  the  ipf.  is  here 
irregularly  used  beside  the  two  aorists ;  cp.  the  uniform  use  of  the 
ao.  in  3.  tamisicis :  this  word,  as  occurring  here  only,  is  somewhat 
doubtful  in  sense  ;  but  it  is  probably  a  f.  adj.  formed  from  a  stem  in 

1902  ]jj 


162 


SOMA 


[viii.  4S,  11 


anc  added  to  tamis  (in  tamis-ra  darJcness) :  cp.  93  a  and  95.  The 
meaning  is  that  a  draught  of  Soma  drives  away  disease  and  the 
powers  of  darkness  (cp.  3  b).  abhaisur  :  s  ao.  of  bhi  fear,  a  aru- 
hat :  a  ao.  of  ruh  :  cp.  the  English  phrase,  ^  go  to  the  head  '.  aganma 
yatra  :  =  '  we  have  arrived  at  the  point  when  '.  d  is  identical  with 
i.  113,  16  d  ;  it  refers  to  the  renewal  of  life  at  dawn. 


^:  I  ir:  I  t^-  i  f^J^V  i  W[S%  i  iftfT:  i 

^^W  I  TT^H  I  Wvjf^%^  I 
cltf  I  ^^T^  I  ff^t  I  ft^  I 
5cE^%  I  Wm  I  g^J^^f^  I  ^VR  II 


12  yo  na  induh,  pitaro,  hrtsii  pit6, 
amartio  martiam  aviv^sa, 
tasmai    S6maya    havisa    vidh- 

ema : 
mrlike  asya  sumatau  siama. 


The  drop  drunJc  in  our  hearts, 
0  Fathers,  that  immortal  has 
entered  us  mortals,  to  that  Soma 
we  would  pay  ivorship  tuith  obla- 
tion ;  we  would  abide  in  his  mercy 
and  good  graces. 


pitaras :  the  Fathers,  often  spoken  of  as  Soma-loving  (somya). 
are  called  to  witness  (cp.  13  a),  hrtsii  pitah :  cp.  2  a  antas  ca  pragah 
and  10  c  yah  somo  niadhayi  asm6. 


^  ^hr  qri^  T^iirT'i  II 


^^  1 5^H  I  ftgvjfir:  i  ^*i:>jftQ^^:  i 
^g  1  ^T^tgf^  ^fcT  I  w  I  <^c^^  I 
rfir  I  ^  I  T^Tf^  I  ft^^t  I  f?^'?  I 

^^T^  I  ^T^  I  Xlrk:  I  T^^T^  II 


13  tuam,  Soma,  pitfbhih  samvid- 
an6, 
anu  dyavaprthivi  a  tatantha. 
tasmai   ta,  Indo,    havisa   vidh- 

ema : 
vayarn  siama  patayo  rayinam. 


Thou,  0  Soma,  uniting  tvith  the 
Fathers,  hast  extended  thyself  over 
Heaven  and  Earth.  To  thee  as 
such,  0  Indu,  tve  woidd  pay 
ivorship  ivith  oblation :  tve  ivould 
be  lords  of  riches. 


viii.  48,  15]  SOMA  163 

sam-vidanas :  see  x.  14,  4  b.  anu  a  tatantha  :  =  hast  become 
famous  in.     d  is  identical  with  iv.  50,  6  d. 

^  ^^  f^^  ft^T^:  wf%lf:  I 

g^TT^  t^i^^T  ^^  II         ^^'l  I  ^H^  I  f^;^  I  ft^^:  i 

g^jftTt^:  I  f^^^'i  I  ^  I  ^t^  II 

4  trataro  deva,  adhi  vocata  no.  Ye  protecting  gods,  speak  for  us. 
ma  no  nidra  isata,  mota  jalpih.  Let  not  sleep  overp>oweruSf  nor  idle 
vayam    S6masya    visvaha  pri-     talJc.     We  always  dear  to  Soma, 

yasah,  rich  in  strong  sons,  would  utter 

suviraso  vidatham  a  vadema.         divine  tvorsliip. 

trataro  devah :  accent,  see  note  on  7  c.  adhl  vocata  :  2.  pi.  ao. 
ipv.  of  vac  speali ;  final  vowel  metrically  lengthened  ;  =  take  our  part, 
defend  us  (nas,dat.).  nidra  :  probably  for  nidrah:  see  note  on  svadha, 
X.  129,  5d.  isata:  3.  s.  sb.  A.  (not  inj.,  which  correct,  p.  372); 
with  gen.  nas  (202,  A  a),  nidra  and  jalpiti  probably  refer  to 
the  vows  of  waking  and  silence  in  the  rite  of  initiation  (diksa)  to  the 
Soma  sacrifice,  c  d  are  identical  with  ii.  12,  15  c  d  excepting  that 
there  ta  Indra  takes  the  place  of  S6masya.  priyasas :  with  gen. 
(p.  322  C). 

q  t^  ^:  ^^  f%^m  ^^^T^  ^^  I  ^:  I  itm  I  f%^<T:  I  ^^U^:  i 
^  ^_f^^l  f4^  1^^:  I  ^^1  ^: sf^n^  i  w  i  f^i[  i  gvJ^^:  i 

^  ^  ?:^  ^fir:  w^^\:         ^^  i  ^:  l  T'^  X^  i  ^f^ifn:  i  f 
x^jff  ^^TfT+lcf  ^T  HT^Tfi:  II  vJ^^:  I 

tiTff  I  TJ^TrfTfi:  I  ^  fTI  ^T  I  HT^ci;  II 

5  tuam   nah,    Soma,   visvato   va-         Thou  art,  0  Soma,  a  giver  of 
yodhas.  strength  to  us  on  all  sides.     Thou 

tuam  suarvid.    a  visa  nrcaksah.     art  a  finder  of  light.     Do  thou,  as 

M  2 


164  SOMA  [viii.  48,  15 

tuam  na,  Inda,  utibhih  sajosah      surveyor   of  men,   enter  us.     Do 
pahi  pascatad  uta  va  purastat.       thou,   0  Indii,  protect  us  behind 

and    before   ivUli    thine    aids  ac- 
cordant. 

a  visa :  final  vowel  metrically  lengthened.  Inda  :  for  Indav 
(21  &) ;  on  the  Padapatha,  cp.  note  on  2  c.  utibhis  to  be  taken  with 
sajosas.     uta  va  :  or  =  and. 


FUNERAL   HYMN 

The  RV.  contains  a  group  of  five  hymns  (x.  14-18)  concerned  with  death 

and  the  future  life.     From  them  we  learn  that,  though  burial  was  also 

practised,  cremation  was  the  usual  method  of  disposing  of  the  dead,  and  was 

the  main  source  of  the  mythology  relating  to  the  future  life.     Agni  conveys 

the  corpse  to  the  other  world,  the  Fathers,  and  the  gods.     He  is  besought 

to  preserve  the  body  intact  and  to  burn  the  goat  which  is  sacrificed  as  his. 

portion.     During  the  process  of  cremation  Agni  and  Soma  are  besought  to 

heal  any  injury  that  bird,  beast,  ant,  or  serpent  may  have  inflicted  on  the 

body.     The  way  to  the  heavenly  world  is  a  distant  path  on  which  Savitr 

(i.  35)  conducts  and  Pusan  (vi.  54)  protects  the  dead.     Before  the  pyre  m, 

lighted,  the  wife  of  the  dead  man,  having  lain  beside  him,  arises,  and  his 

bow  is  taken  from  his  hand.     This  indicates  that  in  earlier  times  his  widow 

and  his  weapons  were  burnt  with  the  body  of  the  husband.     Passing  along: 

by  the  path  trodden  by  the  Fathers,  the  spirit  of  the  dead  man  goes  to  tho 

realm  of  light,  and  meets  with  the  Fathers  who  revel  with  Yama  in  the 

highest  heaven.     Here,  uniting  with  a  glorious  body,  he  enters  upon  a  life 

of  bliss  which  is  free  from  imperfections  and  bodily  frailties,  in  which  all 

desires  are  fulfilled,  and  which  is  passed  among  the  gods,  especially  in  the 

presence  of  the  two  kings  Yama  and  Varuna.  . 

X.  14.     Metre  :  Tristubh ;  13.  14.  16.     Amistubh ;  15.  Brhati. 
%^^  j^Ji^Ti  ^l[\^\  %^^rIH^  I  HJli^lt^'l  I  ^TT^T^  I 


X.  14,  2] 


FUNEKAL  HYMN 


165 


Him  wlio  has  passed  away  along 
the  mighty  steeps  and  has  spied  out 
the  path  for  many,  him  the  son  of 
Vivasvant,  the  assembler  of  people, 
Yama  the  king,  do  thou  present 
with  oblation. 


1  pareyivamsam    pravato    mahir 

anu, 
bahubhyahpantham  anupaspas- 

anam, 
Vaivasvatam  samgamanam  ja- 

nanam, 
Yamam    rajanam     ha  visa    du- 

vasya. 

a  is  a  Jagati  (see  p.  445,  f.  n.  7).  pareyivamsam :  pf.  pt.  act. 
iyivamsam.  (89  a)  of  i  go,  with  para  away,  pravatas :  the  steep 
paths  leading  to  the  highest  heaven  where  Yama  dwells  ;  cp.  ix.  113, 
8,  yatra  raja  Vaivasvat6,  yatravarodhanam  divah  .  .  tatra  mam 
amrtam  krdhi  where  the  king,  the  son  of  Vivasvant,  and  where  the 
secret  place  of  heaven  is,  there  do  thou  (Soma)  make  me  immortal. 
mahis  :  A.  pi.  f.  of  mah  great,  pantham :  97,  2  a.  Vaivasvatam  : 
Yama  is  in  several  passages  called  by  this  patronymic  ;  cf.  also  5  c, 
and  X.  17,  1 :  Yamasya  mata,  paryuhyamana  maho  jaya  Vivas- 
vatah.  the  mother  of  Yama  being  married  as  the  wife  of  the  great 
Vivasvant.  bahiibhyas :  for  the  many  that  die  and  go  to  the  other 
world,  anu-paspasanam  :  pf.  pt.  A.  of  spas  see.  samgamanam. : 
as  gathering  the  dead  together  in  his  abode,  rajanam  :  Yama  is  several 
times  called  a  king,  but  never  expressly  a  god.  duvasya  :  addressed 
to  the  sacrificer. 

2  Yam6  no  gatum  pratham6  vi-         Yama  has  first  found  out  the  way 

veda :  for  us  :   this  pasture  is  not  to  be 

naisa  gavyutir  apabhartava  u.  taken  away.     Whither  our  former 

yatra    nah    piirve   pitarah   pa-  fathers  have  passed  away,  thither 

reyiir,  those  that  have  been  born  since  (pass 

ena  jajnanah  pathia  anu  svah.  away)  along  their  several  paths. 


166 


FUNEEAL   HYMN 


[x.  14,  2 


Yamas  :  a  explains  what  is  said  of  Yama  in  the  preceding  stanza. 
viveda  :  pf.  of  2.  Yid  find,  gavyutis  :  used  figuratively  to  express  Ihe 
abode  which  Yama  has  found  for  those  who  die.  apa-bhartavai : 
dat.  inf.  with  double  accent  (p.  452,  7);  here  it  has  a  passive  force 
(p.  335,  a),  b  is  most  naturally  to  be  taken  as  forming  a  hemistich 
with  a,  not  as  beginning  a  new  sentence  antecedent  to  yatra.  The 
exact  sense  of  cd  is  uncertain  owing  to  the  doubtful  interpretation  of 
ena  and  jajnanas.  The  former  word  is  probably  corr.  to  yatra,  and 
the  latter  the  frequent  pf.  pt.  A.  of  jan  generate.  It  might  be  from 
jna  Tcnotv  (from  which,  however,  this  pt.  does  not  seem  to  occur 
elsewhere) :  the  meaning  would  then  be,  '  knowing  the  way  thereby 
(ena),'  because  Yama  found  it  for  them,  svas :  hy  their  oivn  xmihs, 
each  by  his  own,  each  going  by  himself. 


3  ^Tf}^  ^S[^^  ^rff  ftfir^ 


^fi^  I  ^:  I  '^^\  \  '^f^x^^f^:  \ 
ff^:  I  ^liifiT:  I  ^^T^:  I 
^T'l^  I  ^  I  Itt:  I  ^'g:  1^1=^1 

^Tf  T  I  ^^  I  W^Ji^i  I  ^^  I  ^f^  II 


8  Matali  Kavyair,  Yam 6  Angiro- 

bhir, 
Brhaspatir  ]^kvabhir  vavrdha- 

nah, 
yarns  ca  deva  vavrdhiir,  y6  ca 

devan, 
svaha  any 6,  svadhayany^  mad- 

anti. 


3Iatall  having  groivn  strong  ivith 
the  KavyaSj  Yama  with  the  Aiigi- 
rases,  Brhaspati  ivith  the  liJcvans, 
tuhom  the  gods  have  made  strong 
and  who  (have  made  strong) 
the  gods,  some  rejoice  in  the  call 
Svaha,  others  in  the  offering  to  the 
dead. 


Matali :  mentioned  only  here  ;  one  of  seven  m.  stems  in  i  (100,  1  b). 
8iiyana  thinks  this  means  Indra  because  that  god  s  charioteer  (in 
later  times)  is  matali  and  therefore  matali  (N.  of  matalin)  is  '  he 
who  is  accompanied  by  matali ' ;  but  the  accent  of  words  in  in  is 
invariably  on  that  syllable  (p.  454  B  a).  Kavyais  :  name  of  a  group 
of  ancestors  ;  the  inst.  used  in  the  sociative  sense  (199  A  1).     Angi* 


X.  14,  5]  FUNERAL   HYMN  167 

robhis :  another  group  of  ancestors,  otherwise  associated  with 
Brhaspaii  (who  exclusively  is  called  Angirasa).  Rkvabhis  :  another 
group  of  ancestors  ;  cp.  sa  rkvata  gan^na  he  (Brhaspati)  with  the 
singing  host  (iv.  50,  5).  vavrdhanas  :  by  means  of  oblations,  yams 
ca :  the  ancestors  whom  the  gods  strengthened  by  their  aid,  and  who 
strengthened  the  gods  with  their  offerings,  svaha  any6  :  some,  by 
their  association  with  the  gods,  rejoice  in  the  call  svaha,  which  is 
addressed  to  the  gods,  others  in  the  funeral  oblations  offered  to  them 
as  ancestors,     madanti :  with  inst.  (p.  308,  1  c). 


f^"^f«T:  ftgfir:  ^f^^^:  i        ^f#T:>jf5T:  i  ftgvjf^i:  i  ^vjf^^:  i 

^  TT^-fft^f  ^T^^^  II  ^^  I  TT^I  I  ff^^T  I  'TT^^^  II 

4  imam,  Yama,   prastaram   a  hi         Upon  this  strewn  grass,  OYama, 

sida,  pray  seat  thyself,  uniting  thyself 

Angirobhih  pitrbhih   samvida-  ivith   the  Avgirases,    the  fathers. 

nah.  Let  the  spells  recited  hy  the  seers 

a  tva  mantrah   kavisasta  vah-  bring  thee  hither.    Do  thou,  0  king, 

antu.  rejoice  in  this  oblation. 

ena,  raj  an,  havisa  madayasva. 

a  sida :  2.  s.  ipv.  of  sad  sit  w.  ace.  hi :  p.  252,  2 ;  cp.  p.  467,  B. 
pitrbhis  :  apposition  to  Angirobhis  (cp.  3  a),  samvidanas  :  pr.  pt. 
A.  of  2.  vidfind  according  to  the  root  class  (158  a  a),  kavi-sastas  : 
on  the  accent  cp.  p.  456,  2  a  and  p.  462,  f.  n.  4.  ena  :  here  (cp.  2  d) 
inst.  of  ena  (112  a)  agreeing  with  havisa ;  accented  because  beginning 
the  Pada  (and  always  as  an  adv.,  cp.  2  d).  madayasva  :  with  inst., 
cp.  madanti  in  3  d. 

M  ^^frf^TT  'iff  ^"^f^^       ^fl^T'^ftT:  I  ^  I  'iff  I  ^fir^f^r:  I 

^4  %^fT:i  Tf^^yp^  I  ^  I  %^^:  I  Ti  I  'TTf^^  I 


168  FUNEEAL   HYMK  [x.  14,  5 

>jftT5?f%  ^^w{  f'R^  II  ^f^'i  I  ^  I  ^fff^  I  "^  I  f^s^^  II 


5  Angirobhir  a  gahi  yajniyebhir ; 
Yama,    Vairupair     iha    mada- 

yasva. 
Vivasvantam  huve,  yah  pita  te, 
asmin  yajn^  barhisi  a  nisadya. 


Come  hither  tvith  the  adorable 
Ahgirases  ;  0  Yama,  with  the  sons 
of  Virupa  do  thou  here  rejoice.  I 
call  Vivasvant  who  is  thy  father, 
(let  him  rejoice),  having  sat  himself 
down  on  the  strew  at  this  sacrifice. 


Angirobhis :  sociative  inst.  (199  A  1).  a  gahi :  root  ao.  ipv.  of 
gam  (148,  5).  Vairupais :  sociative  inst. ;  this  patronymic  form 
occurs  only  here ;  Virupa  occurs  once  in  the  sing,  as  the  name  of 
one  who  praised  Agni  (viii.  64,  6),  and  three  times  in  the  pi.  as 
of  seers  closely  connected  with  the  Ahgirases,  as  sons  of  heaven 
or  of  Ahgiras.  huve :  1.  s.  pr.  A.  of  hii  call,  yas :  supply  asti. 
c  is  defective  by  one  syllable  (p.  441,  4  B  a),  barhisi  a :  to  be  taken 
together  (cp.  176,  1,  2).  nisadya:  gd.  of  sad  sit;  agreeing  with 
Vivasvantani  (cp.  210) :  it  is  not  the  priest  who  sits  down 
on  the  strew,  but  the  god  ;  d  occurs  in  iii.  35,  6  as  applied  to 
Indra. 


^Pi  ^\  ^5R^%  ^'.TT  II 


^?rf^T^:  I  ^:  I  ftfTT*  I  Mi'^i:  i 
^4^TT!r:  I  g'i^:  I  ^'^TT^:  i 

^  I  v^  I  ^^^%  I  W\J[  II 


6  Ahgiraso,  nah  pitaro,  Navagva,         Tlie  Aitgirases,  our  fathers,  the 


Atharvano,    Bhrgavah,    somia- 

sah : 
t6sam    vayam    sumatau    yajni- 

yanam 
dpi  bhadr^  saumanas^  siama. 


Navagvas,  the  Atharvans,  the 
Bhrgus,  the  Soma-loving :  we  ivould 
abide  in  the  favour,  the  good  graces 
of  them  the  adorable  ones. 


X.  14,  8]  FUNERAL   HYMN  169 

nah  pitarah :  in  apposition  to  the  names  ;  cp.  4  b.  Navagvas  &c., 
names  of  ancient  priestly  families,  dpi  syama  to  be  taken  together; 
api  as  =  to  take  part  in, 

^  Wf  ^f^  ^W*i:  ^f^  iTi  Ttf  iiffi  Tff  J  ^rf^^^:  I  ^f*r:  i 

^^t  ^:  ^'  ftcft:  tfr:^:  i  ^^  i  ^:  i  ^'  i  fq?!?::  i  ^TTitg:  i 

^HT  Tjm^J  w^^^i  fii^i  ^m  I  TTwr^T  i  ^^^i  i  t^t  i 

-^A  xtiiiTftr  ^^Tsi  'q  l^j^  II  '^^^^  \  q^jftr  i  ^tsfr:  i  '^  \  1^1 " 

7  pr6hi,  pr^hi  pathibhih  purvid-  Go   forth,   go   forth    hy    those 

bhir,  ancient  paths  on  which  our  fathers 

yatra   nah  purve    pitarah   pa-  of  old  have  passed  atvay.     Thou 

reyiih.  shalt  see  both  Jdngs  rejoicing  in  the 

ubha     raj  ana    svadhaya    mad-  offering  to   the  dead,    Yama  and 

anta,  Varum  the  god. 
Yamam    pasyasi   Varunam    ca 

devam. 

pr6hi  pr6hi  :  addressed  to  the  dead  man ;  note  that  this  repeated 
cd.  vb.  is  not  treated  as  an  Amredita ;  in  fact  only  one  repeated 
verbal  form  is  so  treated  in  the  RV.,  viz.  piba-piba  (p.  282,  g).  Note 
the  remarkable  alliteration  in  a  b  ;  cp.  the  repetition  of  -a  in  c  and 
of  -am  in  d  ;  of  a-  in  9  c  d,  and  of  -au  in  10-12.  purve  :  prn.  adj. 
(p.  116).  rajana  :  note  that  both  Yama  and  Varuna  are  called  kings, 
but  Varuna  alone  a  god  (cp.  note  on  1  d).  svadhaya :  cp.  3  d. 
pasyasi :  2.  s.  pr.  sb.  of  pas  see  (cp.  p.  358). 

»=  ^  ^^  f^^T^j  ^  ^M'         ^1 1  ^iw^  I  ftgi^:  I  ^^  I  ^%^  I 
HT^  tj^  ^VR^  I  ^^^'^ '  ^"^  I  f^^w^n.  I 

ff^T^^^  H^T^fl  f|wM  I  ^^^^  I  g^:  I  ^^*i  I  w  I 

^  ^^  <T^  g^:  II  Tff  I 

^Jl  I  TW^  I  W!^T  I  gi^^t:  H 


170  FUNERAL   HYMN  [x.  14,  8 

8  sam     gaehasva    pitibhih,    sam         Unite   tvith  the  Fathers,  unite 

Yamuna,  with  Yamay  ivith  the  reward  of  thy 

istapijrt^na  param^  vioman.  sacrifices   and  good  works  in  the 

hitvayavadyam     punar     astam  highest  heaven.     Leaving  hlemish 

6hi :  hehind  go  hack  to  thy  home  ;  unite 

sam  gaehasua  taniia  suvareah.  with  thy  hody,  full  of  vigour. 

ista-purt^na :  note  that  this  old  Dvandva  cd.  (see  vocab.)  is  not 
analysed  in  the  Pada  text.  param6 :  the  abode  of  Yama  and  the 
Fathers  is  in  the  highest  heaven  ;  madhye  divah  in  x.  15,  14. 
vioman  :  loc.  without  i  (p.  69).  hitvaya  :  gd.,  163,  3.  astam  :  the 
home  of  the  Fathers  ;  cp.  9  b-d.  tanva  suvareah  :  being  free  from 
disease  and  frailties,  the  dead  man  unites  with  a  body  which  is  com- 
plete and  without  imperfections.  The  AV.  often  speaks  of  such  being 
the  state  of  things  in  the  next  life.  In  d  the  rare  resolution  of  v 
in  -sva  is  required. 

^  ^^(ST^^tMw  II  ■^^•^t'T-  I  "^^^f^*  I  w^^:  I  f% 

i^^J^I 

■^W.  I  ^(^  I  ^^i^-p^  I  ^#  II 

9  apeta,  vita,  vi  ca  sarpatato  :  Begone,  disperse,  slink  off  from 
asma  etam  pitaro  lokam  akran.  here  :  for  him  the  Fathers  have 
ahobhir    adbhir     aktiibhir    vi-    prepared  this  place.     Yama  gives 

aktam  him   a   resting-place  distinguished 

Yamo  dadati  avasanam  asmai.       hy  days  and  ivaters  and  nights. 

This  stanza  is  addressed  to  the  demons  to  leave  the  dead  man 
alone,  vita:  for  vi  ita  (see  p.  464,  17,  la),  asmai:  accented 
because  emphatic  at  the  beginning  of  a  Pada,  but  unaccented  at  the 
end  of  d  (cp.  p.  452,  A  c).  akran :  3.  pi.  act.  root  ao.  of  kr  make. 
ahobhir  adbhih :  cp.  ix.  113,  where  the  joys  of  the  next  world  are 


S 


\    X.  H,  11]  FUNEKAL   HYMN  171 

described,  yatra  jy6tir  ajasram,  tasmin  mam  dhehi  amrte  loke 

ivhere  there  is  eternal  light,  in  that  immortal  tvorld  place  me  (7),  and 
yatra  amur  yahvatir  apas,  tatra  mam  amrtani  krdhi  where  are 
those  stvift  tvaters,  there  make  me  immortal  (8).  aktiibhis :  nights  as 
alternating  with  days,  vyaktam :  pp.  of  vi  +  anj  adorn,  dis- 
tinguish. 

^%^  %  ^W{^  iT^f^  II  ^^^  I  %  I  ^^i^^T^;  I  ^^f^  II 

10  ati  drava  sarameyau  suanau,  Bun  Jjy  a  good  path  past  the  tivo 

caturaksau     sabalau     sadhiina  sons    of  Saramd,    the  four-eyed, 

patha;  brindled  dogs;  then  approach  the 

atha  pitrn  suvidatram  lipehi,  hountifid  Fathers  tvho  rejoice   at 

Yamuna  j6  sadhamadam  mad-  the  same  feast  as  Yama, 

anti. 

sarameyau:  in  this  and  the  following  duals  (including  11  a  b) 
the  ending  au  is  irregularly  used  ;  in  the  old  parts  of  the  RV.  a 
is  employed  before  consonants  and  at  the  end  of  a  Pada.  svanau : 
to  be  read  as  a  trisyllable  (cp.  91,  3).  caturaksau :  doubtless  meant 
to  imply  keen  sight ;  thus  this  epithet  is  also  applied  to  Agni.  In 
the  Avesta  a  four-eyed  dog  watches  at  the  head  of  the  bridge  by 
wliich  the  souls  of  the  dead  pass  to  the  other  world,  and  scares  away 
the  fiend  from  the  holy  ones,  b  is  a  Jagatl  (cp.  p.  445,  f.  n.  7). 
atha  :  the  second  syllable  metrically  lengthened.  Yamuna :  socia- 
tive  inst.  (p.  306,  1).  sadhamadam :  cognate  ace.  with  madanti 
(p.  300,  4). 

<=^<^  ^  ^  ^T^  ^^^  Tf^iff         ^1^1  ^^T I  ^  I  Tf^ffifr  i 
'^gT^  4f^^  f^^  I       '^i  i^^  I  ^f^^  T^  ^f^ix'^  I 

gi^Twr  I 


172  FUNERAL   HYMN  [x.  14,  ii 

^f%  ^T^T  ^'HFft^  ^  ^  II      ^f%  I  'q;  I  ^#  I  ^9R^^?^  I  "^  I 

Vff  II 


11  yau  te  suanau,  Yama,  raksita- 

rau, 
caturaksau  pathiraksi  nreaksa- 

sau, 
tabhiam  enam  pari  dehi,  rajan  : 
svasti     casma     anamivam     ca 

dhehi. 


Give  Mm  over  to  those  two,  0 
King,  that  are  thy  dogs,  0  Yama, 
the  guardians,  four-eyed,  ivatcliers 
of  the  path,  observers  of  men  ; 
bestow  on  him  welfare  and  health. 


yau :  au  in  this  and  the  following  duals  for  a,  as  in  10.  nrca- 
ksasau :  as  Yama's  messengers  (cp.  12  b).  b  is  a  Jagati  (cp.  10  b). 
enam :  the  dead  man.  dehi  (2.  s.  ipv.  of  da  give) :  that  they  may 
guide  him  to  Yama's  abode,     dhehi :  2.  s.  ipv.  of  dha  put. 


fTT  W«f  1^%  151^ 
H^^TrIT?Tg^%f  W^  II 


^^i^^  I  ^vjg^'  I  ^^#  I 

^^  I  fcfr  I  'qT*?:  I  ^'iK  I  "^i  I 

fff  I  w«ii  I  f  ir«r  I  ^t^  I 
gif :  I  ^TrfTJii  ^g^i  ^^  I  Tf  I  ^ff^  II 


12  urunasav,  asutfpa,  udumbalau,  Broad-nosed,  life-stealing^  .  .  the 

Yamasya   dutau   carato  janam  two  as  messengers  of  Yama  tvander 

anu ;  among  men ;  may  these  two  give  us 

tav  asmabhyam  drsaye  siiriaya  bacJc  here  to-day  auspicious  life  that 

piinar  datam  asum  ady^ha  bhad-  tve  may  see  the  sun. 

ram. 

uru-nasau :  the  second  syllable  is  metrically  lengthened  ;  on  tl)e 
cerebralization  of  the  dental  n  see  65  b  ;  hero  we  have  the  normal  use 
of  an  as  av  before  a  vowel  within  a  Pada;  broad-nosed,  that  is,  keen- 
scented,  asutrpa  u-  :  on  the  Sandhi  see  22  ;  the  literal  meaning 
delighting  in  lives  implies   delighting   in   taking  them,  while  they 


X.  H,  u]  FUNERAL   HYMN  173 

wander  among  men  as  Yama's  messengers,  udumbaldu  :  this  word 
occurs  here  only,  and  there  is  no  means  of  throwing  any  light  on  its 
sense ;  the  au  of  this  dual,  as  of  dutau,  for  a,  shows  the  same 
irregularity  as  in  the  preceding  stanzas,  caratas :  in  order  to  seek 
out  the  lives  of  those  about  to  go  to  ihe  abode  of  Yama.  asma- 
bhyam :  dat.  pi.  of  aham.  drsaye  :  dat.  inf.,  with  attracted  ace. 
(200  B  4).  datam  :  3.  du.  ipv.  root  ao.  of  da  give  ;  as  having  already 
marked  us  for  their  victims,  let  them  give  back  our  life  to-day. 

^^  i  wt  ^w^^  ^^^  I  f  I  ^^:  I  ^f^  I 

13  Yamaya  somam  sunuta,  For  Yama  press  the  Soma,  to 

Yamaya  juhuta  havih ; .  Yama  offer  the  ohlation  ;  to  Yama 

Yamam  ha  yajno  gachati,  goes  the  sacrifice  tvell  prepared,  with 

Agniduto  aramkrtah.  Agni  as  its  messenger. 

juhuta:  with  metrically  lengthened  final  vowel;  2.  pi.  ipv.  of 
hu  sacrifice  addressed  to  those  officiating  at  the  sacrifice.  Yamam  i 
ace.  of  the  goal  (197,  1 ;  of.  204,  1  6).  Agnidutas :  the  idea  under- 
lying this  figurative  expression  is  that  the  smoke  of  the  sacrificial  fire 
goes  up  to  heaven  where  Yama  dwells. 

^^jTTg:  IT  ^^  II  ^y^  I  w^- 1  ^  I  ^^"^  II 

i  14  Yamaya  ghrtavad  dhavir  To    Yama     offer    the     ohlation 

juhota,  pra  ca  tisthata ;  abounding  in  ghee,  and  step  forth  ; 

sa  no  dev^su  a  yamad,  maf/  he  guide  us  to  the  gods  that 

dirgham  ayuh  pra  jivase.  we  may  live  a  long  life. 


174  FUNERAL  HYMN  [x.  14,  14 

juh6ta :  the  irr.  strong  form  (p.  144,  B.  3  a)  with  a  long  vowel  in 
the  second  syllable  is  here  utilized  for  metrical  purposes,  as  the 
regular  form  juhuta  has  its  final  vowel  lengthened  in  13  b.  pra 
tisthata:  step  forward,  in  order  to  offer  the  oblation  ;  cp.  the  use  of 
pra  bhr  'bring  forward  an  oblation,  a  yamat :  inj.  of  root  ao.  of  yam 
extend ;  this  form  constitutes  a  play  on  the  name  of  Yama.  nas  : 
ace.  governed  by  a  yamad ;  cp.  ix.  44,  5,  sa  nah  Somo  dev^su  a 
yamat  may  he,  Soma,  guide  us  to  the  gods ;  on  ths  loc,  cp.  204  B  1  Z>. 
ayus  :  cognate  ace.  (197  A  4).  pra  jivase  :  cp.  p.  463,  f.  n.  8.  The 
meaning  of  cd  is :  '  may  he  keep  us  (the  survivors)  to  the  worship  of 
the  gods  (and  not  lead  us  to  the  Fathers),  so  that  we  may  enjoy  long 
life  on  earth '  (cp.  12  c,  d). 

15  Yamaya  madhumattamam  To  Yama  the  king  offer  the  most 

rajne  havyam  juhotana.  honied  oblation.     This  obeisance  is 

idam  nama  rsibhyah   purvaj6-  for  the  seers  born  of  old,  the  ancient 

bhiah,  makers  of  the  path, 
purvebhyah  pathikrdbhiah. 

juhotana :  again  the  strong  form  to  suit  the  metre  (cp.  14  b). 
pathikrdbhyas :  because  they  were  the  first,  after  Yama  had  shown 
the  way,  to  tread  the  path  leading  to  Yama's  abode  (the  pitryana  the 
road  of  the  Fathers).  This  stanza  is  a  Brhati  in  the  middle  of 
Anustubhs,  differing  from  them  only  by  the  addition  of  four  syllables 
in  the  third  Pada  (see  p.  444,  9  b). 

^m  m  ^w  wff m  II  ^#r  I  m  I  ^%  I  wifim  ii 


X.  14, 16]  FUNEKAL   HYMN  175 

6  trikadrukebhih  patati.  It  flies  through  the  three  Soma 

sal  urvir,  6kam  id  brhat,  vats.    The  six  earths,  the  one  great 

tristub,  gayatri,  chandamsi,  (world),  trishtbh,  gayatri  and  (the 

sarva  ta  Yama  ahita.  other)  metres,  all  these  are  placed 

in  Yama. 

The  meaning  of  a  b  in  this  final  stanza  is  obscure,  partly  because 
the  subject  is  not  expressed  in  a,  and  partly  because  it  is  uncertain 
whether  b  is  syntactically  connected  with  a  or  not.  The  probability 
is  that  here  we  have  two  sentences,  one  consisting  of  a,  the  other 
of  b-d.  The  first  then  probably  means  that  the  Soma  draught  is 
ready  for  Yama ;  the  second  expresses  the  greatness  of  Yama  by 
stating  that  all  things  are  contained  in  him.  trikadrukebhis  :  this 
word,  occurring  six  times  in  the  KV.,  always  appears  in  the  pi.,  and 
always  except  here  in  the  locative.  It  is  four  times  directly  con- 
nected with  Soma,  and  once  alludes  to  it ;  e.  g.  trikadrukesu  apibat 
sutasya  he  (Indra)  drank  of  the  pressed  Soma  in  the  three  vessels 
(i.  32,  3).  The  term  trikadruka  in  the  ritual  of  the  Brahmanas  is 
the  name  of  three  days  in  a  Soma  ceremony.  The  metaphor  of  flying- 
is  applied  to  the  flowing  Soma  compared  Avith  a  bird,  as  '  the  god 
flies  like  a  bird  to  settle  in  the  vats '  (ix.  3,  1).  The  allusion  therefore 
seems  to  be  to  the  Soma  which  the  priests  are  called  upon  to  press  in 
13  a.  sad  urvih. :  this  expression  is  probably  equivalent  to  the  three 
heavens  and  three  earths:  cp.  tisr6  dyavah.  nihita  antar  asmin, 
tisrd  bhumir  liparah,  sadvidhanah  the  three  heavens  are  placed 
within  him  (Varuna)  and  the  three  earths  below,  forming  a  sixfold  order 
(vii.  87,  5).  6kani  id  brhat :  by  this  expression  is  probably  meant 
the  universe,  otherwise  spoken  of  as  visvam  6kani,  idam  ^kam  &c., 
the  one  being  contrasted  wdth  the  six  ;  cp.  i.  164,  6,  vi  yds  tastambha 
sal  ima  rajamsi  .  .  kim  api  svid  6kani  ?  who  propped  asunder  these 
six  spaces  ;  what  pray  is  the  one  ?  tristiibh,  gayatri  :  these  tivo  names 
of  metres  are  only  mentioned  in  this  and  one  other  hymn  of  the 
tenth  Mandala.  This  and  the  following  four  hymns  (x.  15-18)  are 
among  the  latest  in  the  KV.  The  concluding  stanza  here,  as  in 
some  hymns  addressed  to  other  deities,  sums  up  the  greatness  of  the 
god  by  saying  that  he  embraces  all  things ;  cp.  i.  32,  15  (Indraj ; 
V.  13,  6  (Agni). 


176  PITARAS  [x.  15,  1 

pitAras 

Two  hymns  (x.  15  and  54)  are  addressed  to  the  Pitaras  or  Fathers,  the 
blessed  dead  who  dwell  in  the  third  heaven,  the  third  or  highest  step  of 
Visnu.  The  term  as  a  rule  applies  to  the  early  or  first  ancestors,  who  fol- 
lowed the  ancient  paths,  seers  who  made  the  paths  by  which  the  recent 
dead  go  to  join  them.  Various  groups  of  ancestors  are  mentioned,  such  a? 
the  Angirases  and  Atharvans,  the  Bhrgus  and  Vasisthas,  who  are  identical 
in  name  with  the  priestly  families  associated  by  tradition  with  the  composi- 
tion of  the  Atharvaveda  and  of  the  second  and  seventh  Mandalas  of  the 
Rigveda.  The  Pitaras  are  classed  as  higher,  lower,  and  middle,  as  earlier 
and  later,  who  though  not  always  known  to  their  descendants,  are  known  to 
Agni.  They  revel  with  Yama  and  feast  with  the  gods.  They  are  fond  of 
Soma,  and  thirst  for  the  libations  prepared  for  them  on  earth,  and  eat  the 
offerings  along  with  him.  They  come  on  the  same  car  as  Indra  and  the 
gods.  Arriving  in  their  thousands  they  range  themselves  on  the  sacrificial 
grass  to  the  south,  and  drink  the  pressed  draught.  They  receive  oblations 
as  their  food.  They  are  entreated  to  hear,  intercede  for,  and  protect  their 
worshippers,  and  besought  not  to  injure  their  descendants  for  any  sin 
humanly  committed  against  them.  They  are  invoked  to  give  riches, 
children,  and  long  life  to  their  sons,  who  desire  to  be  in  their  good  graces. 
The  Vasisthas  are  once  collectively  implored  to  help  their  descendants. 
Cosmical  actions,  like  those  of  the  gods,  are  sometimes  attributed  to  the 
Fathers.  Thus  they  are  said  to  have  adorned  the  sky  with  stars,  to  have 
placed  darkness  in  the  night  and  light  in  the  day ;  they  found  the  light 
and  generated  the  dawn.  The  path  trodden  by  the  Fathers  (pitryana)  is 
different  from  that  trodden  by  the  gods  (devayana). 

X.  15.     Metre:  Tristubh;   11  Jagati. 

^  ^^^^  ftffft  f%  II  ^  I  ^:  I  w^  I  fxmt:  i  f^3  ii 


1  lid  iratam  avara,  lit  parasa,  Let  the  loiver,  let  the  higher,  let 

un   madhyamah   pitarah.  somi-     the  middlemost  Soma-Joving  Fathers 

asah ;  arise ;     let    those    Fathers    who, 

asum  ya  iyiir  avrka  rtajnas,  friendly,  Tiuoiving  right,  have  gone 

t6  n6  avantu  pitaro  havesu.  to  life  eternal,  favour  us  in  our 

invocatio7is. 


X.  15,  2]  PITAKAS  177 

lid  iratam  :  note  that  cd.  verbs  are  often  repeated  by  means  of  the 
prp.  (here  ud  twice)  alone,  avare  (on  the  dec,  see  120  c  1)  &c. : 
these  three  words  refer  to  the  Pitrs  dwelling  in  the  three  divisions  of 
the  world,  earth,  air,  heaven  (cp.  y6  parthive  rajasi  in  2  e  ;  and  the 
division  of  heaven  into  three,  the  lowest,  the  middlemost,  and  the 
third  in  which  the  Fathers  sit :  AV.  xviii.  2,  49).  Sayana  thinks 
that  here  the  degrees  of  their  holiness  is  meant,  but  in  this  same 
stanza,  when  it  appears  in  the  AV.  (xviii.  1,  44),  he  thinks  that 
degrees  of  merit  or  of  age  are  intended  ;  but  degrees  of  age  are 
expressly  mentioned  in  2  b  by  purvasas  and  liparasas.  asum  :  life 
in  the  heavenly  world,  immortal  life  (the  Pitaras  are  called  immortal 
in  AV.  vi.  41,  3)  as  opposed  to  terrestrial  life,  iyur :  3.  pi.  pf.  act. 
of  i  go. 

%  inf§'%  T^^rr  f^^Tfi  %  i  ^^f^%  i  T^ft  i  ^  i  f^i^Tn:  i 

2  idam  pitrbhyo  nani6  astu  adya,  Let  this  obeisance  he  made  to-day 
yd  purvaso,  ya  uparasa  iyuh ;  to  the  Fathers  tvho  have  departed 
j6  parthive  rajasi  a  nisatta,  earlier  and  later,  tvho  have  seated 

yd  va  nunam  suvrjanasu  viksu.     themselves   in   the  terrestrial   air 

or  who  are  notv  in  settlements  ivith 
fair  abodes. 

purvasas :  in  x.  14,  2.  7  the  prn.  form  purve  is  used  (see  120,  2). 
iyiir :  in  x.  14,  2.  7  the  more  distinctive  cd.  pareyur  appears,  a 
nisattas  (pp.  of  sad  sit,  cp.  67  a,  b  -,  cp.  a  nisadya  in  x.  14,  5). 
parthive  rajasi :  in  the  atmospheric  region  above  the  earth  ;  here 
the  Pitaras  in  the  air  intermediate  between  heaven  and  earth  are 
meant,  while  in  b  and  d  those  in  heaven  and  on  earth  respectively 
are  intended,  suvrjanasu  viksii  :  cp.  the  frequent  manusisu  viksii 
human  settlements,  with  reference  to  the  Fathers  present  at  the 
funeral  offerings  on  earth. 

1902  U 


178  PITARAS  [x.  15,  3 

«T^nT  f^w^  TfT'ifiTFr:  II  wt:  i 

^ff  ^^^:  I  %  I  w^^i  I  ^fT^  I 
H^ifi  I  T^w.  I  ^  I  Tl  I  w^^fiTFr:  ii 

3  aham  pitrn  suvidatram  avitsi,  I  have  won  liither  tM  hotmtiful 

napatam     ca    vikramanam    ca  Fathers  and  the  grandson  a^id  the 

Visnoh  :  ivide  stride  of  Visnu :  they  who,  sit- 

barhisado  y6  svadhaya  sutasya  ting  on  the  stretv,  shall  partake  of 

bhajanta    pitvas,    ta    ihagami-  the  pressed  drink  tviih  the  offering 

sthah..  to  the  dead,  come  most  gladly  here. 

a-avitsi  (1.  s.  A.  s  ao.  of  2.  Yid  find) ;  =  I  have  induced  to  come  to 
this  offering,  napatam  :  it  is  somewhat  uncertain  who  is  meant  by 
this  ;  according  to  Prof.  Geldner's  ingenious  explanation  Yama  (with 
whom  the  Pitaras  are  associated)  is  intended,  because  in  the  VS. 
(xxix.  60)  Visnu  (here  coupled  with  napatam)  is  called  the  husband 
of  Aditi,  whose  son  (TS.  vi.  5,  6,  2)  was  Vivasvant,  the  father  of  Yama 
(see  note  on  x.  14,  1) ;  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  this  later  statement 
was  part  of  the  mythological  belief  of  the  RV.,  where  Yama  is  the 
grandson  of  Tvastr  (x.  17,  1).  On  the  other  hand,  the  word  may  be 
used  elliptically  to  designate  Agni  =  sahaso  napatam  (Agni  is  called 
naptre  sahasvate  in  viii.  102,  7)  =  sahasah  suniim  son  of  strength,  a 
frequent  epithet  of  Agni,  for  which  once  (vi.  4,  4)  suno  son  alone  is 
used  in  an  Agni  hymn ;  and  below  (9  c)  Agni  is  invoked  to  come 
with  the  Fathers :  agne  yahi  suvidatrebhih  pitrbhih.  There  is 
here  also  a  good  example  of  the  fanciful  interpretations  of  Sayana : 
Visnor  (=  yajnasya)  napatam  (—  vinasabhavam)  the  non-destruction 
of  the  sacrifice,  vikramanam:  Visnu's  third  step  (=  the  highest 
heaven),  where  the  Fathers  dwell  (cp.  i.  154,  5).  bhajanta :  3.  pi. 
inj.  A.  of  bhaj  share,  with  partitive  gen.  (202  A  e).  pitvas :  gen.  of 
pitxi  (p.  81).     a-gamisthas  :  accent,  p.  453,  9  A  6. 


X.  15,  5] 

4  barhisadah  pitara,  uti  arvag ; 
ima   vo   havya   eakrma :    jusa- 

dhvam ; 
ta  a  gata  avasa  samtamena ; 
atha   nah   sam  y6r   arapo  da- 

dhata. 


PITARAS  179 

^ff  vj^^:  I  "ftcTT:  I  ^<ft  I  ^#r^  i 
T'n:  I  ^:  i  f^  i  W'T  i  i^^^i 
%  I  ^  I  im  I  ^^w[  i  ^Ji^i?t%^  I 
^^  I  ^:  I  il?l.l  ^:  I  ^T^:  I  f^fT  il 

Ye  Fathers  that  sit  on  the  sfreiv, 
come  hither  with  aid  ;  these  offer- 
ings we  have  made  to  you :  enjoy 
them  ;  so  come  icith  most  beneficent 
aid  ;  then  bestow  on  us  health  and 
blessing  free  from  hurt. 


barhisadah  pitarah  :  see  note  on  viii.  48,  7  c.  iiti :  inst.  of  iiti 
(p.  81,  f.  n.  4).  arvak :  hither ;  the  vb.  a  gata  come  is  easily  to  be 
supplied  from  c.  eakrma :  with  metrical  lengthening  of  the  final 
syllable,  jusadhvam :  accented  because  it  forms  a  new  sentence 
(p.  466,  19  b).  t6  :  as  such,  as  enjoying  our  offerings,  gata :  2.  pi. 
ipv.  root  ao.  of  gam  go.  atha :  metrically  lengthened,  dadhata : 
2.  pi.  pr.  ipv.  of  dha  place,  with  irr.  strong  form  of  the  pr.  stem 
instead  of  the  normal  dhatta  (p.  144  B  1  b). 


^rfy  W^lti^-^^TR:  II 

5  lipahutah  pitarah  somiaso 
barhisiesu  nidhisu  priy^su ; 
ta  a  gamantu ;  ta  iha  sruvantu ; 
adhi     bruvantu;      t6     avantu 
asman. 


^4^^m:  I  f^rrt:  i  '^J^^:  i 

^f^^g  I  f^^fvg  I  ft^g  I 

%  I  ^  I  tm^  I  %  I  Tf  I  ^^'tT  I 

^Ri  I  5^5^  I  %  I  ^w  I  WPI  I! 

Invited    are    the    Soma-loving 


Fathers  to  the  dear  deposits  placed 
on  the  strew ;  let  them  come;  let 
them  listen  here ;  let  them  speak  for 
us  ;  let  them  aid  us. 


lipa-hutas  :  pp.  of  hii  call,  nidhisu :  the  offerings  deposited  on 
the  sacrificial  grass,  gamantu:  3.  pi.  ipv.  root  ao.  of  gam  go.  sru- 
vantu :  3.  pi.  ipv.  roolf  ao.  of  sru  hear. 

N  2 


180  PITAKAS  [x.  15,  6 

*TT  ff f€i5  ftfTT:  "^4  f^^        m  I  f|f%f  I  ft^:  I  %^  I  f^n^  I  ^:  i 
^?  '^'t:  H^^m  ^TT^FT  II  ^ct^  I  ^:  I  w^:  i  HWn  i  ^xw  ii 

6  acya  janu,  daksinato  nisadya,  Bending  the  Jcnee,  sitting  doivn 
imam  yajnam  abhi  grnita  visve ;  to  the  south  do  ye  all  greet  favour- 
ma  himsista,  pitarah,  k^na  cin     aUy  this  sacrifice ;  injure  us  not, 

no,  0  Fathers,  hy  reason  of  any  sin 

yad  va  agah  purusata  karama.       that  we  may  have  committed  against 

you  through  human  frailty. 

a-acya  (gd.  of  ac  bend) :  note  that  the  suffix  -ya  is  much  oftener 
long  than  short  (164),  but  in  the  Pada  text  it  is  always  short,  janu : 
probably  the  left  knee  ;  cp.  the  SB.  ii.  4,  2,  2,  where  the  gods  bend 
the  right  knee,  the  Fathers  the  left  knee.  In  rites  connected  with  the 
dead,  the  auspicious  direction  is  reversed,  left  being  substituted  for 
right,  daksinatas :  to  the  right  (of  the  v6di  altar),  that  is,  to  the 
south,  because  the  south  is  the  region  of  Yama  and  the  Pitaras. 
grnita :  2.  pi.  ipv.  of  1.  gr  sing,  himsista :  2.  pi.  inj.  is  ao.  of 
hims  injure.  k6na  cid  yad  agah  for  k^na  cid  agasa  yad,  the  sub- 
stantive being  put  into  the  rel.  instead  of  the  principal  clause,  vas  : 
dat.  of  disadvantage  (p.  314  B  1).  puyusata  ;  inst.  s.  identical  in 
form  with  the  stem  (97,  1,  p.  77).  karama:  1.  pi.  root  ao.  sb. 
(p.  171) ;  in  the  sense  of  an  indefinite  past. 

^  w^^'Rt  ^^rwt^ig^  ^^Tf^T^:  i  ^x^'rt?^  i  ^^^^  i 

T:f^  ^ItT  ^^  ^wi'^  I  Tf^^l  I  v^  I  ^T^  I  ^T^  I 

H^wl:  ftfiT^^  w:  g^«t:  I  ftcTTt  i  ^  I  ^W>  i 

IT  ^f!  ff  ^frt  ^ynT{  II         TT I  ^j[  I  ^  I  Tf  I  ^^n:  i  f vttt  ii 

7  asinaso  aruninam  upasthe  Sitting  in  the  lap  of  the  ruddy 
rayim  dhatta  dasuse  martiaya.      (dawns)  hestoiv  tvealth  mi  the  tvor- 


X.  15,  9]  '  PITARAS  181 

putr^bhiah,  pitaras,  tasya  vas-  shipping  mortal.     To  your  sons,  0 

vah  Fathers,  present  a  share  of  those 

pra  yachata;    ta    ihorjam   da-  riches;    so    do    ye    here    hestoiv 

dhata.  strength. 

asinasas :  irr.  pr.  pt.  A.  of  as  sit :  158  a.  aruninam :  aruna 
ruddy  is  the  colour  of  dawn,  and  the  f.  of  this  adj.  sometimes 
appears  as  an  epithet  of  the  dawns  ;  that  these  are  here  meant  is  also 
indicated  by  vii.  9,  1  ;  63,  3,  where  Agni  and  Surya  are  said  to 
awake  or  arise  usasam  upasthat  from  the  lap  of  the  dawns,  dhatta 
and  dadhata  :  here  both  the  regular  and  the  irr.  ipv.  of  dha  are  used 
(cp.  note  on  4  d).  tasya  vasvah :  referring  to  rayim  in  b;  on  the 
form  of  the  gen.  see  p.  81.     t6:  anaphoric  use  (cp.  p.  294  h). 

8  y6  nah  purve  pitarah  somiaso,  l%ose  forefathers  of  ours,    the 

anuhire  somapitham  Vasisthah,  Soma-loving,   the    Vasisthas,    who 

t^bliir  Yamah  samrarand  hav-  fare    after    him     to    the    Soma- 

imsi,  draught,    with    them    let    Yama, 

usann    usadbhih,    pratikamam  sharing   their  gifts,  eat  the  ohla- 

attu.  tions  at  pleasure,  he  the  eager  tvith 

them  the  eager, 

anu-uhir^  :  the  derivation  and  meaning  are  somewhat  doubtful ; 
most  probably  pf.  of  vah  drive,  in  this  case  meaning  tvho  have  driven 
after  Yama  to  the  Soma- draught ;  it  may  possibly  come  from  iih  con- 
sider, then  meaning  ivho  have  been  considered  worthy  of  the  Soma- 
draught.  Vasisthas :  as  one  of  the  groups  of  ancient  seers,  sam- 
raranas  (pf.  pt.  A.  of  ra  give) :  sharing  with  them  their  gifts  to  their 
descendants  (cp.  7  b  c). 


182  .  PITAKAS  [x.  35,  9 

9  j6  tatrsiir  devatra  j^hamana,  Who,    gasping,    have     thirsted 

hotravidah  st6matastas6  arkaih :    among  the  gods,  knoiving  oblations, 

agne  yahi  suvidatrebhir  arvan       having  praise  fashioned  for  them 

satyaih  kavyaih  pitrbhir  ghar-     with  songs  :  with  them  thehountifiil 

masadbhih.  Fathers,  the  true,  the  tvise  that  sit 

at  the  heating  vessel,  come  hither, 
0  Agni. 

tatrsiir :  pf.  of  trs,  with  long  red.  vowel  (139,  9) ;  such  vowels 
regularly  appear  in  their  short  form  in  the  Pada  text  (cp.  note  on 
iii.  59,  1  b).  devatra :  in  heaven  ;  tra  is  one  of  the  suffixes  which 
in  the  Pada  text  is  separated,  being  treated  as  the  second  member  of 
a  cd.  stoma-tastasas  :  this  T^,,  fashioned  tvith  praise,  otherwise  used 
with  mati  =  hymn,  is  here  applied  to  persons  and  thus  comes  to  have 
the  sense  of  a  Karmadharaya  Bv.  (189,  1)  =  tasta-stomasas ;  the 
latter  kind  of  cd.,  with  a  pp.  as  first  member,  does  not  exist  in 
the  KV.  arkais  :  to  be  taken  with  the  preceding  word  =  hy  means 
of  songs,  arvan:  93  6.  kavyais :  this  word  occurs  in  only  two 
other  passages,  the  original  meaning  apparently  being  =  kavi  ivise 
(cp.  kavya-ta  wisdom) ;  here  it  may  be  intended  to  denote  a  particular 
group  of  Fathers  (pp.  x.  14,  3).  gharmasadbhis  :  probably  in  heaven  ; 
cp.  X.  16,  10,  sa  gharmam  invat  param6  sadhasthe  :  may  he  (Agni) 
further  the  gharma  in  the  highest  abode  ;  this  word  as  well  as  j6ha- 
manas  may  be  intended  to  contrast  with  tatrsiir ;  cp.  vii.  108,  9. 

qo  ^  ^^arr^  fftT0  fft^T        ^  i  ^wvk'^  i  fftrti^:  i  ff^ivitrr:  i 
^q  ^Tff  ^f^  ^^^^:  ^1^1  ^ff  I  Ht4^\  |^>J^^-:  I 


X.  15,  11] 


PITARAS 


183 


10  ye  satyaso  havirado  havispa 
fndrena   devaih   saratham    da- 

dhanah, 
agne   yahi  sahasram  devavan- 

daih. 


They  who  are  true,  eating  the 
oblation,  drinJdng  the  ohJation, 
having  the  same  car  with  Indra 
and  the  gods,  tvith  those  thousand 
god-praising  remote  forefathers  that 


paraihpurvaihpitfbhir  gharma-    sit  at  the  heating  vessel,  come,  0 
sadbhih.  Agni. 

sa-ratham  :  this  word,  primarily  a  Bv.,  having  the  same  car,  is  then 
often  used  as  a  cognate  ace.  (p.  300,  4)  with  ya  =  go  (on  a  journey) 
ivith  the  same  car  (here  with  dha  in  place  of  ya) ;  then  adverbially 
(p.  301,  5  1)).  dadhanas:  pr.  pt.  A.  of  dha^t*^  (cp.  p.  460,  f.  n.  3)  ; 
the  pf.  pt.  A.  would  be  dadhanas  (159).  sahasram :  agreeing  with 
pitrbhis :  more  usual  would  be  sahasrena  pitrbhis  :  cp.  194  B  1  6 
(p.  291) ;  parais  :  the  primary  meaning  of  this  word  is/ar^/ier  (opposed 
to  nearer  avara,  less  often  lipara,  antara),  more  remote,  then  also 
higher ;  there  is  no  opposition  here  to  purvais  (opposed  to  which  are 
avara  and  lipara),  which  in  any  case  would  be  in  the  reverse  order, 
purvaih  paraih ;  the  meaning  is  the  remote,  the  early  Fathers ;  cp. 
vi.  21,  6,  parani  pratna  remote,  ancient  deeds  opposed  to  avarasas 
later  men. 


^8f  vJ^Tttt:  1 1^_:  I  ^  i  Tf  Rf  fTi 
^^:^^:  I  ^r^  \  l^S"^^^*  i 
^Tf  I  f^'f^  I  TTvj^mf^  I  ^ffftr  I 

Iff^  I  tI^??;  i  ^^iftT^  I  ^^Trl^  II 


11  Agnisvattah    pitara,    6ha     ga- 
chata ; 
sadah-sadah    sadata,     suprani- 
tayah ; 


Ye  Fathers  that  have  been  de- 
voured by  fire  come  hither ;  sit  you 
down  each  on  his  seat,  ye  that  have 
good  guidance;    eat  the  oblations 


atta  havimsi  prayatani  barhisi ;    proffered  on  the  strew  ;  then  bestow 
atha  rayim  sarvaviram  dadha-     ivealth    accompanied    entirely    by 
tana.  strong  sons. 


184  PITAKAS  [x.  15,  ii 

Agni-svattas  :  with  the  voc.  accent  on  the  first  syllable  ;  the 
ordinary  accent  would  be  Agni-svattas  like  other  Tps.  formed  with 
Agni,  but  such  cds.  with  a  pp.  as  second  member  usually  accent  the 
first  (cp.  p.  456,  2  a),  svattas  :  pp.  of  svad  sweeten  (cp.  67  h),  sadah- 
sadah :  itv.  cd.  (p.  282  a ;  p.  454,  10  a),  governed  by  sadata. 
sadata :  2.  pi.  ipv.  a  ao.  of  sad  sit  (147,  5).  supranitayas :  having 
good  guidance,  tvell  led,  coming  in  good  order ;  the  Pada  text  does  not 
recognize  the  cerebralization  of  the  n  (65  a,  h).  atta,  atha  :  final  a 
metrically  lengthened,  pra-yatani :  pp.  of  yam.  dadhatana  :  irr. 
strong  form  (cp.  note  on  7  d)  and  suffix  tana  (p.  925). 

^^  I  ^5R;  I  t^  I  ITi^fTT  I  f  ^'f^  II 


12tuam,  Agna,  ilit6,  jatavedo, 
avad  dhavyani  surabhmi  krtvi. 
pradah  pitrbhyah ;  svadhaya  te 

aksann ; 
addhi  tvam,  deva,  prayata  hav- 

imsi. 


Thou,  0  Agni,  having  leen  im- 
plored, 0  Jatavcdas,  hast  coni'eycd 
the  oblations,  having  made  them 
fragrant.  Thou  hast  presented 
them  to  the  Fathers;  ivith  the 
funeral  offering  they  have  eaten 
them ;  do  thou,  0  god,  eat  the 
oblations  proffered. 


ilitas  :  by  us.  jata-vedas  :  a  very  frequent  and  exclusive  epithet 
of  Agni  ;  it  is  a  Bv.  as  its  accent  shows,  meaning  having  knoiuledge  of 
created  things  as  explained  by  the  RV.  itself:  visva  veda  janima 
jatavedah  Jdtavedas  knows  all  creations  (vi.  15,  13)  ;  this  is  also  the 
explanation  of  Sayana  here :  jatam,  sarvam  jagad,  vetti,  iti  jata- 
vedah. avat :  2.  s.  s  ao.  of  vah  carry  (144,  5).  dhavyani :  for 
havyani  (54).  krtvi:  gd.  of  kr  (163,  1).  adas ;  2.  s.  root  ao.  of  da 
(148,  1  a),  aksan:  3.  pi.  root  ao.  of  ghas  eat  (p.  170,  e).  addhi:  2. 
s.  ipv.  of  ad  cat. 


X.  15,  14] 


PITAKAS  185 

^  I  ^  I  TI I  ft<ri::  I  %  I  ^  I  'Ti  Tf  I 
^T'Yj  ^  I  f^^  I  "m^i  ^  ^fH  I  '^  I  'Ti 

T[Sl^  I 

w^  I  %?!n  ^  I  %  I  ^T^^??*  I 
^^fir:  I  ^^1 1  g>Jif ffi^  i  ^w  ii 


B  y^  ea  iha  pitaro  y6  ca  n6ha, 


Both  the  Fathers  ivho  are  here 


yams   ea   vidma   yam  u  ca  na     and  tvho  are  not  here,  hoth  those 

whom  ive  know  and  ivhom  we  knoiv 
not,  thou  hnowest  how  many  they 
are,  0  Jatavedas  ;  enjoy  the  sacri- 
fice well  prepared  with  funeral 
offerings. 


pravidma, 
tuam  vettha  yati  t6,  jatavedah ; 
svadhabhir     yajnam     sukrtam 

jusasva. 


y6  ea :  supply  santi.  vidma  1.  pi.  pf.  of  vid  Mow  (p.  154,  3) ;  the 
1.  pi.  pr.  is  vidmas.  yams  ca :  Sandhi,  40  a.  yam  u :  39,  and  p.  25, 
f.  n.  2.  pra- vidma :  Jcnow  exactly,  vettha :  2.  s.  pf.  of  vid  know 
(p.  154,  3).     yati:  cp.  118a.     t6:  supply  santi. 


^^T^  Tv4  ^sm^^  II 
iy^ 


^  I  ^f^vj^T^:  I  ^  I  ^5Tf^>J^T\;iT:  i 
^^  I  ff ^:  I  ^^^t  I  ^T^^%  I 
%f*r:  I  ^i?:TZ  I  ^g>J^f?T^i  vjii^  i 

^^vf^^^l  I   fl^  I  ^^^^  II 


Agnidagdha     ye     anagni- 

dagdha, 
madhye  divah  svadhaya  mada- 

yante, 
t6bhih.  suaral  asunitim  etam 
yathavasam      tanuam      kalpa- 

yasva. 


Those  who,  "burnt  with  fire  and 
not  burnt  ivith  fire,  are  exhilarated 
by  the  funeral  offering  in  the  midst 
of  heaven,  as  sovereign  ruler  do 
thou  with  them  fit  his  body  accord- 
ing to  thy  power  for  this  spirit- 
guidance. 


ye  anagnidagdhah :  that  is,  buried,     madhye  divah  :  note  that 
the  Fathers  enjoy  in  heaven  the  funeral  offering  conveyed  to  them  by 


186  PITARAS  [x.  15,  14 

Agni,  as  well  as  eating  the  oblations  offered  them  on  the  sacrificial 
grass  (lie),  t^bhis :  in  association  with  them  (199  A  1),  as  they 
know  the  path  of  the  dead,  svarat :  as  sovereign  lord  who  acts 
according  to  his  will  (yathavasam)  ;  the  subject  is  Agni  who  is 
addressed  in  9  c  and  10  c  (Agne),  and  in  12  a  and  13  c  (jatavedas) 
or  mentioned  in  11a  (Agnisvattas),  and  in  this  stanza  itself 
(Agnidagdhas).  tanvam  kalpayasva :  the  Ijody  of  the  deceased  ; 
the  words  svayam  tanvam  kalpayasva  (VS.  xxiii.  15)  are  ex- 
plained in  SB.  xiii.  2,  7,  11  :  svayam  rupam  kurusva  yadrsam 
ichasi  assume  thyself  the  form  that  thou  desirest ;  cp.  also  iii.  48,  4  b 
and  vii.  101,  3  b  yathavasam  tanvam  cakra  (=  cakre)  esah  he  has 
taken  a  body  according  to  his  tvill ;  the  corresponding  Pada  in  the  AV. 
(xviii.  3,  59)  reads  yathavasam  tanvah.  kalpayati  may  he  fashion 
our  bodies  according  to  his  tvill ;  cp.  also  in  the  following  funeral  hymn 
(x.  16,  4)  the  hemistich  :  yas  te  sivas  tanvo,  jatavedas,  tabhir 
vahainam  sukrtam  u  lokam  with  those  which  are  thy  auspicious  bodies, 
0  Jatavedas,  conduct  him  to  tlie  ivorld  of  the  righteous,  astmitim  etam  : 
dependent,  like  tanvam,  on  kalpayasva  :  prepare  his  body  and  this 
spirit-leading  ■=  prepare  it  for  this  spirit-leading-,  Agni  conducts  the 
spirit  (asu)  of  the  dead  man,  who  is  cremated,  to  the  next  world  (cp.  x. 
16,  4,  just  quoted)  where  it  unites  with  a  new  body  (tanii) ;  cp.  x.  14. 
8  cd  :  astam  ehi ;  sam  gachasva  tanva  go  home ;  unite  ivith  thy  (new) 
body ;  and  x.  16,  5  sam  gachatam  tanva,  jatavedah  let  him  (the 
deceased)  unite  with  a  (new)  body,  0  Jatavedas. 


HYMN   OF   THE   GAMBLER 

This  is  one,  among  the  secular  hymns,  of  a  group  of  four  which  have 
a  didactic  character.  It  is  the  lament  of  a  gambler  who,  unable  to  resist 
the  fascination  of  the  dice,  deplores  the  ruin  he  has  brought  on  himself 
and  his  family.  The  dice  (aksas)  consisted  of  the  niits  of  a  large  tree 
called  vibhidaka  {Terminalia  hellerica),  which  is  still  utilized  for  this 
purpose  in  India. 

X.  34.     Metre :  Tristubh  ;  7.  Jagati. 


X.  34,  2]  THE   GAMBLER  187 


pravepa  ma  brhatd  madayanti 
pravateja  irine  varvrtanah. 
somasyeva  Maujavatasya   bha- 

kso, 
vibhidako      jagrvir       mahyam 

achan. 


The  dangling  ones,  horn  in  a 
windy  place,  of  the  lofty  (tree) 
gladden  me  as  they  roll  on  the 
dice-hoard.  Like  the  draught  of 
the  Soma  from  Mujavant,  the  en- 
livening VibhulaJca  has  pleased  me. 


varvrtanas :  int.  pt.  of  vrt  turn,  Maujavatasya :  coming  from 
Mount  Mujavant  as  the  best,  achan  :  3.  s.  s  ao.  of  chand  (p.  164,  5). 
Verbs  meaning  to  please  take  the  dat.  (p.  311  h). 


^  I  ^T I  ft^^  I  ^  I  f^f^se  I  ^T  ( 

f^^T  I  ^f^vJ«T:  I  ^<T  I  ^WK  I  W- 
^^^  I  ^11 1  ^^vJ^T^  1 1<fr:  I 

^giWciTTi:  I  ^4 1  ^jm^  I  '^xtw^  II 


^  na  ma  mimetha,  na  jihila  esa : 
siva    sakhibhya    uta     mahyam 

asit. 
aksasyaham  ekaparasya  hetor 
anuvratam  apa  jayam  arodham. 


She  does  not  scold  me,  she  is 
not  angry :  she  was  kind  to  friends 
and  to  me.  For  the  sake  of  a  die 
too  high  hy  one  I  have  driven  aivay 
a  devoted  wife. 


mimetha :  pf.  of  mith  dispute,  jihila :  pf.  of  hid  he  angry  (cp. 
p.  3,  f.  n.  2).  sakhibhyas :  dat.  (p.  313,  3).  ekaparasya:  accord- 
ing to  the  accent  this  is  a  Tp.  adj.,  exceeding  hy  one,  alluding  to  an 
unlucky  throw  (called  kali)  in  which  when  the  number  of  dice 
thrown  is  divided  by  four  one  remains  over  (while  in  the  best  throw, 
the  krta,  nothing  remains  over),  apa  arodham :  root  ao.  of  rudh 
obstruct.  The  meaning  of  the  stanza  is  :  'rejecting  the  kindly  advice 
of  my  wife,  I  gambled  and  lost '. 


188  THE   GAMBLER  [x.  34, 3 

?1f^  "^T^  ^I^T  ^wft  1f^  I  ^^:  I  ^4  I  wrm  \  y^  > 


3  dv6sti   svasrur ;    apa    jay  a   ru- 

naddhi ; 
na    nathit6    vindate     mardita- 

ram : 
asvasyeva  jarato  vasniasya 
naham  vindami  kitavasya  bh6- 

gam. 


Mi/  mother-in-law  hates  me;  mij 
ivife  drives  me  atvay :  the  man  in 
distress  finds  none  to  pity  him : 
*  I  find  no  more  use  in  a  gambler 
than  in  an  aged  horse  that  is  for 
sale.' 


apa  runaddhi  (3.  s.  pr.  of  rudh):  turns  him  away  when  he  asks 
for  money  to  gamble  with,  nathitas  :  the  gambler  speaks  of  himself 
in  the  3.  prs.  asvasya^iva  :  agreeing  with  kitavasya.  jaratas : 
pr.  pt.  of  jr  waste  away,  kitavasya  bhogam :  objective  gen. 
(p.  320,  B  h).' 


8  ^^  ^T^  xift  ^^^ 

ftm  mm  ^i-^x  u^^iir^ 


^^  I  ^lyU^  I  Trfi:  I   ^^Xf^  I  W  I 

^^  I  ^5^c(^  I  ^^  I  mwt  I  w^:  I 
ftcTT  I  mm  I  ^iTiV  I  "^^i  wf":  I 

^  I  ^J^W.  I  ^^  I  ^^^  I  X[ffn  II 


4  any6  jayam  pari  mrsanti  asya,  Others  embrace,  the  tvife  of  him 

yasyagrdhad  v^dane  vaji  aksah.  for  iohose  possessions  the  victorious 

pita  mata  bhratara  enam  ahur  :  die  has  been  eager.  Father,  mother, 

*  na   janimo,    nayata   baddham  brothers  say  of  him,  *  tve  know  him 

etam'.  not,  lead  him  away  bound  \ 

agrdhat :  a  ao.  of  grdh  be  greedy,  governing  v6dane,  loc.  of  the 
object  (p.  325,  1  c).  vaji :  to  be  read  with  a  short  final  (p.  437,  a  4, 
cp.  p.  441,  4  a) ;  accent,  p.  450,  b.  ahur :  pf.  of  ah  say.  janimas  : 
1.  pi.   pr.    of  jna   Jmoiv.     nayata  :    accented   as   beginning  a  new 


X.  34,  6]  THE   GAMBLER  189 

sentence  (p.  466, 19  a) ;  final  vowel  metrically  lengthened  (cp.  p.  441, 
line  2).     baddham  :  as  a  debtor. 

yad     adidhye  :      '  na     davisani         When  I  think  to  myself,  ^I  will 

ebhih ;  not  go  with  them  ;  I  shall  he  left 

parayadbhyo   ava  hiye   sakhi-  behind  hy  my  friends  as  they  depart 

bhyah*,  (to  play)',  and  the  hroivn   ones, 

niuptas    ca    babhravo     vacam  thrown    dotvn,   have   raised   their 

akratam,  voices,  I  go  straight,  lihe  a  courtesan, 

6mid  esam  niskrtam  jariniva.  to  their  place  of  assignation. 

a-didhye :  1.  s.  pr.  A.  of  dhi  think,  davisani :  is  ao.  sb.  of  du 
go  (of  which  other  forms  occur  in  the  A  A.  and  the  YV.) ;  some 
scholars  think  the  sense  of  play  to  be  so  necessary  that  this  must  be 
an  irr.  form  (is  ao.  sb.)  from  div  play  (like  a-sthavisam,  in  a  Sutra, 
from  sthiv  spit),  ebhis  :  with  the  friends,  ava  Mye  :  ps.  of  1.  ha 
leave;  I  am  left  behind  with  abl.  (cp.  201  A  1).  uptas  :  pp.  of  vap 
streiv.  akrata :  3.  pi.  A.  root  ao.  of  kr,  accented  because  still 
dependent  on  yad.  Here  we  have  a  Jagatl  Pada  interposed  in  a 
Tristubh  stanza  (cp.  p.  445,  f.  n.  7) ;  the  same  expression,  vacam 
akrata,  by  ending  a  Pada  in  vii.  103,  8  produces  a  Jagatl  Pada  in  a 
Tristubh  stanza.  The  final  vowel  of  the  vb.  is  here  nasalized  to 
avoid  the  hiatus  at  the  end  of  the  Pada  (cp.  i.  35,  6  a) ;  viii.  29,  6a; 
see  p.  23,  f.  n.  1).    6mi  id  :  I  go  at  once  (p.  218).    esam  :  of  the  dice. 

^m^f?f  f^<T^:  ^WiT^  ^m^  I  iqfir  I  f^^:  i  ^i^m^:  i 

%^n#tf7t  ^^T^^^^T^:  I  %T2ITftT  I  Tfif  I  ^^T  I  ^^^T^:  I 

Y^t€t  ^t^  f%  f^xf^  ^vk  ^^T^:  I  ^m  I  ftf  I  f^Tt^  I  ^T^  I 

3?f^^^  ^^^  w  f mf^  11  ^Rfi^^  I  ^^fj:  I  ^  I  lirfTf^  II 


190 


THE   GAMBLER 


[x.  34,  6 


6  sabham     eti     kitavah     prcha- 
mano, 
jesyamiti,  taniia  susujanah. 
aksasd  asya  vi  tiranti  kamam, 
pratidivne  dadhata  a  krtani. 


The  gambler  goes  to  the  assemhli/ 
hall,  asMng  himself, '  shall  I  con- 
quer', trembling  with  his  body. 
The  dice  run  counter  to  his  desire, 
bestowing  on  his  adversary  at  play 
the  lucky  throws. 


tanva :  accent,  p.  450,  2  b.  susujanas  :  as  this  pt.  is  the  only 
form  of  the  vb.  occurring,  and  is  itself  only  found  in  one  other 
passage  (also  with  tanva),  its  exact  meaning  is  doubtful ;  but  it  must 
express  either  fear  or  confidence,  tiranti :  3.  pi.  pr.  of  tr  cross. 
pratidivan :  dec,  90,  3  ;  dat.  with  verbs  of  giving  (200  A  1),  a 
dadhatas :  K.  pi.  pr.  pt.  of  dha  (156,  p.  181,  top)  agreeing  with 
aksasas ;  with  prp.  following  (p.  462,  13  a  a),  krtani :  probably  in 
the  specific  sense  of  the  highest  throws,  pi.  of  n.  krtam. 


7  aksasa  id  ankusino  nitodino, 
nikrtvanas   tapanas   tapayisna- 

vah; 
kumaradesna,    jayatah   punar- 

hano, 
madhva    samprktah   kitavasya    gambler. 

barhana. 


TJie  dice  are  hooked,  piercing, 
deceitful,  burning  and  causing  to 
burn;  presenting  gifts  like  boys, 
striking  back  the  victors,  siveetened 
with  honey  by  magic  potver  over  the 


tapayisnavas :  causing  the  gambler  to  pain  others  by  his  losses, 
kumara-desnas :  giving  gifts  and  then  taking  them  back  like  children, 
punarhanas :  winning  back  from  the  winner,  equivalent  in  sense 
to  the  preceding  word  ;  Sandhi,  65  b.  sam-prktas  :  pp.  of  pre  mix. 
barhana :  inst.  s.  (p.  77) ;  with  objective  gen.  (p.  320). 


X.  34,  9]  THE   GAMBLER  191 

TTwt  f^t«^  ^^  ^rfifiifrffr  II     TT^T  I  f^fi:  I  ^*3^:  I  ^h:  I  T^  I 

irxiftfiT  II 


i  tripancasah  krilati  vrata  esam, 
deva  iva  Savita  satyadharma  : 
ugrasya  ein  manyave  na  nam- 

ante ; 
raja  cid  ebhyo  nama  it  krnoti. 


Their  host  of  three  fifties  plays 

like  god   Savitr   whose    laws  are 

trite  :  they  how  not  before  the  wrath 

of  even  the  mighty;   even  a  king 

pays  them  obeisance. 


tripancasas :  the  evidence  is  in  favour  of  interpreting  this  word 
as  meaning  consisting  of  three  fifties,  not  consisting  of  fifty-three,  as  the 
number  of  dice  normally  used,  deva  iva  Savita :  the  point  of  the 
comparison  is  that  the  action  of  the  dice  is  as  independent  of  the  will 
of  others  as  the  action  of  Savitr,  who  observes  fixed  laws  of  his  own 
(iv.  53,  4 ;  x.  139,  3),  and  whose  will  and  independent  dominion  no 
being,  not  even  Indra,  Yaruna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  Rudra  can  resist 
(ii.  38,  7.  9  ;  V.  82,  2).  na :  the  only  example  in  the  RV.  of  the 
metrical  lengthening  of  na.  namante,  namas :  with  dat.  (p.  311,  /v 
and  312,  2  a). 


if^T  ii^  ^TTft  ^T'^. 


'R'^T:  I  Wrt%  I  ^ft  I  W^  I 

^^T^:  I  f^vj^^^ll  ^f%  I 
f^^T:  I  ^l^tTT:  I  TfK%  I  f^vJ^FT:  i 
^m:  I  ^ifr:  1 1^^^  I  f^:  i  ^f f^  ii 


nica  vartanta,  upari  sphuranti. 
ahastaso  hastavantam  sahante. 
divya  angara  irine  niuptah, 
g  sitah  santo,  hrdayam  nir  dah- 
anti. 


They  roll  down,  they  spring  up- 
ward. Though  without  hands,  they 
overcome  him  that  has  hands. 
Divine  coals  throivn  down  upon 
the  gaming-board,  being  cold,  they 
burn  up  the  heart. 


192  THE  GAMBLER  [x.  34,  9 

Every  Pacla  in  this  stanza  contains  an  antithesis:  nica— upari; 
ahastasah  —  hastavantam ;  divyah  —  irine ;  sitah  —  nir  dahanti. 
divyas :  alkiding  to  their  magic  power  over  the  gambler ;  ep. 
barhana  in  7  d.  angaras :  the  dice  are  compared  with  bits  of 
charcoal  lying  in  a  hollow  ;  cp.  SB.  v.  3,  1,  10  :  adhid^vanam  va 
agnis,  tasya  et6  'ngara  yad  aksah  the  gaming-hoard  is  fire,  the  dice 
ate  its  coals. 

^TffT  5^^  M:<T:  W  f^^  I         TTfIT  I  H^^  I  ^Ts[\  I  W  I  f^  I 

10  jaya  tapyate  kitavasya  hina,  Forsaken  the  wife  of  the  gambler 

mata  putrasya  caratah  kua  svit.     is  grieved^  the  mother  (too)  of  the 

rnava    bibhyad    dhanam   icha-     son  that  ivanders  ivho  Jcnoivs  tvhere. 

mano.  Indebted,  fearing,  desiring  money 

any^sam  astam  lipa  naktam  eti.     he  approaches  at  night  the  house  of 

others. 

hina :  pp.  of  ha  leave,  putrasya :  the  gambler,  tapyate  must  be 
supplied  with  mata.  rna-va :  lengthening  of  final  a  before  v 
(15,  1  c).  bibhyat:  pr.  pt.  of  bhi/ear.  upa  eti:  probably  for  the 
purpose  of  stealing,  to  explain  c.     naktam  :  see  178,  2 ;   195  A  5  a. 

^^  ^pit  i^^ii  ^  ^fiw:  I     ^^"K I  ^T^rm:  i  g^^rw:  i  ^  i  ^- 

^  ^T^  1^^:  ^^T^  II  i^%  I  ^i^K  I  ^%  I  ff  I  ^'j^  I   j 

^:  I  ^:  I  ^^  I  f^:  I  ^^T^  li 

vll  striyam   drstvaya  kitavam   ta-         It  pains  the  gamhler  ivhen   he 
tapa,  sees  a  tvoman,  the  tvife  of  others^ 

any^sam    jayam,  sukrtam    ca     and  their  ivell-ordcrcd  home.    Since 
y6nim.  he  yolces  the  brown  horses  in  the  i 


X.  34,  12]  THE   GAMBLER  193 

purvahne  asvan  yuyuj^  hi  ba-     morning,    he  falls   down  (in   the 

bhrun,  evening)  near  the  fire,  a  beggar. 

sd  agn^r  ante  vrsalah  papada. 

tatapa :  used  impersonally  with  the  ace.  ;  this  and  the  following 
two  perfects  may  be  translated  as  presents,  because  they  express 
habitual  actions  continued  into  and  included  in  the  pr.  (213  A  a). 
drstvaya :  gd.  of  drs  see,  agreeing  with  kitavam  as  the  virtual 
subject  (210).  striyam  (p.  88,  P) :  jayam  as  apposition,  a  woman  who 
is  the  wife  of  others;  that  is,  when  he  sees  the  wives  of  others  and 
their  comfortable  homes,  he  is  reminded  of  the  unhappiness  of  his 
own  wife  and  the  bareness  of  his  own  home,  asvan :  the  brown 
dice  are  here  figuratively  called  horses,  which  he  yokes ;  that  is,  he 
begins  a  long  spell  of  gambling  with  them,  papada :  he  conse- 
quently falls  down,  exhausted  and  overcome,  on  the  ground  beside 
the  fire  in  the  evening,  having  lost  everything. 

TT^T  Wl^^  3T^»ft  ^4  I  TT^  I  WTri^  I  "ff^^:  I  fi^  I 

2  yo  vah  senanir  mahato  ganasya,  To  him  who  as  the  general  of 

raja     vratasya     prathamo     ba-  your  great    throng,    as    king  has 

bhuva,  become   the  first  of  your  host,  I 

tasmai  krnomi,  '  na  dhana  ru-  stretch   forth    my    ten   fingers — 

adhmi ' ;  'J  withhold  no  money — this  is  truth 

dasaham  pracis,  'tad  rtam  va-  I say\ 
dami '. 

yo  vah :  no  specific  die  is  meant,  the  expression  only  implying  a 
chief,  in  the  abstract,  of  the  total  number  of  dice  played  with, 
dasa  krnomi  pracih :  I  put  the  ten  (sc.  fingers)  forivard,  that  is,  I 
stretch  out  my  two  hands,  pracis :  A.  pi.  f.  of  prafic,  used  predi- 
catively  (198,  1).     tasmai:  dat.  of  advantage  (200  B  1).     na  dhana 

J  902  o 


194  THE   GAMBLER  [x.  34,  i.. 

runadhmi  :  that  is,  '  I  have  no  money  left  for  you  ;'  these  words  in 
sense  come  after  praeis,  expressing  what  is  implied  by  that  gesture. 
rtam  :  predicative,  I  say  this  as  true  (198,  1). 

rT%  f%  ^%  ^f^fTT^^:  II  rrc[^  I  %  I  f^  I  ^%  I  ^f%rfT  I  "^^^  I 

^^:  II 

13  aksair    ma    divyah ;    krsim    it         ^ Play  not   tvlili   dice;  ply  thy 

krsasva;  tillage;    rejoice   in   thy  property, 

vitt6    ramasva,    bahu    manya-  thinking  much  of  it ;  there  are  thy 

manah ;  cattle,  0  gambler,  there  thy  wife '  ; 

tatra  gavah,  kitava,  tatra  jay  a  :  this  Savitr  here,  the  nohle,  reveals 

tan    me    vi     cast3     Savitayam  to  me. 

aryah. 

This  stanza  is  spoken  by  the  gambler,  who  in  a-c  quotes  the  advice 
of  Savitr.  divyas :  2.  s.  inj.  of  div  p>lay  with  ma  (p.  240).  ra- 
masva :  with  loc.  (204,  1  a),  tatra  :  cattle  and  wife  can  be  regained 
by  acquiring  wealth,  caste  :  3.  s.  pr.  of  caks.  me :  dat.  (200  A  c). 
ayam  :  as  actually  present,     aryas  :  nohle,  as  upholder  of  moral  law. 

^8  ftr^  ^^^  ^5  ^35rTT  ^  TW^  I  ^^W^  I  ^^  I  ^35rT  I  ^:  I 

■^^  i{\  "^Xt^  ^TfTTfH  "^m  i      ttt  i  ^:  i  ^^^  i  "^t^  \  -^f^  \  ^  i 
f^  ^  g  ^^f^irffTH?:Tf?T^        f^  I  ^:  I  g  I  ^:   I  f^^T?i  I 

14  mitram  krnudhvam  khalu,  mr-        Pray  make  friendship,  he  gracious 

lata  no.  to  us.     Do  not  forcibly  bewitch  us 

ma  no  ghor^na  caratabhi  dhr-     tvith  magic  power.    Jjct  your  ivrath, 
snu.  your  enmity  noiv  come  to  rest.   Let  j 


X.  90,  1]  PUEUSA  195 

ni    vo    nu     manyur    visatam,     another  now  he  in  the  toils  of  the 

aratir.  hrotvn  ones. 

any6  babhrunam  prasitau  nii 

astu. 

mrlata  (2.  pi.  ipv.  of  mrd,  p.  3,  n.  2) :  accented  as  beginning  a 
new  sentence  ;  with  final  vowel  metrically  lengthened,  nas  :  dat. 
(p.  311,  /).  carata^abhi  :  with  prp.  following  the  vb.  (p.  468,  20  A). 
dhrsnii :  ace.  adv.  (p.  301,  h).  In  this  final  stanza  the  gambler 
adjures  the  dice  to  release  him  from  their  magical  power. 

PtEUSA 

There  are  six  or  seven  hymns  dealing  with  the  creation  of  the  world  as 
produced  from  some  original  material.  In  the  following  one,  the  well-known 
Purusa-sukta  or  Hymn  of  Man,  the  gods  are  the  agents  of  creation,  while 
the  material  out  of  which  the  world  is  made  is  the  body  of  a  primaeval 
giant  named  Purusa.  The  act  of  creation  is  here  treated  as  a  sacrifice  in 
which  Purusa  is  the  victim,  the  parts  when  cut  up  becoming  portions 
of  the  universe.  Both  its  language  and  its  matter  indicate  that  it  is  one  of 
the  very  latest  hymns  of  the  Rigveda.  It  not  only  presupposes  a  knowledge 
of  the  three  oldest  Vedas,  to  which  it  refers  by  name,  but  also,  for  the  first 
and  only  time  in  the  Rigveda,  mentions  the  four  castes.  The  religious  view 
is  moreover  different  from  that  of  the  old  hymns,  for  it  is  pantheistic  : 
'  Purusa  is  all  this  world,  what  has  been  and  shall  be '.  It  is,  in  fact,  the 
starting-point  of  the  pantheistic  philosophy  of  India. 

X.  90.     Metre  :  Anustubh ;  16  Tristubh. 


-V4 


1  sahasrasirsa  Purusah,  TJiousand-headed   was  Purum, 

sahasraksah,  sahasrapat.  thousand-eyed,  thousand-footed.  He 

sa  bhumim  visvato  vrtva,  having   covered   the  earth  on   all 

aty  atisthad  dasangulam.  sides,  extended  heyond  it  the  length 

of  ten  fingers. 
o  2 


196  PURUSA  [x.  90,  1 

sahasrasirsa  &c. :  that  is,  having  innumerable  heads,  eyes,  and 
feet,  as  representing  all  created  beings  (cp.  2).  sahasraksas  :  of  the 
very  numerous  Bv.  cds.  formed  with  sahasra  this  and  sahasra- 
argha  are  the  only  ones  with  irr.  accent  (cp.  p.  455,  10  c).  dasangu- 
1am  :  probably  only  another  way  of  expressing  that  his  size  was 
greater  even  than  that  of  the  earth,     atisthat :  ipf.  of  stha  stand. 

^T^  ^^^  H^  I  '^^^  i  ^^m^  i  ^ri;  i  ^  i  hM?^  i 

2  Piirusa  ev^dam  sarvam  Puntsa  is  this  all,  that  has  been 
yad  bhtitam  yac  ca  bhaviam.  and  that  tvill  he.  And  he  is  the 
utamrtatvasy^sano,  lord  of  immortality ,  which  he  grows 
yad  annenatirohati.  beyond  through  food. 

Purusa  is  coextensive  with  the  whole  world  including  the  gods. 
bhavyam  :  a  late  and  irregular  cadence,  amrtatvasya :  of  the 
immortals,  the  gods,  yad :  there  is  some  doubt  as  to  the  construction 
of  d.;  the  parallelism  of  aty  atisthat  in  1  d  and  of  aty  aricyata  in  5  c 
indicates  that  Purusa  is  the  subject  and  yad  (the  gods)  the  object, 
and  that  the  former  exceeds  the  latter  annena,  that  is,  by  means  of 
sacrificial  food.  The  words  have  also  been  interpreted  to  mean :  ivho 
(the  gods)  groiv  up  by  (sacrificial)  food  ;  or,  and  of  that  tvJtich  grows  by 
food,  that  is,  creatures  other  than  the  gods.  In  these  interpretations 
the  meaning  of  ati  does  not  seem  to  be  sufficiently  brought  out. 

eft  mi^T^  ^m  I  ^rf :  i  ^^rr^i^  i  ^  i  h^^:  i 

3  etavan  asya  mahima,  Such  is  ]iis  greatness,  and  more 
ato  jy4yams  ca  Purusah.                  than  that  is  Purusa,     A  fourth  of 


X.  90, 5]  PUEUSA  197 

pado  'sya  visva  bhutani ;  him    is  all  beings ,    three-fourths 

tripad  asyamrtam  divi.  of  him  are  ivhat  is  immortal  in 

heaven. 


J.    _ 


etavan  asya  :  irr.  Sandhi  for  etavam  asya  (occurring  also  in  x.  85, 
45:  putran  a),  is  a  sign  of  lateness,  this  being  the  regular  post  Vedic 
Sandhi  (39).  atas :  equivalent  to  an  ab.  after  the  cpv.  (201,  3). 
jyayams  ca :  on  the  Sandhi,  see  40  a.  Purusas :  a  metrical 
lengthening  for  Purusas  (cp.  the  Pada  text)  to  avoid  a  sequence  of 
four  short  syllables,  cp.  5  b.   amrtam  :  equivalent  to  amrtatva. 


^  .**>> I 


4  tripad  urdhva  ud  ait  Piirusah  ;  With    three    quarters    Burma 

pado  'syehabhavat  piinah.  rose  iipivard  ;  one  quarter  of  him 

tato  visvan  vi  akramat  here  came  into  being  again.    Thence 

sasananasan^  abhi.  he  spread  asunder  in  all  directions 

^  to  what  eats  and  does  not  eat. 

"lid  ait  (3.  s.  ipf.  of  i  go,  p.  130) :  to  the  world  of  immortals,  iha  : 
in  this  world,  piinar  :  that  is,  from  his  original  form,  tatas  :  from 
the  earthly  quarter,  vi  akramat  abhi :  distributed  himself  to, 
developed  into.  sasana-anasan6  :  animate  creatures  and  inanimate 
things ;  this  cd.  represents  the  latest  stage  of  Dvandvas  in  the  RV. 
(186  A  1,  end). 


198 


PURUSA 


[x.  90,  5 


5  tasmad  Viral  ajayata, 
Virajo  adhi  Purusah. 
sa  jato  aty  arieyata 
pasead  bhumim  atho  purah. 


From  him  Virdj  was  horn,  from 
Viraj  Furusa,  When  horn  he 
reached  heyond  the  earth  hehind 
and  also  he/ore. 


tasmad :  from  the  undeveloped  quarter  of  Purusa.  Viral  :  as 
intermediate  between  the  primaeval  Purusa  and  the  evolved  Purusa  ; 
cp.  X.  72,  4  :  Aditer  Dakso  ajayata,  Daksad  u  Aditih  pari  from 
Aditi  Baksa  was  horn,  and  from  DaTcsa  AditL  On  the  Sand  hi,  see 
p.  3,  n.  2.     With  c  d  cp.  led.     atho :  24. 


6  yat  Fiirusena  havisa 
deva  yajnam  atanvata, 
vasantb  asyasid  ajyam, 
giisma  idhmah,  sarad  dhavih. 


When  the  godsperformed  a  sacri- 
fice with  Furusa  as  an  ohlation, 
the  spring  was  its  melted  hutter, 
the  summer  its  fuel,  the  autumn  its 
ohlation. 


Here  the  gods  are  represented  as  offering  with  the  evolved  Purusa 
an  ideal  human  sacrifice  to  the  primaeval  Purusa.  atanvata :  3.  pi. 
ipf.  A.  of  tan  stretch ;  this  vb.  is  often  used  figuratively  in  the  sense 
of  to  extend  the  web  of  sacrifice  =  to  carry  out,  perform,    dhavis  :  54. 


7  tain  yaj  nam  barhisi  prauksan 
Piirusam  jatam  agratah  : 


fR.  I  ^^^^  I  ^ff  f4  I  IT  I  ^r^  I 
H^qJl  I  ^Trr?^  I  -^VW,  I 

^  I  I^t:  I  ^^^  I 
^Twr:  I  ^4^:  i  ^  i  ^  ii 

lliat  Furusa,  horn  in  the  h  eg  in- 
ning, they  hesprinkled  as  a  sacrifice 


d 


X.  90,  g] 


PURUSA 


199 


t6na  deva  ayajanta,  on     the     strew :     ivith    Mm    the 

sadhya  rsayas  ca  y6.  gods,   the  Sddhyas,  and  the  seers 

sacrificed. 
jatam  agratas :  the  evolved  Purusa,  born  from  Viraj  (5  b),  the 
same  as  in  6  a.  pra-aiiksan :  3.  pi.  ipf.  of  1.  uks  sprinMe.  ayaj- 
anta :  =  yajnam  atanvata  in  6  b.  Sadhyas  :  an  old  class  of  divine 
beings  (here  probably  in  apposition  to  devas),  cp.  16  d.  rsayas  ca 
y6  :  and  those  who  were  seers,  a  frequent  periphrastic  use  of  the 
rel.  =  simply  rsayas. 


S  tasmad  yajnat  sarvahiitah 
sambhrtam  prsadajiam : 


pasun  tarns  cakre  vayavyan, 
aranyan,  gramias  ca  y6. 


^^^l.  I  m^  I  ^%  I  ^T^^K  I 
IRTT^T'l^  I  ^t^t:  I  ^  I  %  II 

From  that  sacrifice  completely 
offered  was  collected  the  clotted 
butter :  he  made  that  the  beasts  of 
the  air,  of  the  forest,  and  those 
of  the  village. 
tasmad :  ab.  of  the  source  (201  A  1).  sambhrtam :  as  finite  vb. 
prsad-ajyam  :  accent,  p.  455,  10  d  1.  pasun  :  Sandhi,  40,  2,  tarns  : 
attracted  to  pasun  for  tat  (prsadajyam) ;  Sandhi,  40,  1  a.  vayav- 
y&n  :  one  of  the  rare  cases  where  the  independent  Svarita  remains  in 
pronunciation  (p.  448,  1) ;  an  here  remains  unaffected  by  Sandhi 
because  it  is  at  the  end  of  a  Pada  (p.  31,  f.  n.  3) ;  this  is  one  of  several 
indications  that  the  internal  Padas  (those  within  a  hemistich)  as  well 
as  the  external  Padas  were  originally  independent  (cp.  p.  465,  f.  n.  4). 
aranyan:  that  is,  ivild.  gramyas  ca  y6  =  gramyan,  that  is,  tame; 
cp.  rsayas  ca  y6  in  7  d. 

rrwfi:  I  ^wr^i  I  ^^i^:  i 

^^:  I  ^TiTTf^  I  ^f^"^  I 
W^Tftf  I  ^t^T  I  fl^K  I 

^^:  I  c!^T?i  I  ^^I^?  " 


200 


PUKUSA 


[x.  90,  9 


9  tasmad  yajnat  sarvahiita 
rcah  samani  jajnire ; 
chandamsi  jajnire  tasmad ; 
yajus  tasmad  ajayata. 


From  that  sacrifice  completely 
offered  were  horn  the  hymns  and 
the  chants;  the  metres  icere  horn 
from  it;  the  sacrificial  formida 
was  horn  from  it. 

reas :  the  Eigveda.  samani :  the  Samaveda.  jajnire :  3.  pi.  pf. 
A.  of  jan  heget.  yajus:  the  Yajurveda.  This  is  the  first  (implicit) 
mention  of  the  three  Vedas.  The  AV.  was  not  recognized  as  the 
fourth  Veda  till  much  later. 


10  tasmad  asva  ajayanta 
y6  k6  ca  ubhayadatah. 
gavo  ha  jajnire  tasmat ; 
tasmaj  jata  ajavayah. 


cTOTcl,  I  ^^t:  I  ^^T^'tT  I 
%  I "%  I  ^1  ^iTm^rr:  I 

TT^:  I  f  I  ^f^  I  (\wi<l  I 

From  that  arose  horses  and  all 
such  as  have  two  rows  of  tcetJt. 
Cattle  tvere  horn  from  that ;  from 
that  were  horn  goats  and  sheep. 


y6  k6  ca :  whatever  animals  besides  the  horse,  such  as  asses  and 
mules,  have  incisors  above  and  below,  ajavayas  :  a  pi.  Dv.  (186  A  2) ; 
Dvandvas  are  not  analysed  in  the  Pada  text. 


^  ^^  XIT^T  ^^%  n 


^'^  \  H^^  I  f%  I  ^^^:  I 

^fH^T  I  f%  I  ^^^^n:  I 

g^^  I  f^  I  '^  \  "^  \  ^T^  tX^  I 

#  I  ^^  \fH  \  ^T^  I  ^'^^  \f7[  II 


1 1  yat  Piirusam  viadadhuh, 
katidha  vi  akalpayan  ? 
miikham  kim  asya  ?  kau  bahii? 


ka  uru  pada  ucyete  ? 


When  they  divided  Furum,  into 
how  many  parts  did  they  dispose 
him?  What  (did)  his  mouth  (be- 
come) ?  What  are  his  two  arms, 
his  two  thighs,  his  two  feet  called? 


[.  90,  13] 


PURUSA 


201 


vi-adadhur :  when  the  gods  cut  up  Purusa  as  the  victim  ;  here 
the  Padapatha  again  (see  note  on  viii.  48,  2  a,  10  c)  accents  the  prp. 
in  a  subordinate  clause  (p.  469,  20  B).  kau  :  the  dual  ending  au  for 
the  normal  a  before  consonants  (cp.  note  on  x.  14,  10  a)  ;  ka  and 
pada  before  u  :  22.  ucyete  :  3.  du.  j^r.  ps.  of  vac  speak  :  Pragrhj^a, 
26  6. 


^^  cT^^  ^t^: 

2  brahmano  'sya  mukham  a&id, 
bahu  rajaniah  krtah ; 
iiru  tad  asya  yad  vaisyah ; 
padbhyam  sudrd  ajayata. 


^T^  Xf^\  Tn^:  I  ^cT:  I 

^^  Tfft  I  rTfi;  I  ^^  I  '^^  I  %^:  I 

^fi^i^jn^  I  ^^:  I  ^wr^^  ii 

His  mouth  ivas  the  Brahman, 
his  tivo  arms  ivere  made  the  ivarrior, 
his  two  thighs  the  Vaiiya ;  from 
his  two  feet  the  Sudra  was  torn. 


In  this  stanza  occurs  the  only  mention  of  the  four  castes  in  the 
EV.  brahmano  'sya:  Sandhi  accent,  p.  465,  17,  3.  raj  any  as : 
predicative  nom.  after  a  ps.  (196  5).  krtas  attracted  in  number  to 
raj  any  ah,  for  krtau  (cp.  194,  3).  yad  vaisyas  :  the  periphrastic  use  of 
the  rel.  (cp.  7  d  and  8  d),  lit.  his  tivo  thighs  became  that  which  was  the 
VaiSya.     padbhyam :  abl.  of  source  (77,  3  a,  p.  458,  1). 


^  '^'TT  ^^  ^TcT^ 
^^:  g^T  ^^T^rr  I 

^^T^igt^T^fT  II 

3  candrama  manaso  jatas ; 
caksoh  sury5  ajayata ; 
miikhad  Indras  ca  Agnis  ca, 
pranad  Vayiir  ajayata. 


^^^t:  I  ^^:  I  ^t?t:  i 
'^^t:  I  f^:  I  '^y^']^J[  I 
^K I  T^:  I  ^  I  ^f^:  I  ^  I 

The  moon  ivas  horn  from  his 
mind ;  from  his  eye  the  sun  was 
horn  ;  from  his  mouth  Indra  and 
Agni,  from-  his  hreath  Vdyu  was 
horn. 


202 


PUKUSA 


[x.  90,  13 


Note  that  candra-mas  is  not  analysed  in  the  Pada  text,  caksos  : 
ab.  of  caksu  used  only  in  this  passage  —  the  usual  caksus ;  in  the 
Funeral  Hymn  (x.  16,  3)  suryas  and  caksus,  vatas  and  atma  are 
also  referred  to  as  cognate  in  nature. 


'H^t:  I  ^^fi;  I  ^'ffft^^  I 
^^:  I  ^:  I  ^^  I  ^^<^(T  I 
i^c^i«TT^  1 3jftf :  I  f^:  I  ^^Tci:  I 

cl^  I  ^^T^  I  ^?T^^^^  II 


14  nabhya  asid  antariksam  ; 
sirsn6  dyauh  sam  avartata ; 


From  his  navel  teas  produced 

the  air  ;  from  his  head  the  sky  was 

padbhyam  bhumir,   disah  sr6-     evolved  ;  from  his  hvofeet  the  earth, 

trat :  from  his  ear  the  quarters :    thus 

tatha  lokam  akalpayan.  they  fashioned  the  tvorlds. 

nabhyas  :  ab.  of  nabhi  inflected  according  to  the  i  dec.  (p.  82  a), 
sirsnas  :  ab.  of  sirsan  (90,  1  a  ;  p.  458,  2).  sam  avartata  :  this  vb. 
is  to  be  supplied  in  c  ;  cp.  adhi  sam  avartata  in  x.  129,  4.  akalpa- 
yan :  ipf.  cs.  of  kip  ;  they  (the  gods)  fashioned. 


"^^Y^t^  ^^  II 


5fH  I  ^^  I  w^l  I  ^iwr:  I 
f^:  I  ^H  I  ^^vfT^:  i  ^m:  i 
t^T:  I  ^fi:  I  ^^'t:  I  ^^t^t:  I 
^^^^  I  H^'l  I  ^^  II 


15  saptasyasan  paridhayas; 
trih  sapta  samidhah  krtah  ; 
deva  yad,  yajnam  tanvana, 
abadhuan  Purusarn  pasum. 


Seven  ivere  his  enclosing  sticks; 
thrice  seven  tvere  the  faggots  made, 
ivhen  the  gods  ^performing  the  sacri- 
fice hound  Furusa  as  the  victim. 

paridhayas  :  the  green  sticks  put  round  the  sacrificial  fire  to  fence 
it  in,  generally  three  in  number,  sapta :  as  a  sacred  number, 
tanvanas  :  cp.  8  b.  abadhnan :  3.  pi.  ipf.  of  bandh  ;  cp.  piirusena 
havisa  in  6  a  and  tarn  yajnarn  Piirusam  in  7  a  b.  pasiim  :  as  appo- 
sitional  ace.  (198). 


X.  127,  1]  EATEI  203 

.6  yajndna   yajnam    ayajanta    de-         Wi^/i  the  sacrifice  the  gods  sacri- 

vas  :  ficed  to  the  sacrifice :    these   were 

tani  dharmani  prathamani  asan.  the  first  ordinances.     These  powers 

te    ha   nakam    mahimanah   sa-  reached  the  firmament  where  are 

canta,  the  ancient  Sddhyas,  the  gods. 
yatra     purve     Sadhiah     santi, 
devah. 

ayajanta :  this  vb.  ordinarily  takes  the  ace.  of  the  person  wor- 
shipped and  the  inst.  of  that  with  which  he  is  worshipped  (308,  1  /) ; 
the  meaning  here  is  :  they  sacrificed  to  Purusa  (here  appearing  as 
a  sacrifice,  like  Visnu  in  the  Brahmanas)  with  the  sacrifice  in  which 
he  was  the  victim.  t6  mahimanah :  probably  the  powers  residing 
in  the  sacrifice.     This  stanza  is  identical  with  i.  164,  50. 

RATE  I 

The  goddess  of  night,  under  the  name  of  Ratri  is  invoked  in  only  one 
hymn  (x.  127).  She  is  the  sister  of  Usas,  and  like  her  is  called  a  daughter 
of  heaven.  She  is  not  conceived  as  the  dark,  but  as  the  bright  starlit  night. 
Decked  with  all  splendour  she  drives  away  the  darkness.  At  her  approach 
men,  beasts,  and  birds  go  to  rest.  She  protects  her  worshippers  from  the 
wolf  and  the  thief,  guiding  them  to  safety.  Under  the  name  of  nakta  n,, 
combined  with  usas,  Night  appears  as  a  dual  divinity  with  Dawn  in  the 
form  of  Usasa-nakta  and  Naktosasa,  occurring  in  some  twenty  scattered 
stanzas  of  the  Rigveda. 

X.  127.     Metre:  Gayatri. 
ft^T  ^f^  f^T^Tif^  II  f%^T:  I  ^f^  I  f^:  I  ^rf>^rT  II 


204 

1  Ratri  vi  akhyad  ayati 
purutra  devi  aksabhih : 
visva  adhi  sriyo  'dhita. 


RATRI 


[x.  127,  1 


Night  approaching  has  looked 
forth  in  many  places  ivith  her  eyes : 
she  has  put  on  all  glories. 


vi  akhyat :  a  ao.  of  khya  see  (147  a  1).  a-yati :  pr.  pt.  f.  of 
&  +  i  go  (95  a),  devi  :  accent,  p.  450,  h  ;  metre,  p.  437,  a  4.  aksabhis  : 
99,  4  ;  the  e3''es  are  stars,  adhi  adhita :  root  ao.  A.  of  dha  put 
(148,  1  a),    sriyas  (A.  pi.  of  sri ;  100  h,  p.  87} ;  the  glories  of  starlight. 


2  a  urv  apra  amartia 
nivato  devi  ndvatah : 
jyotisa  badhate  tamah. 


W  I  ^^  I  ^"JTT:  I  ^?RTWT  I 

f%vj^rr:  I  |ft  I  ^fi:vJ^ci:  i 

^fTi^T  I  ^T^%  I  cf^MI 

The  immortal  goddess  has  per- 
vaded the  wide  space,  the  depths, 
and  the  heights :  tvith  light  she 
drives  away  the  darkness. 


a  apras  :   3.  s.  s  ao.  of  pra  fill  (144,  5).     devi :   cp.  1  b.     jyotisa  : 
with  starlight. 


'^^'i  fT^^  rf*i:  II 

3  nir  u  svasaram  askrta 
Usasani  devi  ayati : 
ap^d  u  hasate  tamah. 


^^^   I    1^    I    ^vJ^fft    I 

^q  I  T^  I  ^  Tf^  I  IT^^  I  rHff:  H 

The  goddess  approaching  has 
turned  out  her  sister  Daivn  ;  away 
too  ivill  go  the  darkness. 


nir  askrta :  3.  s.  root  ao.  of  kr  do  ;  the  s  is  here  not  original 
(PadapFitha  akrta),  but  is  probably  due  to  the  analogy  of  forms  sucli 
as  nis-kuru  (AV.) ;  it  spread  to  forms  in  which  kr  is  compounded 
with  the  prps.  pari  and  sam  (pariskrnvanti,  pariskrta,  samskrta). 
Usasam  :  JJatvn  here  used  in  the  sense  of  daylight  (dec,  83,  2  a). 
nir  u  —  apa  id  u  :  in  the  second  clause  the  pel.  is  used  anaphorically 
(p.  221,  2),  with  special  emphasis  (id)  on  the  second  prp.,  =  and  the 


X.  127,  6] 


RATRI 


205 


darkness  will  also  be  dispelled  by  the  starlight  (cp.  2  c). 
s.  sb.  A.  of  the  s  ao.  of  2.  ha  go  forth  (p.  162,  2). 


hasate :  3. 


4  sa  nd  adya,  yasya  vayam 
ni  te  yamann  aviksmahi, 
vrks^  na  vasatim  vayah. 


^T  I  ^:  I  ^^  I  ^^t:  I  ^^T^  I 
f^\\\  ^Tftl^ I  ^N^ff  I 

f %  I  ^  I  ^yifm^  \  ^:  II 

So  to  us  to-day  thcu  (hast  ap- 
proached), at  whose  approach  we 
have  come  home,  as  birds  to  their 
nest  upon  the  tree. 


sa :  p.  294,  b  ;  a  vb.  has  here  to  be  supplied,  the  most  natural  one 
being  hast  come,  from  ayati  in  3  b.  yasyas  .  .  te  for  tvam  yasyas, 
a  prs.  prn.  often  being  put  in  the  rel.  clause,  yaman :  loc.  (90). 
ni, .  aviksmahi :  s  ao.  A.,wehave  turned  in  (intr.).  vasatim  :  governed 
by  a  cognate  vb.  to  be  supplied,  such  as  return  to.  vayas :  N.  pi.  of 
vi  bird  (99,  3  a). 


f^  if^^f^^f^^:  II 


f^  I  TiWJW.  I  ^f^^cf  I 

f^  I  ^^T^:  I  f^c^;  I  ^f^:  II 


5  ni  gramas6  aviksata, 
ni  padvanto,  ni  paksinah, 
ni  syenasas  cid  arthinah. 


Home  have  gone  the  villages, 
home  creatures  with  feet,  home  those 
tvith  tvings,  home  even  the  greedy 
hawks. 

ni  aviksata :  3.  pi.  A.  s  ao.  of  vis  enter,  gramasas  :  =  villagers. 
ni  :  note  the  repetition  of  the  prp.  throughout,  in  place  of  the  cd.  vb.: 
a  common  usage. 


^^  %^^^  I 


^^^  I  f  ^Ji:  I  ^K^  I 

'^^'^  i  %t?^  i  ^  i 

^4  I  ^:  I  girTTJ  I  H^ 


206 

C  yavaya  vrkiam  vrkam, 
yavaya  stenam,  urmie ; 
atha  nah  sutara  bhava. 


RATRI 


[x.  127,  6 


Ward  off  the  she-wolf  and  the 
tvolf,  ward  off  the  thief,  0  Night ; 
so  he  easy  for  us  to  pass. 


yavaya :  cs.  of  yu  separate  ;  this  and  other  roots  ending  in  u,  as 
well  as  in  i,  r,  may  take  Guna  or  Vrddhi  in  the  cs.  (168,  1  c),  but  the 
Padapatha  invariably  gives  yavaya ;  the  final  vowel  is  nietricallj'- 
lengthened  (in  b  it  is  long  by  position  before  st).  vrkyam :  accent, 
p.  450,  2  b.     atha  :  final  metrically  lengthened  (cp.  p.  214). 


7  lipa  ma  p^pisat  tamah, 
krsnam,  viaktam  asthita : 
Usa  rn^va  yataya. 


^^:  I  ^T^t^  I  'mji^  I! 

The  darkness,  thieldy  painting. 
Hack,  palpable,  has  approached  me : 
0  Baivn,  clear  it  off  like  debts. 


lipa  asthita :  3.  s.  A.  of  root  ao.  of  stha  stand.  p6pisat :  int.  pr. 
pt.  of  pis  paint,  as  if  it  were  material,  lisas :  Dawn,  as  a  counter- 
part of  Night,  is  invoked  to  exact  =  remove  the  darkness  from  RatiT, 
as  one  exacts  money  owing.  In  hymns  addressed  to  a  particular 
deity,  another  who  is  cognate  or  in  some  way  associated,  is  not 
infrequently  introduced  incidentally,     yataya  :  cs.  of  yat. 


8  lipa  te  ga  ivakaram, 
vrnisva,  duhitar  divah, 
Ratri,  stomarn  na  jigyuse. 

lipa  a  akaram  (1.  s.  root  ao. 
song  of  praise,  as  a  herdsman 
which  he  has  herded  since  the 


^1^1  ITii^  I  W  I  "^Tl  I 
f  i!l\^  I  ^f| <t:  I  f^^:  I 
TtN  I  wr?i»i  I  ^  I  f^Tg^  II 

Like  kine  I  have  delivered  up  to 
thee  a  hymn — choose  it  0  daughter 
of  heaven,  0  Night —like  a  song  of 
praise  to  a  victor. 

of  kr) :  I  have  driven  up  for  thee  my 

delivers  up  in  the  evening  the  cows 

morning ;  cp.  i.  114,  9,  lipa  te  st6man 


HYMN   OF   CREATION 


207 


X.  129,  l] 

pasupa  iva^akaram  I  have  driven  up  songs  of  praise  for  thee  like  a 
herdsman,  vrnisva  :  2.  s.  ipv.  A.  from  vr  choose,  h  is  parenthetical. 
stbmain  is  to  be  supplied  with  akaram.  jigyuse :  dat.  of  pf.  pt.  of 
ji  conquer  (157  h  a). 


HYMN   OF   CREATION 

In  the  following  cosmogonic  poem  the  origin  of  the  world  is  explained 
as  the  evolution  of  the  existent  (sat)  from  the  non-existent  (asat).  Water 
thus  came  into  being  first ;  from  it  was  evolved  intelligence  by  heat.  It  is 
the  starting-point  of  the  natural  philosophy  which  developed  into  the 
Sankhya  system. 


X.  129.     Metre:  Tristubh. 


^  I  ^Hfi:  I  "^jS^fi  I  ^  Tt^  I  ^<i  I 
^^(t:  I  «T^T^f^  I 

^  I  w^fi:i  T^:  I  ^  Tfii  I f^iWF  I 

^t:  I  ^^  I 
f^Ji:  I  ^  I  ^^T>3fTfrr  I  f  w  I  ^^  I 

^'('li 

^^:  I  f^  I  w^c!:  I  M^n^  I 'T- 

jf^T^II 


1  nasad  asin,  n6   sad  asit   tada- 

nim; 
nasid  rajo  n6  vioma  paro  yat. 
kim  avarivah?     kiiha?    kasya 

sarmann  ? 
ambhah  kim  asid,  gahanam  ga- 

bhiram  ? 


There  ivas  not  the  non-existent 
nor  the  existent  then;  there  was 
not  the  air  nor  the  heaven  which  is 
heyond.  What  did  it  contain'^' 
Where?  In  whose  protection? 
Was   there   ivater,   unfathomable. 


profound  ? 

Of,  SB.  X.  5,  3,  1  :  na^iva  va  idam  agr^sjsad  asid  na^iva  sad 
asit  verity  this  (universe)  was  in  the  beginning  neither  non-existent  nor 
existent  as  it  were,     tadanim  :  before  the  creation,     asit ;  the  usual 


208  HYMN   OF   CREATION  [x.  129,  1 

form  of  the  3.  s.  ipf.  of  as  he  ;  the  rarer  form  occurs  in  3  b.  no  :  for 
na  u  (24).  vioma :  the  final  vowel  metrically  lengthened  (cp. 
p.  440,  4  B).  paras:  adv.;  on  the  accent  cp.  note  on  ii.  35,  6  c. 
a  avarivar :  3.  s.  ipf.  int.  of  vr  cover  {cp.  173,  3)  ;  what  did  it  cover 
up  =  conceal  or  contain  ?  kiiha :  tchere  was  it  ?  kasya  sarman  :  who 
guarded  it?  kim  :  here  as  an  inter,  pel.  (p.  225).  ambhas :  cp.  3  b, 
and  TS.,  apo  va  idam  agre  salilam  asit  this  (universe)  in  the  beginning 
was  the  ivaters,  the  ocean. 

c^^T^^W  ^V  f^  "^JHM  II  TiWJ^  \  f  I  ^^^  I  ^  I  ^T:  I  ftill 

^^  I  ^^  II 

2  na    mrtyiir    asid,   amrtam    na  There   ivas  not   death  nor  im- 

tarhi.  mortality  then.     There  tvas  not  the 

na  ratria  ahna  asit  praketah.  beacon  of  night,  nor  of  day.    That 

anid     avatam     svadhaya     tad  o«e  breathed,  ivlndless,  by  its  own 

6kam.  power.     Other  than  that  there  tvas 

tasmad  dhanyan  na  parah  kim  not  anything  beyond. 

canasa. 

ratryas :  gen.  of  ratri  (p.  87).  ahnas:  gen.  of  ahan  (91,  2). 
anit :  3.  s.  ipf.  of  an  breathe  (p.  143,  3  a),  tasmad :  governed  by 
any  ad  (p.  317,  3).  dha  for  ha :  54.  anyan  na :  33.  paras  :  cp. 
note  on  1  b.     asa :  pf.  of  as  be  (135,  2). 

^  M  wh^tT^^t  ^'^^  ^i=^:  I  ^^ji:  I  ff^^T  I  ^j^^  I  ^"^  I 

vjp%j  4f^^  ^^^1  T^^,  I       ^^vj^rTTi:  I  ^r^^j^  i  ^^  i  ^:  i 

(^xtf ^^ff^T^T^^^I  II  g^  I  ^g  I  ^f^vjfffT^  I  ^^^  I 

W^rl.1 
7{^W.  I  rfcT  I  ^ff ^  I  lI^T^fT  I  TJSfi^  II 


209 


^'^■^%^]  HYMN  OF  CEEATION 

3  tama  asit  tamasa  gulham  agre ;         Darkness  teas  in  the  heginmng 

apraketam    salilam    sarvam    a     hidden  bi/ darkness ;  indistinguu^h. 

^^^^'  able,    this   all    tvas  ivater.     That 

tuchy^nabhu  apihitam  yad  asit,     ivhieh,    coming    into     being,    tvas 

tapasastanmahindjayataikam/    covered  ivith  the   void,   that   One 

arose  through  the  poiver  of  heat. 

^    gulham :  pp.  of  guh  hide  (69  c,  cp.  3  6  y,  p.  3  and  13).     as  :  3   s 
ipf.  of  as  be  (p.  142,  2  b) ;  this  form  is  also  found  twice  (i.  85   1    7) 
alternating  with  asit.     b  is  a  Jagati  intruding  in  a  Tristubh  stanza 
(cp.  p.  445,  f.  n.  7).     abhii :  the  meaning  of  this  word  is  illustrated 
by  a-babhuva  m  6  d  and  7  a.     mahina  =  mahimna  (90,  2,  p.  69). 

if^  :ff^'^^T  ^^^i  TTift^  H       ^J[:  i  ^^j^ ,  ^;^f^ ,  f-^* ,  ^f^^i,^, 

4k4mas    tad    agre    sam    avarta-  Desire  in  the  beginning  came 

*^^^^'  '^pon   that,    (desire)   that  tvas  tlie 

manaso  retail  prathamam  yad  first  seed  of  mind.     Sages  seeking 

^^^**  «^  their  hearts  tvith  ivisdom  found 

sat6  bandhum  asati  nir  avindan  out  the  bond  of  the  existent  in  the 

hrdi  pratisya  kavayo  manisa.  non-existent. 

adhi  sam  avartata :  3.  s.  ipf.  A.  of  vrt  turn,  with  sam  come  into 
being;  adhi  upon  makes  the  verb  transitive  =  come  upon,  take  posses- 
sion of  tad  that  =  tad  6kam  in  2  c,  the  unevolved  universe.  One 
of  the  two  prps.  here  is  placed  after  the  vb.  (cp.  191/,  and  p.  468, 
20  A  a),  yad :  referring  to  kamas  is  attracted  in  gender  to  the 
predicate  n.  r^tas.  satas :  they  found  the  origin  of  the  evolved 
world  in  the  unevolved.  prati-isya  :  the  gd.  in  ya  has  often  a  long 
final  vowel  (164,  1)  which  is  always  short  in  the  Padapatha.  ma- 
nisa :  inst.  of  f.  in  a  (p.  77). 


1902 


210  HYMN   OF   CREATION  [x.  129,  5 

^[^  "^^^TfR^fTr:  xTTwfci  II     ^^4T I  ^^Tff:  I  m'^1T{:  i  t^t^^  » 

5  tirascino  vitato  rasmir  esam :  Their  cord  was  extended  across  : 

adhah   svid   asiSd,   upari    svid  was  there  helow  or  was  there  ahove? 

asi  3 1  ?  There  were  impregnators,  there  were 

retodha  asan,  mahimana  asan ;  powers ;    there   was  energy  below, 

svadha  avastat,  prayatih  paras-  there  2vas  impulse  above, 

tat. 

rasmis  :  the  meaning  of  this  word  here  is  uncertain,  but  it  may  be 
an  explanation  of  bandhu  in  4c:  the  cord  with  which  the  sages 
(referred  to  by  esam)  in  thought  measured  out  the  distance  between 
the  existent  and  non-existent,  or  between  what  was  above  and  below ; 
cp.  viii.  25,  18,  pari  yo  rasmina  divo  antan  mam^  prthivyah  who 
ivith  a  cord  has  measured  out  the  ends  of  heaven  and  earth  ;  cp.  also  the 
expression  sutram  vitatam  (in  AV.  x.  8,  37)  the  extended  string  with 
reference  to  the  earth,  asit :  accented  because  in  an  antithetical 
sentence  (p.  468,  19  B  ^).  The  i  is  prolated,  and  that  syllable  (and 
not  a)  has  the  Udatta,  as  in  the  final  syllable  of  a  sentence  in  ques- 
tions (Panini  viii.  2,  97);  the  second  question  upari  svid  asi3t  is 
quoted  by  Panini  (viii.  2,  102)  as  coming  under  this  rule,  but  without 
accent.  retodhas  and  mahimanas  are  contrasted  as  male  and 
female  cosmogonic  principles,  to  which  correspond  respectively  pra- 
yatis  and  svadha.  In  TS.  iv.  3,  11,  1,  mention  is  made  of  trayo 
mahimanah  connected  with  fertility,  svadha :  this  is  one  of  the 
five  examples  of  a  N.  f.  in  a  left  uncontracted  with  a  following 
vowel :  it  is  probable  that  the  editors  of  the  Sainhita  text  treated 
these  forms  as  ending  in  ah,  while  the  Padapatha  gives  them  without 
VisarjanTya,  doubtless  owing  to  the  greatly  increasing  prevalence  of 
the  nominatives  in  a. 


^-  129,  7]  HYMN   OF  CREATION  211 

6k6   addha  veda?    ka   iha   pra         Who  Mows  truly?     WJio  shall 

vocat,  /^g^.g  declare,  whence   it  has  been 

kuta  ajata,  kuta  iyam  visrstih  ?    produced,  whence  is  this  creation  ? 

arvag  deva  asya  visarjanena  :         By  the  creation  of  this  (universe) 

atha  k6  veda  yata  ababhuva  ?        the  gods  (come)  aftenvards :    who 

then  knows  tvhence  it  has  arisen  ? 
vocat :  a  ao.  inj.  of  vac.  kutas  :  b  has  one  syllable  too  many 
(p.  441,  4  6^).  arvak:  the  sense  is  that  the  gods,  being  part  of  the 
creation,  are  later  than  the  period  preceding  the  creation,  and  there- 
fore can  know  nothing  of  the  origin  of  the  universe,  atha :  with 
metrically  lengthened  final  vowel  (p.  440,  4 ;  cp,  179,  1). 


7  iyam  visrstir  yata  ababhuva ; 
yadi  va  dadh6  yadi  va  na  : 
J6   asyadhyaksah   param6  vio- 

man 
s6  ahga  veda,  yadi  va  na  v^da. 


T^T^  1  f^vJ^fe:  I  ^:  1  ^i^4  I 

^:  I  w^  \  ^fv^^^:  1  ^T%  1  f% 
^:  I  ^f  I  ^_^  1  ^  I  TT 1  ^  t  "^^  II 

Whence  this  creation  has  arisen  ; 
whether  he  founded  it  or  did  not  : 
he  tvho  in  the  highest  heaven  is  its 
surveyor,  he  only  Icnows,  or  else  he 
knoivs  not. 


a  and  b  are  dependent  on  veda  in  d.  asya  :  of  this  universe,  b  is 
defective  by  two  syllables  (p.  440,  4  a) :  possibly  a  metrical  pause 
expressive  of  doubt  may  have  been  intended,  vyoman  :  loc.  (90,  2). 
v6da  :  the  accent  is  due  to  the  formal  influence  of  yadi  (p.  246,  3  a). 

p  2 


212  YAMA  [x.  135,  1 

yamA 

Three  hymns  are  addressed  to  Yama,  the  chief  of  the  blessed  dead. 
There  is  also  another  (x.  10),  which  consists  of  a  dialogue  between  him  and 
his  sister  Yami.  He  is  associated  with  Varuna,  Brhaspati,  and  especially 
Agni,  the  conductor  of  the  dead,  who  is  called  his  friend  and  his  priest. 
He  is  not  expressly  designated  a  god,  but  only  a  being  who  rules  the  dead. 
He  is  associated  with  the  departed  Fathers,  especially  the  Angirases,  with 
whom  he  comes  to  the  sacrifice  to  drink  Soma. 

Yama  dwells  in  the  remote  recess  of  the  sky.  In  his  abode,  which  is  the 
home  of  the  gods,  he  is  surrounded  by  songs  and  the  sound  of  the  flute. 
Soma  is  pressed  for  Yama,  ghee  is  offered  to  him,  and  he  comes  to  seat 
himself  at  the  sacrifice.  He  is  invoked  to  lead  his  worshippers  to  the  gods, 
and  to  prolong  life. 

His  father  is  Vivasvant  and  his  mother  Saranyu.  In  her  dialogue  with 
him  Yarn!  speaks  of  Yama  as  the  *only  mortal ',  and  elsewhere  he  is  said  to 
have  chosen  death  and  abandoned  his  body.  He  departed  to  the  other 
world,  having  found  out  the  path  for  many,  to  where  the  ancient  Fathers 
passed  away.  Death  is  the  path  of  Yama.  His  foot-fetter  (padbisa)  is 
spoken  of  as  parallel  to  the  bond  of  Varuna.  The  owl  (uluka)  and  the 
pigeon  (kapota)  are  mentioned  as  his  messengers,  but  the  two  four-eyed, 
broad-nosed,  brindled  dogs,  sons  of  Saramil  (sararaeyau)  are  his  regular 
emissaries.  They  guard  the  path  along  which  the  dead  man  hastens  to 
join  the  Fathers  who  rejoice  with  Yama.  They  watch  men  and  wander 
about  among  the  peoples  as  Yama's  messengers.  They  are  besought  to 
grant  continued  enjoyment  of  the  light  of  the  sun. 

As  the  first  father  of  mankind  and  the  first  of  those  that  died,  Yama 
appears  to  have  originally  been  regarded  as  a  mortal  who  became  the  chief 
of  the  souls  of  the  departed.  He  goes  back  to  the  Indo-Tranian  period,  for 
the  primaeval  twins,  from  whom  the  human  race  is  descended,  Yama  and 
Yam.i,  are  identical  with  the  Yima  and  Yimeh  of  the  Avesta.  Yama  himself 
may  in  that  period  have  been  regarded  as  a  king  of  a  golden  age,  for  in 
the  Avesta  he  is  the  ruler  of  an  earthly,  and  in  the  RV.  that  of  a  heavenly 
paradise. 

X.  135.     Metre  :  Anustubh. 


X.  135,  3] 

1  yasmin  vrks^  supalas^ 
devaih  sampibate  Yamah, 
atra  no  vispatih  pita 
puranam  anu  venati. 


YAMA 


213 


Beside  the  fair-leaved  tree  under 
which  Yama  drinks  together  ivith 
the  gods,  there  our  father,  master 
of  the  house,  seeks  the  friendship  of 


I 


the  men  of  old. 

yasmin :  the  loc.  is  often  used  in  the  sense  of  beside,  near  (cp. 
203,  2).  sampibate  :  drinks  Soma  iviih.  atra :  with  metrically  long 
final  vowel  (cp.  433,  2  A),  nas :  otcr  i.  e.  of  me  and  the  other 
members  of  the  family,  pita :  my  deceased  father,  puranan ; 
ancient  ancestors  ;  Sandhi,  39.  anu  venati :  that  is,  associates  with 
them. 

2  puranam  anuv^nantam, 


carantam  papayamuya, 
asuyann  abhy  acakasam : 
tasma  asprhayam  piinah. 


Him  seeking  the  friendship  of 
the  men  of  old,  faring  in  this  evil 
way,  I  looked  upon  displeased :  for 
him  I  longed  again. 

In  this  and  the  preceding  stanza  a  son  speaks  of  his  father  who 
has  gone  to  the  world  of  Yama.  amuya  :  inst.  s.  f.  of  the  prn. 
ayam  used  adverbially  with  shift  of  accent  (p.  109) ;  with  this  is 
combined  the  inst.  s.  f.  of  the  adj.  papa  similarly  used,  the  two 
together  meaning  in  this  evil  way,  that  is,  going  to  the  abode  of 
the  dead,  asuyan :  heing  displeased,  that  is,  with  him,  opposed  to 
asprhayam,  I  longed  for  him,  that  is,  to  see  him  again,  acakasam  : 
ipf.  int.  of  kas,  with  shortening  of  the  radical  vowel  (174). 


'^^^\  fHTi  ^^1  T^m:i 


214 


YAMA 


[x.  135,  3" 


;^>  yam,  kumara,  navam  ratham 
acakram  manasakrnoh, 
6kesam  visvatah  prancam, 
apasyann  adhi  tisthasi. 


The  new  car,  0  hoi/,  the  wheelless, 
which  thou  clidst  make  in  mind, 
which  has  one  pole,  hut  faces  in  all 
directions,  thou  ascendest  seeing 
it  not. 


In  this  stanza  (and  the  next)  the  dead  boy  is  addressed  ;  he  mounts 
the  car  which  he  imagines  is  to  take  him  to  the  other  world,  aca- 
kram :  perhaps  because  the  dead  are  wafted  to  Yama  by  Agni.  6ka 
and  visvatas  are  opposed  :  though  it  has  but  one  pole,  it  has  a  front 
on  every  side,     apasyan  :  because  dead. 


4  yam,  kumara,  pravartayo 
ratham  viprebhias  pari,, 
tam  samann  pravartata, 
sam  it 6  navi  ahitam. 


cT^  I  ^T^  I  ^  I  TTI  ^^J[  I 

The  car,  0  hoy,  that  thou  didst  set 
rolling  forth  away  from  the  priests, 
after  that  there  rolled  forth  a  chard 
placed  from  here  upon  a  ship. 


The  departure  of  the  dead  is  followed  by  a  funeral  chant,  pra- 
avartayas  :  2.  s.  ipf.  cs.  of  vrt  turn  ;  accent,  p.  464,  17, 1  ;  p.  469,  jS  ; 
analysed  by  the  Padapatha,  as  pra  avartayas ;  cp.  note  on  viii. 
48,  2  a.  anu  pra  avartata  ;  B.  s.  ipf.  A.  of  vrt :  accent,  p.  464,  17,  1 ; 
p.  466,  19  ;  p.  468,  20  a.  viprebhyas  :  the  priests  officiating  at  the 
funeral;  abl.  governed  by  pari  (176,  la);  Sandhi,  43,  2a.  sam 
a-hitam :  accent,  p.  462,  13  h.  navi  :  the  funeral  chant  is  placed  on 
a  boat  as  a  vehicle  to  convey  it  from  here  (itas)  to  the  other  world. 


^g^  ^miH^ci;  II 


^:  I  fHTI  I  "^^^ » 

^:  I  f^  I  fff[^  I  ^  I  ^:  I  ^^^ » 
^3^^^  I  ^^T I  ^H^  II 


I 


X.  135,  7] 


YAMA 


215 


5  kah  kumaram  ajanayad  ? 
ratham  ko  nir  avartayat  ? 
kah  svit  tad  adya  no  briiyad, 
aaud^yi  yathabhavat  ? 


WJio  generated  the  hoy  ?  WJio 
roUed  out  his  car?  WJio  pray 
could  tell  us  this  to-day,  how  his 
equipment  (?)  ivas  ? 


I 


These  questions  seem  to  be  asked  by  Yama  on  the  deceased  boy's 
arrival :  Who  was  his  father  ?  Who  performed  his  funeral  ?  With 
what  equipment  was  he  provided  for  the  journey  ?  nir  avartayat : 
cp.  yam  pravartayo  ratham  in  4  a  b.  anud^yi :  this  word  occurs 
only  in  this  and  the  following  verse  ;  it  is  a  f.  of  anu-d^ya,  which 
occurs  in  the  sense  of  to  he  handed  over ;  the  exact  sense  is  nevertheless 
uncertain.  It  not  improbably  means  that  with  which  the  deceased 
was  supplied  for  the  journey  to  Yama's  abode. 


As  the  equipment  ivas,  so  the  top 
arose;  in  front  the  hottom  ex- 
tended ;  hehind  the  exit  was  made. 


^^Tf^r:^!!!  frm^  ii 

6  yathabhavad  annd^yi, 
tat6  agram  ajayata; 
purastad  budhna  atatah ; 
pascan  nirayanam  krtam. 

• 

The  sense  of  this  stanza  is  obscure,  chiefly  because  the  object  of 
which  the  details  are  here  given  is  uncertain.  The  car  on  which  the 
deceased  is  supposed  to  be  conveyed  may  be  meant.  There  is 
evidently  correspondence  between  yatha  and  tatas,  agram  and 
budhnas,  purastad  and  pascad.  There  is  no  doubt  about  the 
grammatical  forms  or  the  meaning  of  the  individual  words  (except 
anud^yi).  If  the  reference  is  to  the  car,  the  general  sense  of  the 
stanza  is:  in  proportion  to  the  equipment  is  the  height  of  the  top, 
the  space  on  the  floor  in  front,  and  the  size  of  the  exit  at  the  back. 


216  YAMA  •  [x.  135,  7 

7  idam  Yamasya  sadanam  This  is  the  seat  of  Yama  ihai  is 

devamanam  yad  ucyate.  called  the  abode  of  the  gods.     This 

iyam  asya  dhamyate  nalir.  is  his  flute  that  is  Mown.     He  it  is 

ayam  girbhih  pariskrtah.  that  is  adorned  with  songs. 

The  boy  here  arrives  at  the  abode  of  Yama.  sadanam  :  note  tliat 
the  vowel  of  this  word  is  always  short  in  the  Pada  text,  the  com- 
pilers of  which  seem  to  have  regarded  it  as  a  metrical  lengthening ; 
sadanam  occurs  about  a  dozen  times  in  the  RV.,  beside  the  much 
commoner  sadanam.  nalis :  with  s  in  the  nom.  (100,  I  a).  There 
is  one  syllable  too  many  in  c  (cp.  p.  428,  2  a),  ayam  :  Yama.  pari- 
skrtas :  note  that  the  Pada  text  removes  the  unoriginal  s  (p.  145, 
f.  n.  1  ;  cp.  note  on  x.  127,  3  a).  girbhis :  dec.  82 ;  accent, 
p.  458,  c  1. 

VATA 

This  god,  as  Vata,  the  ordinary  name  of  wind,  is  addressed  in  two  short 
hymns.  He  is  invoked  in  a  more  concrete  way  than  his  doublet  Vayu.,  who 
is  celebrated  in  one  whole  hymn  and  in  parts  of  others.  Vata's  name  is 
frequently  connected  with  forms  of  the  root  va,  hloip,  from  which  it  is 
derived.  He  is  once  associated  with  the  god  of  the  rainstorm  in  the  dual 
form  of  Vata-Parjanya,  while  Vayu  is  often  similarly  linked  with  Indra  as 
indra-Vayu.  Vata  is  the  breath  of  the  gods.  Like  Rudra  he  wafts 
healing  and  prolongs  life  ;  for  he  has  the  treasure  of  immortality  in  his 
house.  His  activity  is  chiefly  mentioned  in  connexion  with  the  thunder- 
storm. He  produces  ruddy  lights  and  makes  the  dawns  to  shine.  His 
swiftness  often  supplies  a  comparison  for  the  speed  of  the  gods  or  of 
mythical  steeds.     His  noise  is  also  often  mentioned. 

X.  168.     Metre:  Tristubh. 
^rfr  ifri  ^f^^  T^iT^^  II         ^   Tffi   I   T?f^  I   ^f^^T   I  "T^^  I 


X.  168,  2] 


VATA 


217 


1  Vatasya    nii     mahimanam    ra- 

thasya : 
rujann     eti,     stanayann     asya 

gh6sah. 
divisprg  yati  arunani  krnvann  ; 
uto  eti  prthivya  renum  asyan. 


(I  will)  noiv  (proclaim)  the 
greatness  of  Tata's  car :  its  sound 
goes  shattering,  thundering.  Touch- 
ing the  shy  it  goes  producing  ruddy 
hues ;  and  it  also  goes  along  the 
earth  scattering  dust. 


mahimanam  :  the  vb.  can  easily  be  supplied,  the  most  obvious  one 
being  pra  vocam  according  to  the  first  verse  of  i.  32,  Indrasya  nii 
viryani  pra  vocam,  and  of  i.  154  Visnor  nu  kam  viryani  pra 
vocam.  rujan  :  similarly  the  Maruts  are  said  to  split  the  mountain 
with  the  felly  of  their  cars  (v.  52,  9),  and  their  sound  is  thunder 
(i.  23,  11).  stanayan:  used  predieatively  like  a  finite  vb.  (207)  or 
eti  may  be  supplied,  arunani :  alluding  to  the  ruddy  hue  of 
lightning,  with  which  the  Maruts  are  particularly  associated,  asya  : 
accent,  p.  452.  uto :  24.  prthivya :  inst.  expressing  motion  over 
(199,  4). 


^^  I  3T  I  tT^  I  ^g  I  ^Tr!^  I  f^^^n:  I 

^  I  T^m:  I  'Twf^  I  ^^^  I  ^  I 

^m:  I 
rTTfir:  I  ^ig^  I  ^^T^?^:  I  15:  I 

t^%  I 
^w  \  f^^^  I  g^^^  I  TT^  II 


(2  sam  prorate  anu  Vatasya  vistha  : 
ainam    gachanti    samanam    na 

y6sah. 
tabhih    sayiik    saratham    devd 

iyate, 
asya  visvasya  bhiivanasya  raja. 


The  hosts  of  Vata  speed  on 
together  after  him  :  they  go  to  him 
as  women  to  a  festival.  The  god, 
the  king  of  all  this  world,  united 
with  them,  goes  on  the  same  car. 


sam  pra  irate  :  3.  pi.  pr.  A.  of  ir ;  p.  468,  20  a.  visthas  :  though  the 
derivation  is  vi-stha  (not  analysed  in  the  Pada  text),  the  meaning  is 
uncertain.     It  is  probably  the  subject  with  which  y6sas  are  com- 


^18 


VATA 


[x.  168, 


pared,  the  sense  being :  the  rains  follow  the  storm  wind  (apam  sakha 
in  3  c),  and  accompany  hiai  on  his  course,  saratham  :  an  adv.  based 
on  the  cognate  ace.  (197,  4).  iyate :  from  i  go  according  to  the 
fourth  class,  from  which  the  pr.  forms  lyase,  iyate,  iyante,  and  the 
pt.  lyamana  occur ;  c  is  a  Jagati  Pada. 


;]  antarikse  pathibhir  lyamano, 
na  ni  visate  katamac  canahah. 
apam  sakha  prathamaja  rtava, 
kiia  svij  jatah,  kuta  a  babhuva  ? 


Going  along  his  paths  in  the  air 
he  rests  not  any  day.  The  friend 
of  tvaters,  the  first-born,  the  holy, 
where   pray    being   born,    zvhence 

has  he  arisen  ? 

pathibhis :  inst.  in  local  sense  (199,  4).  iyamanas  :  see  note  on 
2  c.  ahas :  ace.  of  duration  of  time  (197,  2);  cp.  also  4  b  and  the 
Padapatha.  apam  sakha  :  as  accompanied  by  rain  (cp.  note  on  2  a). 
prathama-jas  :  97,  2.  rtava  :  15  c.  kva  :  =  kiia  (p.  448).  jatas  : 
as  a  finite  verb  (208) ;  cp.  x.  129,  6  b.  kiita  a  babhuva  =  what  is 
his  origin  (cp.  x.  129,  6  d) ;  on  the  use  of  the  pf.  cp.  213  A  a. 


8  wi3n  |m^f  g^^^  ^vri 
<T#  -^Tii'^  ^i^^i  T^\\^  i 


^(iTT  I  I^T^i^^  I  g4^^  I  w:  I 
^t^t:  I  f:??:  I  ^^  I  ^Mt  I  ^  I 

7l#f  I  mcTT^  I  1  f^T  I  f^^  II 


J.     _ 


4  atma     devanarn,      bhiivanasya         Breath  of  the  gods,  germ  of  the 
garbho,  world,  this  god  fares  according  to 

yathavasam  earati  deva  e§ah.         his  will.     His  sounds  are  heard, 


X.  168,  4]  VAT  A  219 

ghosa  id  asya  srnvire,   na  ru-     (but)  his  form  is  not  (seen).     To 
pam.  that   Vdta  we  would  pay  tvorship 

tasmai  Vataya  havisa  vidhema.     with  oblation. 

atma :  cp.  x.  90,  13,  where  Vayu  is  said  to  have  been  produced 
from  the  breath  of  Purusa  ;  q,nd  x.  16,  3,  where  breath  is  allied  to 
wind,  garbhas :  Vata  is  here  called  germ  of  the  world  as  Agni  is 
in  X.  45,  6.  asya :  accent,  p.  452.  ghosas :  cp.  1  b.  srnvire  :  3.  pi. 
A.  pr.  of  sru  with  ps.  sense  (p.  145,  y).  na  rupam  :  the  vb.  drsyate 
is  here  easily  supplied,     vidhema  :  with  dat.  (200  A/). 


VOCABULARY 


Finite  verbal  forms  are  here  given  under  the  root  from  which  they  are  derived, 
as  also  the  prepositions  with  which  they  are  compounded,  even  when  separated 
from  them.  Nominal  verbal  forms  (participles,  gerunds,  gerundives,  infinitives), 
on  the  other  hand,  appear  in  their  alphabetical  order. 

ABBREVIATIONS 

a.  =^  adjective.  A.  =  accusative.  A  =  Atmanepada,  middle  voice.  A  A.  =  Aitareya 
Aranyaka.  ab.  =  ablative,  ace.  =  accusative,  act.  ~  active,  adv.  =  adverb, 
adverbial.  ao,  =  aorist.  Arm.  =  Armenian.  Av.  =  Avesta,  Avestic.  Bv. 
=  Bahuvrihi  compound,  cd.  ^  compound,  cj.  =  conjunction,  cog.  =  cognate, 
corr.  =  correlative,  cpv.  =  comparative,  cs.  =  causative.  D.  =  dative,  dat, 
=  dative,  dec.  =  declension,  dem.  =  demonstrative,  den.  =  denominative, 
der.  =  derivative.  Dv.  =  Dvandva  compound,  ds.  =  des^iderative.  du.  =  dual, 
emph.  =  empliatic,  emphasizing,  enc.  =  enclitic.  Eng.  =  English,  f.  =  feminine, 
ft.  =  future.  G.  =  genitive,  gd.  =  gerund,  gdv.  =  gerundive,  gen.  =  genitive. 
Gk.  =  Greek.  Go.  =  Gothic,  gov.  =  governing  compound.  I.  =  instrumental, 
ij.  =  interjection,  ind.  ^  indicative,  indec.  =  indeclinable,  inf.  =  infinitive, 
inj.  =  injunctive,  inst.  —  instrumental,  int.  =  intensive,  inter.  =  interroga- 
tive, ipf.  =  imperfect,  ipv.  =  imperative.  jri.  =  irregular,  itv.  =  iterative. 
K.  =  Karmadharaya  compound,  m.  =  masculine,  mid.  —  middle.  L.  =  loc;,- 
tive.  Lat.  =  Latin.  Ic.  =  locative.  Lith.  =  Lithuanian.  N.  =  nomina- 
tive.  n.  =  neuter.  neg.  =  negative,  nm.  =  numeral,  nom.  =  nominative. 
OG.  =  Old  German.  OL  =  Old  Irish.  OP.  =  Old  Persian.  op.  =  optative, 
ord.  =  ordinal.  OS.  =  Old  Saxon.  OSI.  =  Old  Slavonic.  P.  =  Parasniaipada, 
active  voice,  pel.  =  particle,  pf.  =  perfect,  pi.  =  plural,  poss.  =  possessive. 
pp.  =  past  passive  participle,  ppf.  =  pluperfect,  pr.  =  present.  prn.  =  pro- 
noun, proh.  =  prohibitive.  prp.  =  preposition.  prs.  =  person,  personal, 
ps.  =  passive,  pt.  =  participle.  red.  =  reduplicated.  ref.  =  reflexive.  rel. 
=  relative,  rt.  =  root.  s.  =  singular,  sb.  ^  subjunctive,  sec.  =  secondary, 
sf.  =  sutfix.  Slav.  =  Slavonic,  spv.  =  superlative,  syn.  =  syntactical.  Tp. 
=  Tatpurusa  compound.  V.  =  vocative,  vb.  =  verb,  verbal,  voc.  =  vocative. 
YV.  =  Yajurveda. 


a,  prn.  root  that  in  d-tas,  d-tra,  d-tha, 

a-smdi,  a-syd. 
ams  attain,  v.  asnoti,  asnute  :  see  as, 
dmh-as,  n.  distress,  trouble,  ii.  38,  2   3  ; 

iii,  59,  2  ;  vii.  71,  5. 


ak-tii,  m.  ointwent ;  beam  of  light ;  (clear) 

night,  x,  14,  9  [anj  anoint']. 
aks-d,   m.   die  for  playing,  pi.  dice,  x. 

34,    2.    4.    6.    7.     13    [pcrhaj^s     eye 

=  spof]. 


aksan] 


222 


[adhvara 


eye  (weak  stem  of  dksi),  x. 
tmf ailing,  i. 


aks-dn,  n. 

127,  1. 
d-ksiya-mana,  pr.  pt.   ps. 

154,  4  [2.  ksi  destroy], 
akhkhali-kf  Lya,  gd.  having  made  a  croak, 

vii.  103,  3. 
Ag-ni,  m.fre,  ii.  12,  3  ;  iii.  59,  5  ;  viii. 

48,  6  ;    X.  34,  11  ;    god  of  fire,  Agni,  i. 

1-7,  9  ;  35^  1  ;  ii.  35,  15  ;  v.  11,  1-6  ; 

vii.  49,  4  ;    X.  15,  9.  12  ;  90,  13  [Lat. 

ig-ni-s,  Slav,  og-ni], 
agni-dagdha,  Tp.  cd.  burnt  with  fire,  x. 

15,  14  [pp.  of  dab.  turn], 
agni-diita,  a.   (Bv.)   having  Agni   as   a 

messenger,  x.  14,  13. 
agni-svattd,   cd.   Tp.    consumed  by  fire, 

X.  15,  11  [pp.  of  svad  taste  well]. 
dg-ra,  n.  front;  beginning ;  top,  x.  135,  6; 

Ic.  dgre  in  the  beginning,  x.  129,  3.  4. 
agra-tas,  adv.  in  the  beginning,  x,  90,  7, 
a-ghn-ya,  f.  cow,  v.  83,  8  [gdv.  not  to  be 

slain,  from  han  slay], 
ankus-fn,  a.   having  a  hook,  hooked,  at- 
tractive, X.  34,  7  [ankus^  hook], 

1.  ang-a,  n.  limb,  ii.  33,  9. 

2.  angd,  emphatic  pel.  ^i(S<,  only,  i.  1,6; 
X.  129,  7  [180]. 

Angara,  m.  coal,  x.  34,  9. 

Angira,  m.  name  of  an  ancient  seer,  iv. 

51,  4. 
Angiras,  m.   pi.  name    of  a  group 

ancestors,  v.  11,  6;    x.  14,  3.  4.  5. 

s.,  as  an  epithet  of  Agni,  i.  1,  6  ; 

11,6  [Gk.  dyyiXo-s  'messenger']. 
ae  bend,   I,  P.  deati.  ud-,  draw  up,  v. 

83,8. 
a-cakra,  a.  (Bv.)  wheelless,  x.  135,  3. 
a-cit,  a.  (K.)  unthinking,  thoughtless,  vii. 

86,  7. 
a-cit-e,  dat.  inf.  not  to  knoio,  vii.  61,  5. 
a-citti,  f.  (K.)  thoughtlessness,  vii.  86,  6. 
a-citrd,  n.  darkness,  obscurity,  iv.  51,  3. 
d-cyuta,    pp.    (K. )    not    overthrown,    un- 
shakable, i.  85,  4. 
acyuta-cyiit,   i\.    (Tp.)    moving 

movable,  ii.  12,  9. 
dcha,  prp.  with  ace,  unto,  viii. 
aj    drive,  I.  P.  djati    [Lat.   ago 

'  drive  ',  Gk.  070;,  '  lead  ']. 
a-  drive  up,  vi.  64,  10. 
ud-  drive  out,  ii.  12,  3  ;  iv.  50,  5. 
ajd-mayu,  a.   (Bv.)   bleating  like  a  goat, 

vii.  103,  6.  10  [mayu,  m.  bleat]. 
a-jdra,   a.    (K.)  unaging,   i.    160,   4  [jf 

icaste  away]. 


of 

6; 

V. 


the   im- 

48,  6. 
'  lead ', 


d-jasra,  a.  (K.)  eternal,  ii.  35,  8  [imfail- 

ing  :  jas  be  exhausted], 
ajavi,  m.  pi.  Dv.  cd.  goats  and  sheep,  x. 

90,  10  [aja  +  dvi]. 
a-jur-ya,  a.  unaging,  iv.  51,  6  [jur  icastc 

aiuay], 
aJaj,  VII.  P.   andkti  anoint;    A.  ankt^ 

anoint  oneself,  viii.  29,  1. 
dnjas-a,  adv.  straightway,  vi.  54,  1  [inst. 

of    dnjas   ointment :   =  with    gliding 

motion], 
anj-i,  n.  ornament,  i.  85,  3  ;  viii.  29,  1 

[anj  anoint], 
a-tas,  adv.  hence,  x.   14,  9  ;  =  ab.  fro)n 

that,  iv.  50,  3  ;  than  that,  x.  90,  3. 
ati-ratrd,  a.   (celebrated)  overnight,  vii. 

103,  7  [ratri  night]. 
atka,  m.  robe,  ii.  35,  14. 
dty-etavdi,   dat.  inf.  to  pass  over,  v.  83, 

10  [dti  +  i  go  beyond]. 
d-tra,  adv.  here,  i.  154,  6  ;  ii.  35,  6. 
d-tra,  adv.  then,  vii.   103,  2;    there,   x. 

135,  1. 
Atri,  m.  an  ancient  sage,  vii.  71,  5. 
d-tha,  adv.  then  ;  so,  vi.  54,  7. 
Athar-van,  m.  pi.  name  of  a  group  of 

ancient  priests,  x,  14,  6. 
d-tha,  adv.  then,  viii.  48,  6  ;  x.  14,  10  : 

15,  4.  11  ;  129,6;  so,  x.  127,  6. 
dtho,  adv.  and  also,  x.  90,  5  [atha  +  u]. 
ad,  eat,  II.  P.  dtti,  ii.  35,  7  ;  x.  15,  8. 11. 

12  [Lat.  edo,  Gk.  eSo;,  Eng.  eat]. 
d-dabdha,  pp.  (K.)  uninjured,  iv.  50,  2 

[dabh  harm], 
A-diti,  f.  name  of  a  goddess,  viii.  48,  2 

[imbinding,  freedom,  from  3.  da  bind], 
ad-dha,  adv.    tridy,   x.   129,   6   [in  this 

manner  :  a-d  this  +  dha]. 
a-dyd,  adv.  to-day,  i.  35,  11  ;  iv.  51,  3- 

4;    X.  14,  12;    127,  4;    135,5;    nou; 

X.  15,  2    [perhaps  =  a-dyavi  on  this 

day]. 
d-dri,  m.  rock,  i.  85,  5  [not  splitting  :  dr 

2nerce]. 
ddri-dugdha,   Tp.  cd.  pressed   out    with 

stones,  iv.  50,  3  [pp.  of  duh  milk], 
ddha-ra,  a.  lower,  ii.  12,  4. 
adhds,  adv.  beloio,  x.  129,  5. 
ddhi,  prp.  with  Ic,  upon,  i.  85,  7  ;   v. 

83,   9;    vii.    103,  5;    with  i\h.  from, 

X.  90,  5. 
ddhy-aksa,  m.  eye-witness;  surveyor,  x. 

129,  7  [having  one's  eye  upon]. 
adhvard,    m.    sacrifice,   i.   1,  4.  8;     iv. 

51,2. 


adhvaryii] 


223 


[abhistisavas 


adh.var-yu,    m.    officiating    priest,    vii. 

103,  8. 
a-dhvasm^n,  a.  (Bv.)  undimmed,  ii.  35, 

14  [having  no  darkening']. 
an  Ireaihe,  II.  P.  dniti,  x.  129,  2  [Go. 

an-an  *  breathe ']. 
dn-agni-dagdha,   pp.    (K.)   not    burned 

withfire,  x.  15,  14. 
dn-abhi-mlata-varna,   a.    (Bv.)   having 

an  unfaded  colour,  ii.  35,  13. 
d-nasta-vedas,  a.   (Bv.)  ivhose  property 

is  never  lost,  vi.  54,  8. 
an-amiva,  a.  (Bv.)  diseaseless,  iii.  59,  3; 

n.  health,  x.  14,  11  [amiva  disease]. 
dn-agas,  a.  (Bv.)  sitdess,  v,  83,  2  ;    vii. 

86,   7  [agas   sin;     Gk.    dv-ayr]s    'in- 
nocent ']. 
an-idhmd,   a.   (Bv.)   having  no  fuel,   ii. 

35,4. 
d-nimis-am,  (ace.)  adv.  unwinkingly,  vii. 

61,  3  [ni-mis,  f.  loink]. 
d-nimis-a,  (inst.)  adv.   loifh  unwinking 

eye,  iii.  59,  1  [ni-mis,_f  icink]. 
d-nivisamana,  pr.  pt.  A.  unresting,  vii. 

49,  1  [ni  +  vis  go  to  rest]. 
dn-ira,   f.  (K.)  languor,  ailment,  vii.  71, 

2  ;  viii.  48,  4  [ira,  f.  refreshment]. 
an-ika,  n.face,  ii.  35,  11  [an  breathe]. 
anu,  prp.  with  ace,  along,  x.  14,  1.  8  ; 

among,  x.  J  4,  12. 
anu-kamdm,    (ace.)    adv.    according    to 

desire,  viii.  48,  8. 
anu-d6yi,  f.  equipment  {'i) ,  x.   135,  5.  6 

[f.    gdv.    of    anu-da    to    be    handed 

over], 
anu-paspasana,  pf.  pt.  A.  having  spied 

out,  x.  14,  1  [spas  spy], 
anu-madyd-mana,    pr.    pt.     ps.    being 

greeted  with  gladness,  vii.  63,  3. 
anu-venant,  pr.  pt.  seeking  the  friendship 

o/(acc.),  X.  135,  2. 
dnu-vrata,  a.    devoted,  x.  34,  2    \_acting 

according  to  the  will  (vrata)  of  another]. 
dn-rta,  n.  {K.)  falsehood,  ii.  35,  6  ;    vii. 

61,  5  ;  misdeed.,  wrong,  86,  6  [rtd  right]. 
an-ends,    a.    (Bv.)    guiltless,   vii.    86,   4 

[6nas  guilt], 
dnta,  m.  end,  iv.  50,  1  ;  edge,  proximity  : 

Ic.  dnte  near,  x.  34,  16. 
antdr,  prp.  with  Ic,  within,  1.  35,  9  ;  ii. 

12,  3  ;  35,  7  ;  iv.  51,  3  ;  vii.  71,  5  ;  86, 

2  (  =  m  communion  with)  ;    viii.  48,  2  ; 

among,  viii.  29,  2.  3  [Lat.  inter]. 
antdri-ksa,  n.  air,  atmosphere,  i.  35,  7. 

11  ;    ii!    12,    2 ;    x.   90,   14  ;    168,    3 


[situated  betiveen  heaven  and  earth  : 

ksa  =  1.  ksi  divell]. 
anti-tas,  adv.  from,  near,  iii.  59,  2  [dnti 

in  front,  neai], 
dndh-as,  n.  Soma  plant ;  juice,  i.  85,  f> 

[Gk.  dvO-oi  '  blossom  ']. 
dn-na,  n.  food,  ii.  35,  5.  7.  10.  11.  14  ; 

pi.  12  ;  X.  90,  2  [pp.  of  ad  eat]. 
anyd,  prn.  a.  other,  ii.  35,  3.  8.  13 ;   x. 

34,  4.  10.  11.  14  ;  129,  2  ;  with  ab. 
=  than,  ii.  33,  11  ;  anyo-anyd  one- 
another,  vii.  103,  3.  4.  5  ;  anye-anye, 
anyah-anyah  some-others,  x.  14,  8  ;  ii. 

35.  3  [cp.  Lat.  alius,  Gk.  dAAo-s 
'other']. 

dp,  f.  icaier,  pi.  N.  apas,  ii.  35,  3.  4  ;  vii. 
49,  1.  22.  3.  4  ;  103,  2  ;  A.  apds,  v.  83, 
6  ;  inst.  adbhis,  x.  14,  9  ;  G.  apam, 
i.  85,  9  ;  ii.  12,  7  ;  35,  1.  2.  3.  7.  9.  11. 

13.  14  ;  vii.  103,  4 ;  x.  168,  8  ;  L. 
apsTi,  ii.  35,  4.  5.  7.  8  ;  vii.  103,  5 
[Av.  ap  *  water  ']. 

apa-dhd,  f.  unclosing,  ii.  12,  3. 
dpa-bhartavdi,  dat.  inf.  to  take  away,  x. 

14,  2  [bhr  6ear]. 

apa-bhartf,  m.  remover,  ii.  33,  7  [bhr 

bear]. 
d-pasyant,  pr.   pt.   (K.)    not  seeing,   x. 

135,  3. 
dpas,  n.  ivork,  i.  85,  9  [Lat.  opus  '  work ']. 
apds,  a.  active,  i.  160,  4. 
apds-tama,  spv.  a.  most  active,  i.  160,  4. 
Apam  ndpat,  m.  son  of  icaters,  name  of 

a  god,  ii.  33,  13  ;  35,  1.  3.  7.  9. 
dpi-hita,  pp.  covered,  x.  129,  3  [dha  put]. 
apic-ya,  a.  secret,  ii.  35,  11  [apic  con- 
traction of  a  presupposed  api-aric]. 
a-praketd,  a.   (Bv. )  indistinguishable,  x. 

129,  3  [yvaiketi,  perceptiort]. 
d-pratita,  pp.   (K.)  irresistible,  iv.  50,  9 

[prati  +  pp.  of  i  go]. 
a-pramrsyd,  gdv.  not  to  be  forgotten,  ii. 

35,  6  [mrs  touch]. 
d-budhya-mana,   pr.    pt.  unawakening, 

iv.  51,  3  [budh  wake]. 
abhi-ksipdnt,  pr.  pt.  lashing,  v.  83,  3. 
abh£-tas,  adv.  on  all  sides,   iv.   50,  3  ; 

with  ace,  around,  vii.  103,  7. 
abhimat-in,  m.  adversary,  i.  85,  3  [abhi- 

mati,  f.  hostility], 
abhi-vrsta,  pp.  rained  upon,  vii.  103,  4. 
abhisti-dyumna,   a.    (Bv.)   splendid  in 

help,  iv.  51,  7  [dyumnd,  n.  splendour]. 
abhisti-savas,  a.  (Bv.)  strong  to  help,  iii. 

59,  8  [sdvas,  n.  might]. 


abhiti] 


224 


[avrka 


abliiti,  f.  attack,  ii.  33,  5  [abhi  +  iti]. 
abhi-vrta,  pp.  adorned,  i.  35,  4  [1.  vr 

cover]. 
d-bhv-a,  a.  monstrous ;    n.  foixe,  ii.  33, 

10  ;    monster,   iv.    51,   9    [non-existent, 

monstrous  :  -bhu  &e]. 
d-manya-mana,  pr.  pt.  A.  not  thinking 

=  unexpecting,  ii.  12,  10  [man  think']. 
^-martya,  a.  (K.)  immortal,  viii.  48,  12  ; 

f.  a,  X.  127.  2. 
a-mitra,  m.  (K.)  enemy,  ii.  12,  8  [mitra 

friend]. 
^tnita- varna,  a.  (B  v. )  of  unchanged  colour, 

iv.  51,  9.' 
^mi-va,  f.  disease,  i.  35,  9  ;    ii,  33,   2  ; 

vii.  71,  2  ;  viii.  48,  11  [am  harm,  3.  s. 

dimi-ti]. 
amu-y-a,  inst.  adv.  in  this  way.  so,  x. 

135,  2  [inst.  f.  of  amu  this  used  in 

the  inflexion  of  ayam]. 
a-mura,    a.    (K.)    wise,    vii.   61,  5    [not 

foolish  :  mnra]. 
a-mfta,  a.  immortal ;  m.  immortal  being, 

i,  '35,  2  ;  vii.  63,  5  ;  viii.  48,  3^ ;  n. 

wliat  is  immortal,  i.  35,  6  ;   x.  90,  3  ; 

immortality,  x.  129,  2  [jiot  dead,  mrtd, 

pp.  of  mr  die  ;  cp.  Gk.  djjL0poTos  '  im- 
mortal ']. 
amrta-tva,  n.  immortality,  x.  90,  2. 
dm.bh-as,  n.  water,  x,  119,  1. 
a-yajvan,    m.    (K.)    non-sacrifcer,    vii. 

61,  4. 
a-y-dm,  dem.  prn.  N.  s.  m.  this,  in.  59, 

4  ;  vii.  86,  3.  8  ;   viii.  48,  10  ;   x.  34, 

13  (=  here)  ;  he,  i.  160,  4  :  x.  135,  7. 
a-yas,  a.   nimble,  i.  154,  6  [not  exerting 

oneself:  yas  =  yas  heat  oneself], 
a-rap^s,  a.  (Bv.)  unscathed,  ii.  33,  6  ;   x. 

15,  4  [rdpas,  n.  infirmity,  injury]. 
aram-krta,  pp.  ivell-prepared ,  x.  14,  13 

[made  ready], 
dr-am,   adv.   in   readiness ;    with  kr  do 

service  to  (dat.),  vii.  86,  7. 
d-rati,  f.  hostility,  ii.  35,  6;    iv.  50,  11  ; 

viii.  48,  3  ;   x.  34,  14  [non-giving,  nig- 
gardliness, enmity]. 
a-ri,  m.  niggard,  enemy,  gen.  aryds,  ii. 

12,  4.  5  ;  iv.  50, 11  ;  viii.  48,  8  [having 

no  wealth:   ri  =  rai ;    1.   indigent;    2. 

7iiggardly]. 
d-rista,  pp.  (K.)  uninjured,  vi.  54,  7  [ris 

injure]. 
ar-und,  a.  f.  i,  ruddy,  x.  15,  7  ;  n.  ruddy 

hue,  X,  168,  I. 
ar-u.sA,  a.  ruddy,  i.  85,  5  ;  vii.  71,  1. 


a-renta,  a.  (Bv.)  dustless,  i,  35,  11  [renu 

m.  dust]. 
ark-d,  m.  song,  i.  85,  2  ;  x.  15,  9  [arc 

sing], 
arc  sing,  praise,  I.  drcati.    sam-,  2^rciise 

universally,  pf.  anrc^,  i.  160,  4. 
drc-ant,  pr.  pt.,  singing,  i.  85,  2  ;  viii. 

29,  10. 
arna-va,  a.  waving,  viii.  63,  2;  m.  flood, 

i.  85,  9. 
dr-tha,  n.  goal,  vii.  63,  4  [ivhat  is  gone 

for  :  T  go]. 
arth-in,  a.  greedy,  x.  127,  5  [having  an 

object,  needy], 
ar-paya,  cs.  of  r  go.     ud-  raise  up,  ii, 

33,  4. 
arya,  a.  noble,  vii.  86,  7  ;  x.  34,  13  ;  m. 

lord,  ii.  35,  2. 
Arya-man,    m.    name    of  one   of    tlie 

Adityas,  vii.  63,  6. 
ar-vant,  m.  steed,  ii.  33,  1  ;    vii.  54,  5 

[speeding  :  r  go], 
arvak,  adv.   hither,  x.    15,  4.  9  ;    after- 
wards, X.  129,  6. 
arvanc,  a.  hitherward,  i.  35,  10  ;  v.  83,  6. 
drh-ant,  pr.  pt.  worthy,  ii.  33,  10'. 
av  help,  I.  P.  avati,  i.  85,  7  ;   ii.  12,  14  ; 

35,  15  ;    iv.  50,  9.  11  ;  vii.  49,  1-4  ; 

61,  2  ;  X.  15,  1.  5  ;  quicken,  v.  83,  4.    . 
ava-ta,  m.  well,  i.  85,  10 ;  iv.  50,  3  [dva 

doivn], 
a-vadyd,,  n.  blemish,  x.  14,  8  [gdv.  not  to 

be  praised,  blameworthy], 
ava-ni,  f.  river,  v.  11,  5  [ava  down], 
ava-pdsyant,   pr.    pt.    looking   down   on 

(ace),  vii.  49,  3. 
ava-md,  spv.  a.  lowest ;    nearest,  ii.  35, 

12  ;  latest,  vii.  71,  3  [dva  do^cn']. 
ava-yatf,  m.  appeaser,  viii.  48,  2. 
ava-ra,  cpv.  a.  lower,  x.  15,  1 ;   nearer^ 

ii.  12,  8  [dva  doivn]. 
dv-as,  n.  help,  i.  35,  1  ;   85,  11  ;    ii.  12, 

9  ;  iii.  59,  6  ;  x.  15,  4  [av  help]. 
ava-sana,  n.  resting  place,  x,  14,  9  [mw» 

binding,    giving    rest :     dva  +  sa  =  si 

tie], 
avds-tat,  adv.  below,  x,  129,  5. 
avas-yu,  a.  desiring  help,  iv.  50,  9. 
a-vatd,  a.  (Bv.)  windless,  x.  129,  2  [vata 

ivind]. 
av-i-tf,  m.  helper,  ii.  12,  6. 
a-vira,  a.  .(Bv.)  sonless,  vii.  61,  4  [viv& 

hero]. 
a-vrkd,  a.  (K.)  friendly,  x.    15,   1    [noi 

harming  :  vrka  tvolf]. 


avyathya] 


225 


[ajata 


a-vyathya,    gdv.    immovable,   ii.    35,    5 

[vyath  icave'r]. 
as  reach,  obtain,  V.  asnoti,  asnut§,  i.  1, 

3  ;  85,  2  ;  ii.  33,  2.  6  ;  iii.  59,  2  ;  vii, 

103,  9. 
abhi-  attain  to  (ace),  i.  154,  5, 
as-man,  m.  rock,  ii.  12,  3  [Av.  asman 

'■  stone  ' ;  Gk.  aK/xcvv  '  anvil ']. 
ds-va,  m.  horse,  ii.  12,  7  ;  35,  6 ;  iv.  51, 

5;  V.  83,  3.  6  ;  vii.  71,  3.  5  ;  x.  34,  3. 

11  ;  90,  10  [Lat.  equii-s  ^ horse',  Gk. 

'LTTTro-s,  OS.  ehu]. 
dsva-magha,  a.  (Bv.)  rich  in  horses,  vii. 

71,  1  [maghd  bounty~]. 
Asv-in,  m.  du.  horsemen,  name  of  the 

twin  gods  of  dawn,  vii.  71,  2.  3.  6. 
astdu,  nm.  eight,  i.  35,  8. 
as  be,  II.  P. :  pr.  2.  dsi,  i.  1,  4  ;    ii.  12, 

15  ;  33,  3  ;  3.  ^sti,  ii.  12,  5  ;  33,  7.  10  ; 

vii.    71,   4;    86,    6;    x.  34,    14;    pi. 

1.    smdsi,   vi.    54,   9 ;     viii.    48,    9 ; 

3.  santi,  i.  85,   12 ;    x.  90,  16  ;   ipv. 

astu,  V.  11,  5  ;    vii.  86,  82  ;    x.  15,  2  ; 

santu,  vii.  63,  5  ;  op.  syama,  iii.  59, 

3  ;  iv.  50,  6  ;  51,  10.  11  ;  viii.  48,  12. 

13  ;    ipf.  3.  as,  x.  129,  3  ;    asit,  x.  34, 

2  ;  90,  6.  12.  14  ;  129,  1^.  22.  32.  4.  52 ; 
asan,  x.  90,  15.  16  ;  129,  52  ;  pf.  asa, 
vii.  86,  4  ;  x.  129,  2  ;  asur,  iv.  51,  7. 

dpi-  be  or  remain  in  (Ic")  ;  syama,  iii. 

59,  4  ;  X.  14,  6. 
pdri  be  around,  celebrate,  2.  pi.  stha,  vii. 

103,  7. 
prd,-  be  pre-eminent,  ipv.  astu,  iii.  59,  2. 
ds-at,  pr.  pt.  n.  the  non-existent,  x.  129, 

1.  4. 
a-sascdt,  a,  (Bv.)  inexhaustible,  i.  160,  2 

[having  no  second,  sascdt :  sa.c  follovi], 
as-ita,  (pp.)  a.  black,  iv.  51,  9. 
d-sammrsta,  pp.  (K.)  imcleansed,  v.  11. 

3  [mrj  wipe]. 

as-u,  m.  life,  x.    14,   12  ;    15,  1    [1.  as 

exist] . 
asu-tfp,  a.  (Tp.)  life- stealing,  x.   14,  12 

[trp  delight  in~\. 
asu-niti,  f.  spirit- guidance,  x.  15,  14. 
asu-ra,  m.  divine  spirit,  i.  35,  7.  10  ;  v. 

83,  6  [Av.  ah'urct]. 
asur-ya,  n.  divine  dominion,  ii.  33,  9  ; 

35,  2. 
asuy6.nt,  pr.  pt.  displeased,  resentfid,  x. 

135,  2. 
ds-ta,  n.  home,  abode,  x.  14,  8 ;  34,  10. 
asmd,    prn.   stem    of    1.    prs.    pi.;    A. 

asman  us,  viii.  48,  3.  11  ;  x.  15,  6  ;  D. 

1902 


asmdbhyam  to  its,  i.  85,  12  ;  x.  14, 
12  ;  asme  to  us,  i.  160,  5  ;  ii.  33,  12  ; 
Ab.  asmad /rom  its,  ii.  33,  2  ;  vii.  71, 
1.2;  than  us,  ii.  33,  11  ;  G.  asma- 
kam  of  us,  vi.  54,  6 ;  L.  asm6  in  or  on 
us,  ii.  35,  4  ;  iv.  50,  10.  11  ;  viii.  48, 
10  ;  asmasu  on  us,  iv.  51,  10. 

a-smin,  L.  of  prn.  root  a,  in  this,  ii.  35, 
14  ;  iv.  50,  10  ;  x.  14,  5. 

a-smera,  a.  (K.)  not  smiling,  ii.  35,  4. 

a-smdi,  D.  of  prn.  root  a,  to  him,  ii.  35, 
5.  12  ;  for  him,  x.  14,  9  ;  unaccented, 
asmai  to  or  for  him,  ii.  12,  5.  13  ;  35, 
2.  10 ;  vi.  54,  4  ;  vii.  63,  5  ;  x.  14,  9. 
11. 

a-sya,  G.  of  prn.  root  a,  of  this,  ii.  33,  9 ; 
X.  129,  6  ;  168,  2  ;  unaccented,  asya 
his,  of  him,  its,  of  it,  i.  35,  7;  154,  5  ; 
160,  3  ;  ii.  12,  13  ;  35,  2.  6.  8.  11  ;  iv. 
50,  2  ;  vi.  54,  3  ;  vii.  86,  1  ;  viii.  48, 
12  ;  X.  34,  4.  6  ;  90,  3^.  4.  6.  122.  15  . 
129,  7  ;  135,  7  ;  168,  1. 

as-yant,  pr.  pt.  scattering,  x.  168,  1  [as 
throw]. 

a-sydi,  D.  f.  of  prn,  root  a,  to  that,  ii. 

33,  5. 

ah  say:  pf.  3.  pi.  ahur,  ii.  12,  5  ;  v.  11, 

6  ;  vii.  86,  3  ;  x.  34,  4. 
aha,  emphasizing  pel.,  indeed,  i.  154,  6 ; 

V.  83,  3;  vii.  103,  2. 
dhan,  n.  day,  viii.  48,  7  ;  x.  129,  2. 
aham,  prs.  prn.,  J,  viii.  86,  7  ;  x.  15,  3  ; 

34,  2.  3.  12. 

ahar,  n.  day,  vii.  103,  7. 

dhas,  n.  day,  x.  168,  3. 

a-hastd,  a.  (Bv.)  handless,  x.  34,  9. 

dh-i,  m.  serpent,  ii.  12,  3.  11  [Av.  azi, 

Gk.  €Xi-s  '  viper  ',  Lat.  angui-s]. 
d-hrnana,  pr.  pt.  A.  free  from  ivrath  [hr 

be  angry]. 

A,  prp.  with  ab.  from,  ii.  35,  2 ;  iv.  50, 
3  ;  51,   10  ;  with  L.,  in,  i.  85,  4  ;  ii. 

35,  7.  8  ;  iii.  59,  3  ;  viii.  48,  6. 

a,  pel.  quite,  very,  ii.  12,  15  ;  with  D., 

viii.  48,  4. 
a-gata,  pp.  come,  vii.  103,  3.  9  [gam  go]. 
a-gam-istha,  a.  spv.  coming  most  gladly, 

X.  15,  3. 
ag-as,  n.  sin,  vii.  86,   4  ;  x.  15,  6  [cp. 

Gk.  dyos  '  guilt ']. 
ac-ya,    gd.    bending,    x.    15,    6    [4  +  ac 

bend]. 
a-jata,    pp.    produced^   x.    129,   6    [jan 

generate]. 


Q 


ajya] 


226 


[ima 


aj-ya,  n.   melted  butter,  x.  90,  6   [a-anj 

anomi]. 
ani,  m,  axle-end,  i.  35,  6. 
a-tata,    pp.    extended,    x.    135,    6    [tan 

stretch7\. 
a-tasthivams,  red.  pf.pt.  having  mounted, 

ii.  12,  8  [a  +  stha  s^nnd]. 
at-man,  m.  breath,  x.  168,  4  [Old  Saxon 
_  dthom  '  breath ']. 

Adityd,  m.  son  of  Aditi,  iii.  59,  2.  3.  5. 
ap  obtain,  V.  P.  apnoti  ;  pf.  apa,  iv.  51, 

7  [Ija,t. ap-iscor  '  reach  ',  ap-ere  '  seize']. 
a-bhis,  I.  pi.  f.  of  prn.  root  a,  with  these, 

V.  83,  1. 
a-bhu,  a.  coming  into  being,  x.  129,  3. 
ama,  a.  raiv,  unbaked,  ii.  35,  6  [Gk.  ojfjio-s 

'  raw ']. 
a-yat-i,  pr.  pt.  f.    coming,  x.  127,  1.  3 

[a  +  i  go]. 
ayas-d,  a.  f.  i,  made  of  iron,  viii.  29,  3 

[ay as  iron']. 
ay-ii,  a.  active  ;  m.  living  being,  mortal, 

iii.  59,  9  [1  go]. 
a-yudh-a,  n.  toeapon,  viii.  29,  5  [5,  +  yudh 
,  fighf]. 
ay-US,  n.  span  of  life,  vii.  103,  10  ;  viii, 

48,  4.   7.   10.   11  ;  x.  14,  14  [activity: 

igo]. 
aranyd.,  a.  belonging  to  the  forest,  x.  90,  8 

[dranya]. 
a-rohant,  pr.  pt.  scaling,  ii.  12,  12  [ruh 

mount]. 
avis,  adv.  in  view,  with  kr,  make  mani- 
fest, V.  83,  3. 
as-u,  a.  swift,  vii.  71,  5  [Gk.  wkv-s;]. 
asu-h^man,   a.  (Bv.),   of  sioift  impulse, 

ii.  35,  1. 
a-sam,  gen.  pi.  f.  of  the  prn.  root  a,  of 

them,  iv.  51,  6. 
as-ina,  irr.  pr.  pt.  A.,  sitting,  x.   15,  7 

[as  sit]. 
a-hita,  pp.  placed  in  (Ic),  viii.  29,  4  ;  x. 

14,   16;    with  sdm  placed  upon  (Ic), 

X.  135,  4  [dh&  put]. 
a-huta,  pp.  to  whom  offering  is  made,  v. 

11,  3. 


I  go,  II.  P.  6mi,  x.  34,  5  ;  6ti,  iv.  50,  8  ; 
X.  34,  6  ;  168,  1^  ;  ytoti,  vii.  49,  1  ; 
approach  (ace),  viii.  48,  10  ;  dyan,  pr. 
sb.  pass,  vii.  61,  4  ;  attain,  vii.  63,  4  ; 
pf.  lyur,  X.  15,  1.  2. 
4nu-  go  after,  vi.  54,  5  ;  follow  (ace), 
viii,  63;  5. 


apa-  go  away,  x.  14,  9. 

abhi-  come  upon,  ipf.  ayan,  vii.  103,  2. 

4va-  appease  :  op.  iyam,  vii.  86,  4. 

a-  come,  ii.  33,   1  ;  v.  83,  6  ;    go  to,  x. 

14,  8. 
upa  a-  come  to  (ace),  i.  1,  7. 
ud-  rise,  vii.  61,  1  ;   63,  1-4  ;  ipf.   ait, 

X.  90,  4. 
upa-  approach,  vii.  86,  3;    103,  3  ;   x. 

14,  10  ;  34,  10  ;  flotv  to,  ii.  35,  3. 
para-  pass  away,  pf,  iyiir,  x.  14,  2.  7. 
pdri-  surround,  ii.  35,  4.  9. 
prd-  go  forth,  i.  154,  3  ;  x.  14,  7. 
anu  pra-  go  forth  after,  vi.  54,  6. 
vi-  disperse,  x.  14,  9. 
sdm-  floio  together,  ii.  35,  3  ;  v,nite,  vii, 
103,  2. 
icha-mana,  pr.  pt.  A.  desiring,  x.  34,  10 

[is  wish]. 
i-tds,  adv.  from  here,  x.  135,  4. 
i-ti,  pel.  thus,  ii.  12,  5^  ;  vi.  54,  1.  2  ;  x. 

34,  6  [180]. 
it-tha,  adv.  thus,  ii.  35,  11  ;  truly,  i.  154, 

5  [id  +  tha;  180]. 

i-d,  emphasizing  pel,  just,  even,  i.  1,  4, 

6  ;  85,  8  ;  154,  3  ;  ii.  35,  8.  10  ;  iv,  50, 
7.  8  ;  51,  9  ;  vii.  86,  3.  6  ;  x.  14,  16  ; 
34,  5.  7.  8.  13;  127,  3  [Lat.  id: 
180]. 

i-d-^m,  dem.  prn.  n.  this,  i.  154,  3  ;  ii. 
12,  14;  33,  10;  iv.  51,  1  ;  v.  11,  5; 
x.  14,  15  ;  15,  2;  90,  2  ;  129,  3  ;  135, 

7  ;  this  world,  v,  83,  9  ;  =  here,  vi.  54, 
IJlll]. 

i-danim,  adv.  now,  i.  35,  7. 
idh  kindle,  VII.  A.  inddh6, 
s^m-  kindle,  3.  pi.  indhate,  ii.  35,  11; 

pf.  idhir^,  v.  11,  2. 
idh-md,,  in.  fuel,  x.  90,  6  [idh  kindle], 
ind-u,  m,  drop,   Soma,  viii.  48,  2,  4.  8. 

12.  13.  15  ;  pi.  iv.  50,  10  ;  viii.  48,  5. 
Indra,  m.  name  of  a  god,  i.  85,  9  ;    ii. 

12,  1-15  ;  iv.  50,  10, 11  ;  v.  11,  2  ;  vii. 

49,  1  ;  viii,  48,  2.  10 ;  x.  15,  10  ;  90, 

13, 
indr-iy^,    n.    might  of  Indra,    i.   85,  2 

[Indra]. 
i-nv  go,  I.  P.  invati   [secondary   root 

from  i  go  according  to  class  v.:  i-nu], 
sam-  bring,  i.  160,  5. 
imd,  dem.  prn.  stem,  this,  A.  m.  im^m, 

ii.  35,  2  ;  X.  14,  4  ;    15,  6  ;    N.  m.  pj. 

im6,  vi.  54,  2  ;    viii.  48,  5  ;    n.  ima, 

ii.  12,  3  ;  x.  15,  4  ;   imani,  vii.  61,  6 ; 

71,  6  [111], 


iyam] 


227 


[upara 


i-y-dm,  dem.  prn.  f.  this,  v.  11,  5  ;   vii. 

61,  7;  71,  62;  X.  129,  6.  7  [111]. 
ira,  f.  nurture,  v.  83,  4. 
ir-ina,  n.  dice-hoard,  x.  34,  1.  9. 
ir-ya,  a.  ivatchful,  vi.  54,  8. 
i-va,  enc.  pel.  like,  i.  1,  9  ;  85,  5.  8^ ;  ii. 

12,  4.  5  ;  33,  6 ;  35,  5.  13  ;  iv.  51,  2  ; 
V.  11,  5  ;  83,  3  ;  vii.  63,  1  ;  103,  5^  ; 
viii.  29,  8 ;  48,  42.  6.  7^ ;  x.  34,  1.  3. 
5.  8 ;  127,  7.  8  [180]. 

is-ird.,  a.  devoted,  viii.  48,  7. 

istd-vrata,  a.  (Bv.)  accordant  iviih  desired 
ordinances,  iii.  59,  9. 

ista-piirtd,  n.  (Dv. )  sacrifice  and  good 
loorks,  X.  14,  8  [is-ta,  pp.  du.  of  yaj 
sacrifice  +  purtd,  pp.  of  pr  fill,  he- 
stowed]. 

i-hd,  adv.  here,  i.  1,  2  ;  35,  1.  6 ;   ii.  35, 

13.  15 ;  vi.  54,  9  ;  vii.  49,  1.  2.  3.  4  ; 
X.  14,  5.  12;  15,  3.  5.  7.  11.  18^  ;  90, 
4  ;  129,  6. 

ila,  f.  consecrated  food,  iv.  50,  8. 

i  go,  IV.  A.  lyate,  x.  168,  2  ;    approach, 

imahe,  vi.  54,  8. 
ant6.r-  go  hetween  (ace),  i.  35,  9 ;  160,  1, 
ij-an^,  pf.  pt.  A.  (of  yaj),  sacrificer,  iv. 

51,  7.  _     ^  . 

id  praise,  II.  A.,  lie,  i.  1,  1. 
id-ya,    gdv.    praiseworthy,    i.    1,   2     [id 

praise]. 
im,  enc.  pel.  (ace.  of  prn.  i),  i.  85,  11  ; 

ii.  12,  5 ;  33,  18^ ;  35,  1  ;   vii.  103,  3 
,   [180]. 
lya-mana,  pr.   pt.   A.  going,  x.   168,  3 

[ifl'o].  _    ^ 

ir  stir,  set  in  motion,  II.  A.  irte. 
anu  sdm  pr^-  speed  on  together  after,  x. 

168,  2.' 
ud-  arise,  x.  15,  1 ;  v.  83,  3. 
prd-,  cs.  irdya,  titter  forth,  ii.  33.  8. 
is  he  master  of,  overpower,  II.  A.  iste,  with 

gen.,  viii.  48,1 4. 
is-ana,  pr.  pt.  A.  riding  over,  disposing  of 

(gen.),  vi.  54,  8;    x.  90,  2 ;    m.  ruler, 

ii.  33,  9. 
is  move,  I.  isati,  -te,  from  (ab.),  v.  83,  2. 
il-ita,  pp.  implored,  x.  15,  12  [id  praise]. 

U,  enc.  pel.  now,  also,  i.  35,  6  ;  154,  4  ; 
ii.  33,  9  ;  35,  10.  15 ;  iv.  51,  1.2;  v. 
83,  102 .  vi^  54,  3  .  vii  61^  J5  .  63,  1.  3 ; 
86,  3.  8  ;  viii.  48,  3  ;  x.  14,  2  ;  15, 
3  ;  127,  32  ;  129,  I2  [180]. 


uk-tha,    n.    recitation,    iv.    51,    7    [vac 
speak], 

1.  uks  sprinkle,  VI.  uksati,  -te,  x.  90,  7. 
pra-  hesprinkle,  x.  90,  7. 

2.  uks  grow. 

uks-it^,  pp.  grown  strong,  i.  85,  2  [2.  uks 

—  vaks  groiv], 
ug-ra,   a.   mighty,   ii.   33,  9 ;    x.  34,  8 ; 

fierce,  terrible,  ii.  33,  11 ;  viii.  29,  5. 
uclid,nt,  pr.  pt.  shining,  iv.  51,  2  [1.  vas 

shine]. 
u-td,  pel.  and,  i.  85,  5;  154,  4;  ii.  12, 

5  ;  35,  11 ;  iii.  59,  1  ;  iv.  50,  9  ;  v.  83, 

22.  10  ;   vi.  54,  6  ;   vii.  63,  5  ;   86,  2  ; 

viii.  48,  1.  5.  8.  14  ;   x.  34,  2  ;  90,  2  ; 

uta  va,  vii.  49,  22 ;  =  and,  viii.  48, 15 

[180]. 
uto,  pel.  and  also,  x.  168,  1  [uta  +  u]. 
ut-tara,    cpv.   a.   tipper,   i.   154,   1    [tid 

up]. 
ut-sa,    in.    spring,   i.    85,    11  ;    154,    5 

[ud  ivet]. 
ud  wet,  VII.   P.  unatti,   undanti  [cp. 

Lat.  und-a  '  wave  ']. 
vi-  moisten,  drench,  i.  85,  5  ;  v.  83,  8. 
ud-dn,    n.    water,    i.    85,    5    [Go.    wato 

'  water ']. 
udan-vdnt,  a.  water-ladeyi,  v.  83,  7. 
lid-ita,  pp.  risen,  vii.  63,  5  [ig^o]. 
udumbal^,  a.  hrown  (?),  x.  14,  12. 
ud-v^t,  f.  upward  path,  i.  35,  3  ;   height, 

V.  83,  7  ;  x.  127,  2  [lid  up  +  sf.  vat]. 
upa-ksiyant,   pr.  pt.  abiding  by  (ace), 

iii.  59,  3  [ksi  dwell]. 
upa-md,  spv.  a.  highest,  viii.  29,  9. 
upa-ydnt,  pr.  pt.  approaching ,  ii.  33,  12 

[i  go]. 

upa-ra,  cpv.  a.  later,  x.  15,  2  [Av.  upara 

'upper',    Gk.   vwfpo-s  'pestle',   Lat. 

s-uperu-s  '  upper  ']. 
up^ri,  adv.  upivard,  x.  34,  9 ;    above,  x. 

129,  5  [Gk.  if7T(p,  vneip  =  vnept,  Lat. 

s-uper.     Old     High      German      uhir 

'over']. 
lipa-srita,  pp.  impressed  on  (Ic.),  vii. 

86,  8  [sri  resort]. 
upa-sd,dya,  gdv.  to  he  approached,  iii.  59, 

5  [s^d  sit], 
upd-stha,  m.  lap,  i.  35,  5.  6  ;  vii.  63,  3 ; 

X.  15,  7. 
upa-hatnu,  a.  sZa?/*;?^,  ii.  33,  11  [ha-tnu 

from  han  slatj]. 
lipa-hiita,  pp.  invited,  x.  15,  5  [hii  call]. 
upard,,  m.  offence,  vii.  86,  6  [upa  +  ara 

from  r  go  :  striking  upon,  offence]. 


Q  2 


ubj] 


228 


[eta 


xibj  force,  VI.  P.,  ubjati. 

nir-  d7'ive  out,  i.  85,  9. 
ubha,  a.  both,  i.  35,  9  ;  x.  14,  7  [cp.  Lat. 

am-ho,  Gk.  d'/z-c^cu  '  both ',  Eng.  ho-th']. 
ubhd-ya,  a.  pi.  hoth.  ii.  12,  8.  ,• 
ubhaya-dat,  a.  having  teeth  on  both  jaivs, 

X.  90,  10. 
ur-ii,  a.,  f.  urv-i,  loide,  i.  85,  6.  7  ;    154, 

2  ;    vii.  61,  2  ;  86,  1  ;   x.  127,  2  [Av. 

vouru,  Gk.  tupu-s]. 
uru-kramd.,  a.  (Bv.)  loide- striding,  i.  154, 

5  [krama,  m.  stride]. 
uru-gayd,  a.  (Bv.)  wide-paced,  i.  154,  1. 

3.  6 ;  viii.  29,  7  [-gaya gait  from  ga  go]. 
uru-cdksas,  a.  (Bv.)  far-seeing,  vii.  63, 

4  [cdksas,  n.  sight]. 
uru-vydcas,   a.    (Bv.)  far-extending,   i. 

160,  2  [vydcas,  n.  extent]. 
um-sWsa,  a.  (Bv.)  far-famed,  viii.  48, 

4  [sdmsa,  m.  praise]. 
uru-syu,  a.  freedom-giving,  viii.   48,   5 

[from  den.  uru-sya  pttt  in  wide  space, 

rescue], 
urii-nasd,  a.  (Bv.)  broad-nosed,    x.    14, 

12  [uru  +  nas  nose], 
urviya,  adv.  widely,  ii.  35,  8  [inst.  f.  of 

urvi  wide]. 
urv-i,  f.  earth,  x.  14,  16  [uru  loide]. 
us-^nt,  pr,  pt.  eager,  vii.  103,  3  ;   x.  15, 

8^  [vas  desire]. 
Us-as,  f.  Dawn,  ii.  12,  7  ;  vii.  63,  3  ;  71, 

i  ;  X.    127,  3.  7  ;  pi.  iv.  51,   1-9  ;  11 

[1.  vas  shine  ;  cp.  Gk.  i)ajs  (for  dus-6s), 

Lat.  aur-6r-a]. 
usr^-yaman,  a.  (By.)  faring  at  daybreak, 

vii.  71,  4  [usrd  matutinal,  yaman,  n. 

course]. 
usr-iya,  f,  coio,  iv.  50,  5  [f.  of  usr-iya 

ruddy  from  us-ra  red]. 

tJ,  enc.  pel.,  ii.  35,  3  ;  iv.  51,  2  [metri- 
cally lengthened  for  u]. 

ti-ti,  f.  help,  i.  35,  1  ;  viii.  48,  15  ;  x.  15, 
4  [&v  favour]. 

uTu,  m.  du.  thigh,  x.  90,  11.  12. 

urj,  f.  vigour,  strength,  vii.  49,  4  ;  x.  15,  7. 

urjdyant,  den.  pr.  pt.  gathering  strength, 
ii.  35,  7. 

urdh-v^,  a,  upright,  ii.  35,  9  ;  upivard,  x. 
90,  4  [Gk.  updo-s  for  opO-fo-s  ;  Lat. 
arduu-s  '  lofty']. 

urdhvdm,  ace.  adv.  upicards,  i.  85,  10. 

urmya,  f.  night,  x.  127,  6. 

tir-va,  n.  receptacle,  ii.  35,  .3  ;  fold,  lierd, 
iv.  50,  2  [1.  vr  cover]. 


R  go,  V.  P.  rnoti,  int.  dlarti  arise,  viii. 
48,  8  [Gk,'  hp-vv-jxi  '  stir  up ']. 
abhi-  penetrate  to  (ace),  i.  35,  9. 
pra-  send  forth,  III.  iyarti,  vii.  61,  2. 
rk-van,    m.    pi.    name    of  a   group   of 
ancestors,  x.  14,  3  [singing  from  arc 
sing]. 
fk-vant,  a.  singing,  jubilant,   iv.  50,  5 

[arc  sing]. 
fc,  f.  stanza,  ii.  35,  12  ;  collection  of  hymns, 

Rgveda,  x.  90,  9  [arc  sing^  praise]. 
rc^s-e,  dat.  inf.  with'pra,  to  praise,  vi. 

61,  6  [arc  praise]. 
r-n^,  n.  debt,  x.  127,  7. 
rna-vdn,   a.   indebted,   x.    34,    10    [rna 
'  'debt]. 
r-t^,  n.  settled  order,  i.  1,  8  ;    iv.  51,  8  ; 

truth,  X.  34,  12  [pp.  of  r  go,  settled]. 
rtd-jata-satya,  a.  punctually  true,  iv.  51, 
7  [true  as  produced  by  established  order], 
rta-jnd,  a.  knowing  rigM,  x.  15,  1. 
rta-yuj,  a.  yoked  in  due  time,  iv.  51,  5  ; 

vii.  71,  3. 
rta-spfs,  a.  cherishing  the  rite,  iv.  50,  3. 
rta-van,  a.  holy,  ii.  35,  8  ;    x.  168,  3  ; 
pious,   vii.   61,   2  ;    f.    -vari    observing 
order,  i.  160,  1. 
r-tu,  m.  season,  vii.  103,  9  [fixed  time  : 

from  r  go],        • 
T-t6,  adv.  prp.  v^ith  ab.,  loithout,  ii.  12, 

9  [loc.  of  rtd]. 
rtv-ij,    m.    ministrant,   i.    1,   1    [rtii  +  ij 

=  yaj  sacrificing  in  season], 
rdud^ra,    a.    compassionate,    ii.    33,    5  ; 

wholesome,  viii.  48,  10. 
rdh  thrive,  V.  P.  rdhnoti. 
dnu-  bring  forward,  op.  2.   s.  rdhyas, 
viii.  48,  2. 
fdhak,  adv.  separately,  vii.  61,  3. 
iftbh-u,  m.  pi.   name  of  three  divine 
artificers,  iv.  51,  6  [skilfid,  from  rabh 
take  in  hand], 
fs-i,  m.  seer,  1. 1,  2 ;  iv.  50,  1 ;  x.  14,  15 ; 
*  *  90,  7. 

rs-ti,  f.  spear,  i.  85,  4  [rs  thrust], 
rs-vd,  a.  high,  lofty,  vii.  61,  3;  86,  1. 

^-ka,  nm.  one,  i.  35,  6  ;   154,  3.  4  ;   vii. 

103,  6<  ;  viii.  29,  1-8.  10  ;    x.  14,  16  ; 

129,  2.  3  [prn.  root  e]. 
eka-pard,  a.  too  high  by  one,  x.  34,  2. 
ekesa,    a.    having    one    pole,    x.    1.").5,    3 

[Isa  +pole  of  a  car  J. 
e-td,  dem.  prn.  stem,  this:  n.  etdd,  iii. 

59,  5  ;  ace.  m.  etdm  this,  x.  14,  9  ;  hitn, 


^tasa] 


229 


[kr 


X.  34,  4  ;  inst.  etena,  v.  83,  6  ;  n,  pi, 

eta,  X.   15,  14  ;  ni.  pi.  et^  these,  vii. 

103,  9  [prn.  root  e  + 16,  this]. 
6ta-sa,  m.  steed  of  the  Sun,  vii.  68,  2 

[6ta  speeding,  from  i  go]. 
eta-vant,   a.   such,   x.  90,  3   [prn,  et^ 

this  +  sf.  vant]. 
e-na,  enc.  prn.  stem  of  3.  prs,  he,  she, 

it :   ace,  enam  him,  ii,  12,  5  ;   iii,  59, 

3  ;  vii.  103,  2 ;  x.  14,  11  ;  34,  4  ;  168, 

2 ;    ace.   pi.   enan  them,  vii.   103,  3  ; 

gen,  du.  enos  of  them  two,  vii.  103,  4 

[prn.  root  e]. 
6n-as,  n.,  ii.  12,  10;   vii.  71,  4  ;  86,  3. 
ena,  inst.  hy  it,  x.  14,  4  ;  adv.  thither,  x. 

14,  2  [inst.  of  prn.  root  a]. 
e-bhis,  I,  pi,  with  them,  x.  34,  5  [prn. 

root  a]. 
e-bhyas,  D.  pi.  to  them,  x.  34,  8  [prn. 

root  a]. 
e-vd,,  pel.  thus,  just,  i.  1,  3  ;  ii.  12,  1 ;  iv, 

51,  9  ;  vi.  54, 1.  2  ;  x.  90,  2  [prn.  root 

e  ;  cp.  180]. 
e-va  ( =  evd,),  adv.  thus,  just,  ii.  33,  15 ; 

iv.  50,  8  [prn.  root  e]. 
e-sd,  dem.  prn. :  N.  s.  m.  esah  this,  x. 

168,  4  ;  he,  ii.  12,  15  ;  vii.  63,  3  ;  viii. 

29,  6  ;  f.  esa  this,  x.  14,  2  ;  she,  x.  34, 

2  [from  prn.  root  e  +  sa]. 
e-sam,  G.  pi.  m.  of  them,  i.  85,  3  ;   vii. 

103,  52.  6  ;   X,  34,  5,  8  ;    129,  5  [prn. 

root  a]. 

Ok-as,  n.  abode,  iv.  50,  8  [ivonted  place : 

uc  he  wont]. 
6j-as,  n.  might,  i.  85,  4.  10 ;  160,  5  [uj 

=  vaj  ;   cp.  Lat.  augus-tu-s  '  mighty  ', 

'august']. 
oja-ydmana,den.pr.  pt.  A.  showing  one's 

strength,  ii.  12,  11  [ojas]. 
6j-iyams,  cpv.  a.  mightier,  ii.  33,  10. 
osa-dhi,  f,  plant,  v.  83,  1 .  4.  5.  10  ;  Vii. 

61,  3   [dv(a)s-a  nurture   (av  further) 

+  dhi  holding,  from  dba  hold], 

Kd,  inter,  prn.  whol  i.  35,  7  ;  x.  129,  6; 
135,  5»  ;  G.  kdsya,  x.  129,  1  ;  du. 
kdu,  X.  90,  112  .   ^jtjj  jjijj  .    J    ^^^^ 

cid  hy  any,  x.  15,  6  ;  pi.  N.  k^  old 

some,  viii.  103,  8. 
ka-kiibh,  f.  peak,  i.  35,  8. 
ka-tamd,  inter,   prn.  which  {of  many)  ? 

i.  35,  7  ;  iv.  51,  6  ;  with  cana  any,  x.    j 

168,  3  [Lat.  quo-tumu-s]. 


kati-dha,  adv.  into  how  many  parts  ?  x.  90, 

11  [kd-ti  how  7nany?  Lat.  qnot]. 
ka-da,  inter,  adv.  when  ?  vii.  86,  2 ;  with 

cand,  ever,  vi.  54,  9  [kd  who?]. 
kdnikradat,    int.    pr.  pt.  hellowing,  iv. 

50,  5  ;  V.  83,  1.  9  [krand  roar]. 
kan  -  iyams,  cpv.  younger,  vii.  86,  6  [cp. 

kan-ya,  f.  girl ;  Gk.  Kaivu-s  '  new  '  for 

Kai/io-s]. 
kam,  pel.,  i.  154,  1  [gladly  :  cp.  p.  225, 

2]. 
kdr-tave,  dat.  inf.  of  kr  do,  i.  85,  9. 
kalmalik-m,  a.  radiant,  ii.  33,  8. 
kav-i,  m.  sage,  v.  11,  3  •,    vii.  86,  3  ;  x. 

129,  4  [Av.  kavi  '  king ']. 
kavi-kratu,a.  (Bv.)  having  the  initlligence 

of  a  sage,  i.  1,  5  ;  v.  11,  4. 
kavi-tara,  cpv.  a.  wiser,  vii.  86,  7. 
kavi-sastd,  pp.  (Tp.)  recited  hy  the  sages, 

X.  14,  4. 
kav-ya,  a.  wise,x.  15,  9  ;  m.  pi.  name  of 

a  group  of  Fathers,  x.  14,  3. 
kasa,  f.  ivhijJ,  v.  83,  3. 
kam-a,  m.  desire,  i.  85,   11  ;  x.  34,  6  ; 

129,  4  [kam  desire], 
kas  appear,  int.  cakasiti. 

abhi-  look  upon,  x.  135,  2. 
kitava,  m.  gambler,  x.  34,  3,  6.  7.  10.  11. 

13. 
ki-m,  inter,  prn.  ivhat?  vii.  86,  2.  4; 

viii.  48,  32  ;  X.  90,  11  ;  129,  I2  ;  with 

cand  anything,  x.   129,  2  [Lat.  qui-s, 

qui-d]. 
kila,  adv.  emphasizing  preceding  word, 

indeed,  ii.  12,  15  [180]. 
kir-i,   m.  singer,   ii.    12,    6    [2.  kr  com- 
memorate]. 
ku-card,  a.  wandering  at  will,  i.  154,  2 

[ku,  inter,  prn.  root  where?  =  anywhere 

+  cara  from  car /are]. 
ku-tds,  inter,  adv.  whence?    x.  129,  62  ; 

168,  3  [prn.  root  where?]. 
ku-mara,  m,  boy,  x.  135,  3.  4.  5  ;  =  son, 

ii.  33,  12. 
kumard-desna,  a.  (Bv.)  preseriting  gifts 

like  boys,  x.  34,  7  [desna,  n.  gift  from 

da  give], 
kul-ya,  f.  stream,  v.  83,  8. 
kuv-id,  inter,  pel.  whether?  ii.  35,  1.  2 ; 

iv.  51,  4  [ku-l  id:  cp.  p.  226]. 
ku-ha,  inter,  adv.  where?  ii.   12,5;  x. 
129,     1    [ku  +  sf.    ha  =  dha :      cp. 
p.  212]. 
kr  make,  V.  krnoti,  krnut^,  iv.  50,  9  ; 
V.  83,  3;  =  hold,  x.   34,    12;  -  raise 


krnvant] 


230 


[ga 


(voice),  8;  pr.  sb.  3.  s.  krndvat,  viii. 

48,  8  ;   3.  pi.  krndvan,  iv.  51,  1  ;   vii. 

63,  4  ;  2.  pi.  A.    krnudhvam,  x.   34, 

14  ;  ipv.  krnuhi,  x.  135,  3  ;  pf.  cakr- 

mfi,,  vii.  86,  5  ;  x.  15,  4  ;  cakrur,  vii. 

63,  5;   A.  cakr6,  x.  90,  8;  cakrate, 

viii.  29,  9  ;  cakrir^,  i.  85,  1.  2.  7.  10; 

ft.  karisyasi,  i.    1,6;   root  ao.  dkar, 

ii.  12,  4';  iii.  59.9  ;  v.  83,  10  ;  dkran, 

x.  14,  9  ;    3.  pi.  A,  dkrata,  vii.  103,  8 ; 

X.  34,  5  ;    sb.  k^rati,  ii.  35,  1  ;    kdra- 

ma,  X.  15,  6  ;   ao.  ps.  dkari,  vii.  61,  7 

[cp.    Gk.   KpaivQj   'accomplish',    Lat. 

creb  '  create  ']. 
upa  a-  drive  up  for  :  rt.  ao.  dkaram,  x. 

127,  8. 
avis-  make  manifest,  v.  83,  3. 
nis-  turn  out:  rt.  ao.  askrta,  x.  127,  3. 
krnv-dnt,  pr.  pt.  making  =  offering,  vii. 

'103,  8;  x.  168,  1  [kr  mafce]. 
kr-td,  pp.  made,  i.  85,  6  ;  ii.  12,  4  ;   vii. 
'61,  6  (-  offered)  ;   x.  90,  12.  15  ;    135, 

6  ;  n.  lucky  throiv,-  x.  34,  6  [Av.  kereta. 

Old  Persian  karta  '  made  ']. 
kfta,  f.  breast  {?),  ii.  35,  5. 
kr-tvi,  gd.  having  made,  x.  15,  12. 
krs-d,  a.  ijoor,  ii.  12,  6  [krs  groiv  lean'], 
kfsana,  n.  pearl,  i.  35,  4. 
krs  dra^c,  I.  P.  kdrsati,  v.  83,  7  ;  VI.  P. 

*krsd-ti  till,  X.  34,'  13. 
krs-i",  f.  field,  x.  34,  13  [krs  till]. 
krs-ti,  f.  pi.  people,  i.  160,  5;    iii.  59,  1 

[tillage,  settlement :  krs  till]. 
krs-na,  a.  black,  i.  35,  "2.  4.  9  ;  x.  127,  7; 

■f.  1,  vii.  71,  1. 
kip  he  fit,  I.  kdlpati,  cs.  kalpayati,  -te 

arrange,  x.  15,  14. 
vl-  dispose,  x.  90,  11.  14. 
ket-ii,  m.  banner,  v.  11,  2.  3  ;  vii.  63,  2 

[cit a^^^^^^a'" ;  Go.  haidii-s  'manner'], 
kevata,  in.^nY,  vi.  54,  7. 
kosa,  m.  bucket,  v.  83,  8  ;  ivell  (of  a  car), 

vi.  54,  3. 
kr-d-tu,  m.  poioer,  ii.  12,  1  ;  ivisdom,  vii. 

61,  2  [kr  do]. 
krand  bellow,  I.  P.  krdndati. 

abhi-  bellow  towards,  v.  83,  7. 
krdnd-as,  n.  battle  array,  ii.  12,  8  [battle 

cry :  krand  shout]. 
kram  stride  ,  I.  P.  kramati,  A.  krdm- 

ate. 
vi-  stride  out,  pf.  cakrame,  viii.  29,  7. 
abhi  vi-  spread  asunder,  develop  into  :  ipf. 

dkramat,  x.  90,  4. 
krid  play,  I.  krila,  x.  34,  8. 


krudh  be  angry,  IV.  P.  krudhyati;  red. 

ao.  inj.  cukrudhama,  ii.  33.  4. 
kva,  inter,  adv.  ivhere?  i.  35,  7  ;    ii.  33, 

7  ;   iv.  51,  6  ;   x.  168,   3  ;  with  svid 

who  knows  where,  x.  34, 10  [pronounced 

kua]. 
ksa-trd,    n.    dominion,    i.    160,    5    [ksa 

=  ksi  rule], 
ksam /orbear,  I.  A.  ksdmate. 

abhi-  he  merciful  to  (ace),  ii.  33,  1.  7. 
ksi  divell,  II.  P.  kseti,  iv.  50,  8. 

ddhi-  dwell  in  (Ic),  i.  154,  2. 
ksiy-dnt,  pr.  pt.  drcelling,  ii.  12,  11  [ksi 

dwell]. 
ks6-ma,  m.  possession,  viii.  86,  8  [ksi  : 

ksdyati  possess]. 

Khan-i-trima,  si. produced  by  digging,  vii. 

49,  2  [khan  dig]. 
khdlu,  adv.  indeed,  x.  34,  14  [p.  227]. 
kha-ta,  pp.  dug,  iv.  50,  3  [khan  dig], 
khya  see  :  no  present ;  a  ao.  fi,khyat. 

abhi-  perceive,  vii.  86,  2. 

vi-  survey,  i.  35,  5.  7.  8  ;  x.  127,  1. 

Gan-a,  m.  throng,  iv.  50,  5  ;  x.  34,  12. 
gabh-ird,  a.  profound,  x.  129,   1   [gabh 

=  gah  2^lunge]. 
gabhird-vepas,  a.  (Bv.)  of  deep  inspira- 
tion, i.  35,  7. 
gam  go,  I.   gdchati,  -te  to  (ace),  i.   1, 

4  ;    X.  14,  13  ;    root  ao.  3.  pi.  dgman, 

vii.  71,  6  ;    1.  pi.  aganma,  viii.  48,  3. 

11  [Gk.  ^aivw,  Lat.  venio,  Eng.  come]. 
a-  come,  1.  1,  5  ;   85,  11  ;    root  ao.  ipv. 

gahi,  vi.  54,  7  ;  x.  14,  5 ;   2.  pi.  gatd, 

X.  15,  4  ;  3.  gdmantu,  x.  15,  5^.  \\  ;  go 

to  (ace),  X.  168,  2. 
sdm-  cjo  ivith  (inst.),  a  ao.  op.,  vi.  54, 

2  ;  unite  ivith  (inst.),  x.  14,  8. 
gdm-a-dhyai,  dat.  inf.  (of  gam)  to  go,  i. 

154,  6. 
garta-sdd,  a.  (Tp.)  sitting  on  a  car-seat, 

ii.  33,  11. 
gdrbh-a,  m.  germ,  ii.  33,  13  ;  v.  83,  1.  7  ; 

x.  168,  4  [grbh  receive]. 
gdv-y-iiti,   f.  pasturage,   x.    14,    2   [Bv. 

having  nurture  for  cows  :  go], 
gdh-ana,  a.  unfathomable,  x.  129,  1  [gah 

plunge]. 
ga  go,  III.  P.  jigati. 
abhi-  approach,  vii.  71,  4. 
a-  come  :  rt.  ao.  agat,  i.  35,  8. 
pdri-  go  by  (ace.)  :  root  a<>.  inj.  gat,  ii. 

33,  14. 


gatii] 


231 


[caks 


prd-   go  forward,  ipv.  jigata,  i.  85,  6  ; 

enter,  root  ao.,  viii.  48,  2. 
ga-tu,  m.  path,  ivay,  iv.  51,  1  ;  vii.  63, 

^5  ;  X.  14,  2  [ga  go). 
gatre-gatre,  Ic.  itv.  cd.,    in  every  limbj 

viii.  48,  2  [ga  go]. 
gaya-tri,  f.  a  metre,  x.  14,  16  [song  :  ga 

sing]. 
gir,  f.  song,  ii.  35,  1  ;   v.  1 1 ,  5  ;   83,  1 ; 

vii.  71,  6 ;  X.  185,  7  [gr  sing], 
giri-ksi-t,  a.  mountain- dwelling,  i.  154,  3 

[ksi  dwell]. 
giri-stha,  a.  mountain-haunting,  \.  154,  2 

[stha  stand]. 
gup   guard  :    pf.    jugupur,  vii.   103,  9 

[secondary  root   from  the  den.  go- 

pa-ya] . 
guha,  adv.  in  hiding,  v.  1],  6  ;  with  kr, 

cause  to  disappear,  ii.  12,  4  [from  guh- 

a,  inst.    of  guh   concealment,   w.   ad- 
verbial shift  of  accent]. 
giih-ya,  gdv.   to  he  hidden,   vii.   103,  8 

[guh  hide]. 
giah-ant,  pr.  pt.  hiding,  iv.  51,  9  [guh 

hide]. 
gCilha,  pp.  hidden,  x.  129,  3  [guh  hide]. 

1.  gr  sing,  IX.  grnati,  grnit6,  ii.  38,  8. 
12.  *  *  "       . 

abhi-  greet  favourably,  x.  15,  6. 

2.  gr  waken  :  red.  ao.  2.  du.  ipv.  jigrtam, 
iv.  50,  11. 

grn-dnt,  pr.  pt.  singing ;    m.  singer,  iii. 

59,  5  [gr  sing].  _ 
grn-and,  pr.  pt.  A.  singing,  praising,  i. 

■  .35,  10  ;  160,  5  [gr  sing]. 
gft-sa,  a.  experienced,  vii.  86,  7. 
grdh  be  greedy,  IV.  P.  gfdhyati ;  a  ao. 

agrdhat,  x.  34,  4. 
grbh-ayd,  den.  P.  grasp. 

ud-  hold  up,  cease,  v.  83,  10. 
grh-d,   m.   house,   pi.,   vi.   54,   2   [grah 

receive,  contain]. 
grhe-grhe,  Ic.  itv.    cd.,  in  every  house, 

'v.  11',  4. 
go,  f.  cow,  pi.  N.  gavas,  i.  154,  6  ;  ii.  12, 

7  ;   viii.  48,  5  (=  straps) ;  x.  34,  13  ; 

90,  10  ;  A.  gas,  ii.  12,  3  ;  vi.  54,  5.  6  ; 

127,  8;  G.  gdvam,  iv.  51,  8  ;  vii.  108, 

2.  10  [Av.  N.  gau-s,  Gk.  i8ou-s,  Lat. 

bo-s  (bov-),  01.  bo,  Eng.  cow]. 
G6-tama,  m,  name  of  a  seer,  i.  85,  11 

[spv.  of  go  coiv]. 
go-pa,   m.  Tp.  {cow-protector),  guardian, 

i.  1,  8  ;  V.  11,  1  ;  viii.  48,  9  [go  cow 
+  pa  j^fotect]. 


go-magha,  a.  (Bv.)  rich  in  cows,  vii.  71, 

1  [having  abundance  of  cows]. 
go-matr,  a.    (Bv.)   having   a   cow  for   a 

mother,  i.  85,  8. 
go-may u,  a.  (Bv.)  loiving  like  a  coiv,  vii. 

103,  6.  10  [mayu,  m.  lowing]. 
grabh  sezse,IX.  grbhnati,  grbhmt^,  vii. 

103,  4. 
dnu-  greet,  vii.  103,  4. 
grama,  m.  village,  x.  127,  5  ;  pi.  —  clans, 

ii.  12,  7. 
gram-yd,  a.  belonging  to  the  village,  x,  90, 

8  [grama], 
grismd,  m.  summer,  x.  90,  6. 

Ghar-m^,  m.  hot  milk  offering,  vii.  103,  9 

[Av.  gar^ma,  Lat.  formu-s,  Gk.  Ofpfio-s 

'  wai-m  ',  Eng.  ivarm], 
gharma-sdd,  a.  (Tp.)  sitting  at  the  heating 

vessel,  X.  15,  9.  10  [sad  sit]. 
gharm-in,  a.  heated,  vii.  103,  8. 
ghas  eat :  root  ao.  3.  pi.  dksan,  x.  15,  12 

[=  a-gh(a)s-an]. 
gha,   enc.  emphasizing  pel.,  iv.  51,  7 

[180]. 
ghf-ni,  f.  heat,  ii.  38,  6  [ghr  =  hr  be  hot], 
ghr-td,  (pp.)  n.  clarified  butter,  ghee,  i.  85, 

3  ;  ii.  33,  11.  14  ;  v.  11,  3  ;  83,  8  [ghr 

be  hot]. 
ghrt^-nirnij,  a.  (Bv.)  having  a  garment 

of  ghee,  ii.   35,  4  [nir-nij,  f.  splendour 

from  nis  out  +  nij  wash]. 
ghrtd-pratika,  a.   (Bv.)  butter-faced,  v. 

11,1  [pratika,  n.  front  from  praty6.nc 

turned  towards]. 
ghrtd-vant,  a.  accompanied  ivith  ghee,  iii. 

59,  1  ;  abounding  in  ghee,  x.  14,  14. 
ghfs-vi,  a.  impetuous,  i.  85, 1  [ghrs  =  hrs 

be  excited]. 
gho-r^,  a.  terrible  ;  n.  magic  power,  v.  34, 

14. 
ghos-a,   m.  sound,  x.    168,   1.  4  [ghus 

make  a  noise]. 

Ca,  enc.  pel.  and,  i.  160,  2.  8  ;  ii.  33, 

132  ;    35,  6.  8  ;    iv.  50,  10  ;    v.  11,  5  ; 

vii.  86,  1  ;  x.  14,  7.  9. 14  ;  34,  11  ;  90, 

2.  3.  7.  8. 10  ;  if,  viii.  48,  2  ;  x.  34,  5  ; 

ca-ca,  i.  35,  11  ;   iv.  51,  11  ;  x.  14,  3. 

11  ;    15,  3.  132  ;   90,  13  [Av.  ca,  Lat. 

qu£  '  and  '  ;  cp.  180]. 
cakr-d,  n.  wheel,  vi.  54,  8  ;  vii.  63,  2  [Gk. 

kvkXo-s,  Anglo-Saxon  hiveowol], 
caks,  see  II.  cdste  [reduplicated  form 

of  kas  =  kas  shine:  —  ca-k(a)s]. 


caksuj 


232 


fjas 


abhi-  regard,  iii.  59,  1  ;  vii.  61,  1. 
prd-,  cs.  caksdya  illumine,  viii.  48,  6. 
vi-  reveal,  x.  34,  13. 
caks-u,  n.  eye,  x.  90,  18  [caks  seel. 
cdks-us,  n.  eye,  vii.  61,  1  ;   68,  1   [caks 

.see]. 
cat  hide  (intr.),  I.  P.  catati  ;  cs.  catdya 

drive  away,  ii.  33,  2. 
catur-aksa,  a.  (Bv. ) /owr-ei/ecZ,  x.  14,  10. 

11  [aksd  =  d,ksi  eye]. 
catus-pad,   a.   (Bv.)  four-footed,  iv.   51, 

5   [catiir     /bur,     Lat.    quathior,     Go. 

^(i?(;or]. 
catvarimsa,  ord.,  f.  i,  fortieth,  ii.  12,  11. 
ca-nd,  pel.  aw(i  nof,  vii.  86,  6. 
candra-mas,  m.  moon,  x.  90,  13  [K.  cd. 

bright  (cand.ra)  moon  (mas)]. 
car /are,  I.  carati,  -te,  iv.  51,  6.  9  ;  viii. 

29,  8;  x.  14,  12;  168,  4. 
'  abhi-  bewitch,  x.  34,  14. 
a-  approach,  iv.  51,  8. 
prd-  go  forward,  enter,  viii,  48,  6. 
abhi  sam-  come  together,  viii.  48,  1. 
card,-tha,  n.   motion,  activity,   iv.  51,   5 

[car /are]. 
cdr-ant,   pr.  pt.   ivandering,  x,  34,   10 ; 

faring,  x.  135,  2. 
car-i-tra,  n.  leg,  viii.  48,  5  [car  move], 
cdr-man,    n.   sJcin,  hide,  i.  85,  5  ;    vii. 

63,  1. 
carsani-dhf-t,  a.  (Tp.)  supporting  the  folk, 

iii.  59,   6    [carsani,  a.    active,    f,  folk 

+  dhr-t  sup-porting^. 
ca-ru,  a.  dear,  ii.  35, 1 1  [can  gladden  ; Lat. 

cd-rU'S  '  dear'], 
ci-kit-vams,   red.    pf.   tvise,  vii.   86,  3 

[cit  think']. 
cit  perceive,  I.  catati,  -te  ;  pf.  cik6ta,  i. 

35,  7  ;  sb.  ciketat,  i.  35,  6  ;  cs.  citdya 

stimulate,  iv.   51,  3  ;    cet6.ya  cause  to 

think,  vii.  86,  7. 
a-  observe  :  pf.  ciketa,  vii.  61,  1. 
cit-ra,  a.  brilliant,  iv.  51,  2  ;   n.  marvel, 

vii.  61,  5. 
citrd-bhanu,  a.  (Bv. ")  of  brilliant  splendour, 

i.  35,  4;  85,  11. 
citr^-sravas,    a.    (Bv.)    having   brilliant 

fame  ;  spv.  -tama  of  most  brilliant  fame, 

i.  1,  5  ;  bringing  most  brilliaiii  fame,  iii. 

59,  6. 
cid,  enc.  pel.  just,  even,  i.  85,  4.  10  ;    ii. 

12,  8.  13.  15  ;  83,  12 ;  vii.  86,  1.  3.  8; 

x.  84,  82 ;  127,  5  [Lat.  quid']. 
cekit-ana,  int.  pr.  pt.  famous,  ii.  33,  15 

[cit  perceive]. 


cod-i-tf,    m.  furtherer,    ii.    12,   6    [cud 

impel]. 
cydv-ana,  a.  unstable,  ii.  12, 4  [cyu  move]. 
cydv-ana,  m.  name  of  a  seer,  vii.  71,  5 

[pr.  pt.  of  cyu  move].  \, 

cyu  loaver,  fall,  I.  cydvate.  "^T 

prd-,  cs.  cyavdpya  overthrow,  i.  85,  4. 

Chand  seem,  II.  P.  chdntti  ;  pf.  ca- 
chdnda,  vii.  63,  3  ;  seem  good,  please, 
3.  s.  s  ao.  dchan,  x.  34,  1. 

chand-as,  n.  metre,  x.  14,  16  ;  90,  9. 

chaya,  f.  shade,  ii.  33,  6  [Gk.  ckuX]. 

Jdrgat,  n.  world,  i.  35,  1  [pr.  pt.  of  ga  go]. 

jdgm-i,  a.  nimble,  speeding,  i.  85,  8  [from 
red.  stem  jag(a)m  of  gam  go]. 

jajn-ana,  pf.  pt.  A.  having  been  born,  x. 
14,  2  [jan  generate]. 

jan  generate,  create,  I.  janati  ;  pf.  jajana, 
i.  160,  4  ;  ii.  12,  8.  7  ;  35,  2  ;  jajnir^ 
loere  born,  x.  90,  9^.  10  ;  is  ao.  ^jani- 
sta  has  been  born,  iii.  59,  4  ;  v.  11,  1  ; 
red.  ao.  ajijanas  hast  caused  to  grow,  v. 

83,  10  ;  cs.  janaya  gfmera^e,  ii.  35,  13; 
X.  135,  5  [Old  Lat.  gen-b  '  generate'  ; 
Gk.  ao.  €-y(v-6-fiT)v]._ 

pr^-  be. prolific,  IV.  A.  jaya,  ii.  33,  1  ; 

35,  8. 
jan-a,  m.  mankind,  ii.  35,  15  ;  iii.  59,  9 ; 

iv.  51,  1  ;  V.  11,  1  ;  pi.  me?i,  people,  i. 

35,  5  ;  ii.  12,  1-14  ;  iii.  59,  1.  8  ;  iv. 

51,  11  ;  vii.  49,  3  ;  61,  5  ;  68,  2.  4  ;  x. 

14,  1  [jan  generate  ;    cp.  Lat.  gen-us, 

Gk.  -ytu-os,  Eng.  kin]. 
jandy-ant,  cs.  pr.  pt.  generating,  i.  85,  2. 
jdn-i,  f.  icoman,  i.  85,  1. 
jan-i-man,  n.  birth,  ii.  35,  6. 
jan-us,    n.   generation,   vii.   86,    1    [jan 

generate]. 
jdy-ant,  pr.  pt.  conquering)  m.  victor,  x. 

84,  7  [ji  conquer]. 
jdr-ant,  pr.  pt.  aging,  old,  x.  34,  3  [jf 

roaste  away  ;  Gk.  ytp-ovr-  '  old  man ']. 
jar-ds,  m.  old  age,  vii.   71,  5  [jf  waste 

away  ;  cp.  Gk.  yfjpas  *  old  age  *]. 
jar-i-tf,  m.  singer,  ii.  33,  11  [jr  sing]. 
jdlasa,  a.  cooling,  ii.  33,  7. 
jalasa-bhesaja,  a.   (Bv.)   having   cooling 

remedies,    viii.    29,    5    [bhesajd,    ii. 

remedy]. 
jdlp-i,   f.   idle  talk,   chatter,  viii.  48,   14 

[jalp  chatter]. 
jas  be  exhausted,  I.  jdsa ;  pf.  ipv.  jajastdm 

iveaken,  iv.  50,  11. 


ja] 


233 


[tan 


ja  &e  born,  IV.  A,  jayate  is  born,  v.  11,  3 ; 

83,  4  ;  X.  90,  5  ;  jayase  art  born,  v.  11, 

6  ;  ipf.  djayata  was  born,  x.  90,  9.  12. 

132  .  129,  3  ;  135,  6  ;  djayanta,  x.  90, 
^10. 
jagr-vi,  a.  watchful,  v.  11,  1  ;  stimulating, 

X.  34,   1    [from  red.   stem  of  2.  gr 

wake]. 
ja-td,  pp.  born,  ii.  12,  1  ;  x.  90,  5.  7  ; 

168,  3;  =  finite  vb.,  were  born,  x.  90, 

10.  13  ;  n.  what  is  born,  ii.  33,  3  [ja  be 

horn]. 
jata-vedas,  a.  (Bv.)  having  a  knowledge  of 

beings,-x.l6, 12. 13  [v6d-as,n. knowledge 

from  vid  knoiv]. 
jan-u,  n.  knee,  x.  15,  6  [Gk.  yov-v,  Lat. 

^  genu,  Go.  Miiu,  Eng.  knee]. 
jaya-mana,  pr.  pt.  being  born,  iv.  50,  4 

[ja  be  born]. 
ja-ya,  f.  wife,  x.  34,  2.  4.  10.  11.  13  [ja 

be  born], 
jar-in-i,  f.   courtesan,   x.    34,  5    [having 

paramours:  jard]. 
Jahus-a,  m.  name  of  a  protege  of  the 

A^vins,  vii.  71,  5. 
ji  conquer,  I.  jdyati  ;  ft.  jesyami,  x.  34, 

6 ;    ps.  jiyate,   iii.  59,  2   [when  ac- 
cented this  form  appears  in_the  RV. 

as  jfyate,  i.  e.  it  is  then  pr.  A.  of  jya 

overpower]. 
VI-  conquer,  ii.  12,  9. 
sdm-  ivin,  iv.  50,  9. 
jigi-vams,  red.  pf.  pt.  having  conquered, 

ii.  12,  4 ;  x.  127,  8  [ji  conquer], 
jihmi,,  a.  transverse  =  athwart,  i.  85,  11; 

prone,  ii.  35,  9. 
jird,-danu,   a.    (Bv.)    having    quickening 

gifts,  V.  83,  1. 
jiv-d,,   n.    living   ivorld,   iv.  51,  5    [Lat. 

vw-o-s]. 
jivds-e,  dat.  inf.  to  live,  viii.  48,  4  ;  with 

prd,  to  live  on,  x.  14,  14. 
jus  enjo7j,  VI.  jusa,  vii.  71,  6  ;  86,  2  ;  x. 

15,  4. 13  ;  pf.  sb.  jujusan,  vii.  61,  6  ;  is 

ao.  sb.  josisat,  ii.  85,  1  [cp.  Gk.  yevcJ, 

Lat.  gus-tus.  Go.  kiusan,  Eng.  choose]. 
jus-and,  pr.  pt.  A.  enjoying,  viii.  48,  2. 
jtis-ta,  pp.  (with  shifted  accent)  accept- 
able, iii.  59,  5  [jus  enjo7j]. 
ju,  IX.  P.  junati  speed,  vii.  86,  7. 
jr,  I.  A.  jdra  awake,  be  active,  iv.  51,  8. 
j6ha-mana,  pr.  pt.  A.  gasping,  x.  15,  9 

[jeh  gasp]. 
jna  knoiv,  IX.  janati,  x.  34,  4  [cp.  Gk. 

€-yv(i}-v,  Lat.  co-gno-sco,  Eng.  know]. 


vi-,    ps.    jnaydte    be   distinguished,    iv, 

51 ,  6. 
jma,  f.  eartli,  gen.  jmas,  iv.  50,  1. 
jya- yams,  cpv.  more,  x.  90,  3  ;  elder,  vii. 

86,  6  [jya  overpower ;  Gk.  jStd  '  force ']. 
jy6-stha,  spv.  highest,  ii,  35,  9  ;  chief,  vii. 

86,  4  [spv.  of  jya]. 
jyot-is,  n.  light,  iv.  50,  4  ;   51,  1  ;   viii. 

48,  3  ;  x.  127,  2  [jyut  =  dyut  shine]. 

Td,  dem.  prn.,  that ;  he,  she,  it  ;  n.  td,d 
that,  i.  1,  6  ;  35,  6  ;  154,  2.  5.  6  ;  ii. 
35,  11.  15 ;  iv.  51,  10.  11  ;  vii.  86,  2. 
3.  4  ;  103,  5.  7  ;  X.  34,  12. 13  ;  90,  12 ; 
129,  2.  3.  4  ;  135,  5  ;  m.  A.  tdm  him, 
ii.  33,  13  ;  35,  3.  4  ;  iv.  50,  1.  9  ;  vi. 
54,  4  ;  that,  x.  90,  7  ;  135,  4  ;  I.  t^na 
ivith  it,  viii.  29,  4. 10  ;  ivith  him,  x.  90, 
7  ;  I.  f.  tdya  iviih  that,  i.  85,  11  ;  D. 
tasmai  to  him,  iii.  59,  5  ;  iv.  50,  8^  ; 
X.  34,  12  ;  for  him,  x.  135,  2  ;  to  that, 
viii.  48,  12.  13  (=  as  such)  ;  x.  16,8,  4  ; 
for  that,  viii.  48,  10  ;  ab.  tsismad /rom 
him,  X.  90,  5.  8.  9^.  10^ ;  than  that,  x. 
129,  2  ;  G.  tasya  of  him,  ii.  35,  9  ;  iii. 
59,  4  ;  of  that,  viii.  48,  8  ;  x.  15,  7  ;  du. 
m.  tdu  these  two,  x.  14,  12  ;  f.  t6  these 
two,  i.  160,  1.  5;  D.  tabhyam  to  those 
two,  X.  14,  11  ;  pi.  N.  m.  t6  they,  i.  85, 
2.  7.  10  ;  viii.  48,  5;  x.  15,  3.  53.  12. 
13  ;  those,  x.  15,  1  ;  90,  16;  =  as  such, 
X.  15,  4.  7  ;  f.  tas  they,  iv.  51,  8  ;  those, 
iv.  51,  72.  9 ;  vii.  49,  1.  2.  3.  4  ;  n.  ta 
those,  i.  154,  6  ;  ii.  33,  13  ;  x.  14,  16  ; 
tani  those,  i.  85,  12  ;  x.  90,  16;  A.  tan* 
those  =  that,  x.  90,  8  ;  I.  t^bhis  with 
them,  i.  35,  11 ;  x.  15,  8.  14 ;  f.  tabhis 
ivith  them,  x.  168,  2  ;  G.  t^sam  of  them, 
x.  14,  6  ;  L.  tasu  in  them,  ii.  33,  13, 

tarns  shake. 
abhi-  attack :  pf.  tatasr€,  iv.  50,  2. 

tatan-vams,  pf.  pt.  having  spread,  vii. 
61,  1  [tan  stretch]. 

td-tas,  adv.  thence,  x.  90,  4  ;  so,  x.  135,  6 
[prn.  root  t&]. 

t£-tra,  adv.  there,  x.  34,  13  [prn.   root 
ti,]. 

td-tha,  adv.  thus,  x.  90,  14  [prn.  root 

ta-danim,  adv.  then,  x.  129,  1  [prn.  root 
U]. 

tan  extend  =  perforin,  VIII.  tanoti  ;  ipf. 
dtanvata,  x.    90,  6  [cp.  Gk.  Tawjuai 
'stretch',  Lat.  tendo  'stretch']. 
abhi-  extend  over  :  red.  pf.  sb.,  i.  1 60,  5. 


tanaya] 


234 


[trisadhastha 


dva-  slacken  (A.),  ii.  33,  14. 
a-  extend  to  (ace),  i.  35,  7. 
dnu  a-  extend  over,  viii.  48,  13. 
t6,n-aya,   ii.  descendant,  ii.  33,   14   [tan 

tan-u,  f.   body,  i.  85,  3  ;   ii.  35,  13  ;  iv. 

51,  9  ;    viii.  48,  9  ;   x.  14,  8  ;    15,  14  ; 

34,  6  ;    self,  vii.   86,   2.    5   (pi.)   [tan 

stretch :    cp.  Lat.  ten-u-i-s,  Gk.  rav-v-, 

Eng.  thm']. 
tanv-and,  pr.  pt.  A.  performing,  x.  90,  15 

[tan  extend^. 
tap  burn,  I.  tapa  ;  pf.  tatapa  =  it  pains, 

X.  34,  11  ;  ps.tapyate,  is  distressed,  x. 

34,  10  [cp.  Lat.  tep-ere  'be  warm  ']. 
tdp-ana,  a.  burning,  x.  34,  7  [tap  burn']. 
tap-as,  n.  heat,  x.  129,  3  [Lat.  tep-or]. 
tap-ta,  pp.  heated,  vii.  103,  9  [tap  buni]. 
tdm-as,  n.  darkness,  iv.  50,  4;   51,  1.  2. 

3  ;  vii.  63,  1 ;  71,  5  ;  127,  2.  3.  7  ;  129, 

3^  [tarn  faint]. 
tdmis-ic-T,  f.  jMioer  of  darkness,  viii.  48, 

11  [tamis  -^  tdmas  +  ic  —  i-anc]. 
tar-dni,  a.  speeding  onward,  vii.  63,  4  [tf 

cross], 
td-rhi,  adv.  then,  x.  129,  2  [pni.   root 

td]. 
tava,  gen.  (of.  tvam)  of  thee,  i.  1,  6  ;  vi. 

54,    9 ;   viii.   48,    8    [Av.  tava,    Litli. 

tave], 
tav-ds,  a.  mighty,  ii.  33,  3  ;  v.  83,  1  [tu 

be  strong], 
tavds-tama,  spv.  mightiest,  ii.  33,  3, 
tdv-is-i,  f.  might,  i.  35,  4  [tdvis  =  tdv- 

as,  n.  might], 
tdskara,  m.  thief,  viii.  29,  6. 
tasthi-vams,  pf.  pt.  act.  having  stood,  ii. 

35,  14  [stha  stand], 

tapay-isnu,  a.   causing  to  burn,  x.  34,  7 

[from  cs.  of  tap  burn], 
^      tay-u,  m.  thief,  vii.  86,  5  [=  stayu  ;  cp. 

ste-nd  thief], 
tig-md,  a.  sharp,  viii.  29,  5  [tij  be  sharp]. 
tirasc-ina,  a,  across,  x.  129,  5  [tirds]. 
tir-ds,  prp.  across,  vii.  61,  7  [tf  cross; 

Av.  tard  ;  cp.  Lat.  trans  =  '  crossing', 

N.  pr.  pi.], 
tisf,  nm.  f.  of  tri  three,  N.  tisrds,  i.  35, 

6  ;  ii.  35,  5. 
tu,  pel.  indeed,  vii.  86,  1    [pin.  root  tu 

in  tu-dm]. 
**^   tuch-yd,  n.  void,  x.  129,  3. 

tubhya,  D.  (of  tvdra)  to  thee,  v.  11,  5  [cp. 

Lat.  tibi]. 
tubhyam,  D.  (of  tvdm)  for  thee,  iv.  50, 


3  ;  v.  11,  5  ;  (angry)  with  thee,  vii.  86, 
S  ;  =  by  thee,  vii.  86,  8. 

tur-d,   a.   eager,   vii.  86,   4  [tur  ==  tvar 

S2)eed], 
tuvi-jata,  pp.  high-born,  iv,  50,  4   [tuvi 

from  tu  be  strong], 
tuvis-mant,  a.  mighty,  ii.  12,  12[tuv-is, 

n.  might  from  tu  be  strong], 
trp    be    pleased,    IV.    P.    trpnoti  ;    cs. 

tarpaya   satisfy,   i.   85,    11    [cp.    Gk. 

Tepiroj], 
trs  thirst,  IV.  trsya  ;    pf.  tatrsur,  x.  15, 

9  [cp.  Gk. repaofxai  'become  dry ',  Lat. 

torreo  '  scorch  ',  Eng.  thirst]. 
trs-ndj,  a.  thirsty,  i.  85,  11. 
trsya-vant,  a.  thirsty,  vii.  103,  3  [trsya 

thirst]. 
tf  cross,  VI.  tira. 
pra-  extend,  increase  (f&mi\y),  vii.  61,  4  ; 

prolong  (life),  103,  10  ;  is  ao.,  viii.  48, 

4.  7.  11. 
vi-  run  counter  to  (ace),  x.  34,  6. 
te,  eiic.  dat.  (of  tvam),  to  thee,  ii.  33,  1 ; 

iii.  59,  2  ;  viii.  48,  13;  x.  127,  8;  for 

thee,  iv.  50,  3  ;   gen.  of  thee,  i.  35,  11  ; 

ii.  12,  15  ;  33,  7.  11  ;  v.  11,  3;  vi.  54, 

9 ;  viii.  48,  6.  7.  9  ;  x.  14,  5.  11  ;  127, 

4  [Av.  ioi,  Gk.  rol]. 

tok-a,  m.  offspring,  children,  ii.  33,  14  ; 

vii.  63,  6. 
tmdn,  self,  vii.  63,  6  [cp.  atman]. 
tyd,  dem.  prn,,  n.  tydd  that,  iv.  51,  1  ; 

pi.  tya  those,  viii.  48,  11. 
tras    tremble,   I.   trasa  [Gk.   r^to;,    Lat. 

terreo  '  frighten ']. 
nis-  speed  away,  \'iii,  48,  11. 
tra  protect,  IV.  A.  trdyate ;    s  ao.  op., 

vii.  71,  2. 
tra-tr,    a.    p^-otecting,    viii.    48,    14    [tra 

protect], 
tri,  nm.  three,  i.  35,  8  ;  154,  2.  3.  4  ;  viii. 

29,  7  [Gk.  rpt-,  Lat.  tri-,  01.  tri,  Eng. 

three]. 
tri-kadruka,  m.  pi.  three  Soma  vats,  x. 

14,  16  [kadrii,  f.  Soma  vessel]. 
tri-dhatu,    a.   (Bv.)  having   three  parts, 

threefold,  i.  85,  12  ;   154,  4. 
tri-pancasd,  a.  consisting  of  three  fifties, 

X.  34,  8. 
tri-pad,  a.  {^\.)  consisting  of  three-fourths, 

X,  90,  4  ;  m.  three-fourths,  x.  90,  3. 
tri-vandhurd,  a.  three-seated,  vii.  71,  4. 
tri-sidhasthd,  a.   (Bv.)  occupying   three 

seats,  iv.  50,  1  ;  n.  threefold  abode,  v.  11, 

2  [sadhd-3tha,  n.  gathering-place]. 


tristubhl 


235 


[durita 


tri-stiibh,  f.  name  of  a  metre,  x.  14, 16. 
tri-s,  adv.  thrice,  x.  90,  11  [Gk.  rpis]. 
tre-dha,  adv.  in  three  ivays,  i.  154,  1. 
tvdks-iyams,  cpv.  most  vigorous,  ii.  33, 6. 
tvdd,  ab.  (of  tvdm)  than  thee,  ii.  33, 10. 
tv6.m,  prs.  pin.  ihou~,  i.  1,  6  ;    35,  8  ;    ii. 

33,  12  ;  viii.  48,  9.  13.  15^ ;  x.  15, 12'^. 

13. 
Tvds-tr,  m.  name  of  the  artificer  god, 

i.  85,  9 ;  cp.  viii.  29,  3  [tvaks  =  taks 

fashiori]. 
tva,  enc.  A.  (of  tvdm)  thee,  i.  1,  7  ;  ii. 

33,  4  ;  V.  11,  3  ;  vii.  86,  4  ;  x.  14,  4. 
tva-datta,  pp.  (Tp.  cd.)  given  by  thee,  ii. 

33,  2. 
tvam,  prs.  prn.  A.  (of  tvdm)  thee,  v.  11, 

5.  62. 
Ives-d,  a.  terrible,  ii.  33,  8.  14  [tvis  be 

agitated], 
tvesd-samdrs,  a.  (Bv.)  of  terrible  aspect, 

i.*85,  8'. 
tvota,  pp.  (Tp.)  aided  by  thee,  iii.  59,  2 

[tva  inst.  +uta,  pp.  of  a.v  favour]. 

Ddks-a,  m.  ivill,  vii.  86,  6  ;    might,  viii. 

48',  8  [daks  be  able]. 
ddks-ina,  a.  right,  vi.  54,   10   [cp.  Gk. 

5e£to  -s,  Lat.  dexter]. 
daksina-tds,  adv.  to  the  south,  x.  15,  6. 
ddd-at,  pr.  pt.  giving,  vii.  103,  10  [da 

give]. 
dddhat,  pr.  pt.  bestowing,  i.  35,  8  ;  with 

a  (following),  x._34,  6  [dha  fut], 
dddh-ana,  pr.  pt.  A.  committing,  assum- 
ing, i.  35,  4  ;  ii.  12,  10  ;  =  going,  x.  15, 

10  [dha.  put]. 
ddm-a,  m.  house,  i.  1,  8  ;    ii.  35,  7  [Gk. 

Sofio-s,  Lat.  domu-s]. 
dfi,sa,   nm.    ten,    x.  34,   12   [Gk.    5t/fa, 

Lat.  decern,  Eng.  ten]. 
dasanguld,  length  of  ten  fingers,  x.  90,  1 

[ddsa  +  aiiguli  finger]. 
Ddsa-gv-a,  m.  an   ancient  priest,   iv. 

51,  4  [having  ten  cows :  gu  =  go], 
dds-yu,  m.  non-Aryan,  ii.   12,   10  [das 

lay  ivaste], 
dah  burn,  I.  d^ha. 
nis-  burn  up,  x.  34,  9. 
1.  da  give.  III.  daditi,  ii.  35,  10  ;  x.  14, 

9  ;  ao,  Mat,  vii.  103,  10^ ;  ipv.  3.  du. 

datam,  x.  14,  12  ;  s  ao.  op.  disiya,  ii. 

33,  5  [cp.  Gk.  SiSoj/xt,  Lat.  dd-re]. 
&n\i- forgive,  ii.  12,  10. 
a-  take,  ii.  12,  4. 
pdra-  abandon  :  ao.  inj.,  viii.  48,  8. 


pdri-    give   over  to :    ipv.   dehi,  x.  14, 

11. 
pr6,-  present :  root  ao.  ddas,  x.  15,  12. 
2.  da  divide,  TV.  ddya  ;  wield,  ii.  33,  10. 
dadrhand,  pf.  pt.  A.  steadfast,  i.  85,  10 

[drh  make  firm]. 
da-tf,  m.  giver,  ii.  33,  12. 
Danu,  m.  son,  of  Ddnu,  a  demon,  ii.  12, 

11. 
da-man,  n.  ro/je,  viii.  86,  5  [3.  da  bind], 
das-vams,  pf.  pt.  ivorshipping,  m.  wor- 
shipper, i.  1,  6 ;  85,  12  ;  vii.  71,  2  ;  x. 

15,  7  [das  honour]. 
das-a,   a.   non-Aryan,  ii.  12,  4   [das  be 

hostile] . 
das-a,  m.  slave,  vii.  86,  7. 
didfk-su,  adv.  •ioith  a  desire  to  see  =  find 

out,  vii.  86,  3  [from  ds.  of  drs  see]. 
div,  m.  sky,  A.  divam,  iii.  59,  7  ;    G. 

divds,  iv.  51,  1.  10.  11  ;  v.  83,  6  ;  vii. 

61,  3;    63,  4;    x.  15,  14;    127,  8;   L. 

divi,  i.  85,  2  ;   v.  11,  3  ;   viii.  29,  9  ; 

X.  90,  3  [Gk.  Alfa,  Aifos,  Aifi]. 
div  play,  IV.  divya,  x.  34,  13. 
div-a,  adv.  by  day,  vii.  71,  1.  2  [w.  shift 

of  accent  for  div-a]. 
divi-spfs,  a.   touching  the  sky,  v.  11,  1  ; 

X.    168,    1     [divi    L.    of   div  +  sprs 

touch]. 
dive-dive,  Ic.  itv.  cd.    every  day,  i.  1, 

3.  7  [L.  of  diva  day], 
div-ya,  a.  coming  from  heaven,  divine,  vii. 

49,  1  ;  103,  2 ;  x.  34,  9  [div  heaven]. 
dis,  f.  quarter  (of  the  sky),  i.  85,  11  ;    x. 

90,  14  [6.ispoinf\. 

1.  dlfly,  IV.  diya. 

pdri-  fly  around,  ii.  35,  14  ;  v.  83,  7. 

2.  di  shine  :  pf.  didaya,  ii.  33,  4. 
didi-vams,  pf.  pt.  shining,  ii.  35,  3.  14 

[di  shine]. 
didivi,  a.  shining,  i.l,  8  [dl  shine]. 
didhy-ana,  pr.  pt.  A.  pondering,  iv.  50, 

1  [dhi  think]. 
dip  shine,  IV,  A.  dipya. 
sdm-  inflame  :  red.  ao.  inj.  didlpas,viii. 

48,  6  [cp.  di  shine]. 
diy-ant,  pr.  pt.  flying,  vii.  63,  5  [dlfly]. 
dirghd,  a.  long,  i.  154,  3  ;  x.  14, 14  [Gk. 

bo\ix6-f]. 
dirgha-sru-t,  a.  heard  afar,  vii.  61,  2 

[sru  hear  + 1]. 
du  go  :  is  ao,  sb.  davisani,  x.  34,  5. 
dudhrd,  a.  fierce,  ii,  12,  15. 
dur-i-tfi,,  (pp.)  n.  faring  ill,  hardship,  i. 

35,  3  [dus  ill  +  pp.  of  i  go]. 


durga] 


236 


[dha 


dur-ga,  n.  hardship,  vii.  61,  7  [dus  +  ga 

-  gam  go]. 
dur-mati,  f.  ill-will,  ii.  33,  14  [dus  ill 

+  mati  thoughf]. 
duvas-ya,  den.  present  wifh  (inst.),  x.  14, 

1  [diivas,  n.  gift]. 
dus-kft,  m.  evil-doer,  v.  83,   2.  9  [dus 

+  kr  do  +  t]. 
du-stuti,  f.  ill  praise,  ii.  33,  4  [dus  ill 

+  stuti  praise], 
duh  milk,  II.  P.  dogdhi  ;    s  ao.  duk- 

sata,  with  two  ace,  i.  160,  3, 
duh-i-tf,  f.  daughter,  iv.  51,  1.  10.  11  ; 

X.  127,  8  [Gk.  6vya.T7]p,  Go.  dauhtar]. 
du-dabha,  a.  (Bv.)  hard  to  deceive,  vii. 

86,  4  [dus  +  dabha  deception]. 
du-td,  m.  messenger,  v.  11,  4  ;  83,  3  ;  x. 

14,  12. 
durad,  ab.  adv.  from  far,  iii.  59,  2  ;    v. 

83,  3  [du-rd,  a.  far]. 
dure-artha,  a.  (Bv.)  whose  goal  is  distant, 

vii.  63,  4. 
dr  pierce,  int.  dardarsi,  ii.  12,  15. 
df-ti,  m.  water-skin,  v.  83,  7  ;  vii.  103,  2 

[dr  split;  cp.  Gk.  Sepoj,  Eng.  i'ear]. 
drs  see  :  pf.  dadrse  is  seen,  vii.  61,  5. 
drsdye,  dat.  inf.  to  see,  x.  14,  12. 
drs-tvaya,  gd.  having  seen,  x.  34,  11. 
drh  ynakefirm,  I.  P.  dfmha  ;  ipf.  ddrm- 

'hat,  ii.  12,  2. 
dev-a,  m.  god,  i.  1,  1.  2.  4.  5  ;  35,  1.  2. 

32.  8.  10.  11 ;  160,  1.  4  ;  ii.  12,  1^  ;  33, 

15  ;  35,  5.  15  ;  iii.  59,  6.  8.  9 ;  iv.  50, 

9;    V.  11,  2;    vii.  61,  1.  7;    63,1.3; 

86,   72;  viii.   29,   2.   3.   7;  48,  3.   9. 

14;    X.  14,  32.  7.  14;    15,  10.  12  ;  34, 

8  ;  90,  6.  7.  15.  16^  ;    129,  6  ;  135,  1  ; 

168,  2.  42  [celestial  from  div  heaven]. 
deva-tra,  adv.  among  the  gods,  x.  15,  9. 
deva-mand,    n.    abode    of   the    gods.    x. 

135,  7. 
deva-yu,  a.  devoted  to  the  gods,  i.  154, 

5. 
deva-vandd,  a.  god-praising,  x.  15,   10 

[vand  greet]. 
devd-hiti,   f.  divine   order,  viii.    103,    9 

[deva  god  +  hi- ti,  f.   impulse  from  hi 

impel] . 
dev-i,  f.  goddess,  i.  1 60,  1  ;  ii .  35,  .5  ;  iv. 

51,  4.  5.  8.  11  ;   vii.  49,  1.  2.  3.  4  ;   x. 

127,  1.  2.  3  [f.  of  dev-d  god]. 
dosa-vastr,  m.  (Tp.)  illuminer  of  gloom, 

i.  1 ,  7  [dosa  evening  +  vas-tr  from  vas 

shine], 
ddiv-ya,  a.  divine,  i.  35,  5  ;  viii.  48,  2  ; 


coming  from   the    gods,   ii.    33,   7;    n. 

divinity,  ii.  35,  8  [from  devd  god]. 
Dyava-prthivi,  du.    (Dv.)   Heaven  and 

Earth,  1.  35,  9  ;   160,   1.  5  ;  v.  83,  8  ; 

viii.  48,  13  ;     the    parts  of  tlie   cd. 

separated,  ii.  12,  13. 
dyu-md.t,  adv.  brilliantly,  v.  11,  1  [n.  of 

dyu-m^nt,  a.  bright^. 
dyu-mna,  n.  wealth,  iii.  59,  6. 
dyo,  m.  heaven,  N.  dydus,  iv.  51, 11  ;  x. 

90,  14  ;  ace.  dyam,  i.  35,  7.  9  ;  154,  4  ; 

ii.l2,  2.12;  iii.  59,  1;  N.  pi.  f.  dyavas, 

i.  35,  6  [Gk.  Zfus,  Zrjv,  Lat.  diem]. 
dyot-ana,  a.  shining,  viii.  29,  2  [dyut 

shine]. 
drdv-ina,  n.    loealth,  iv.  51,  7   [movable 

property,  from  dru  run], 
dru  run,  I,  drava. 

ati-  run  past  (ace),  x.  14,  10. 
drug-dhd,  n.  misdeed,  vii.  86,  5  [pp.  of 

druh  be  hostile], 
druh,  f.  malice,  ii.  35,  6  ;  m.  avenger,  vii. 

61,  5. 
dva,  nm.  two,  i.  35,  6  ;  viii.  29,  8.  9  [Gk. 

dvoj,  Lat.  duo,  Lith.  dii,  Eng.  two], 
dvadasa,  a.  consisting  of  twelve,  m.  twelve- 
month, vii.  103,  9. 
dvar,  f.  du.  door,  iv.  51,  2  [cf.  Gk.  Ovpa, 

Lat.  fores,  Eng.  door  ;    perhaps  from 

dhvrctosewith  loss  of  aspirate  through 

influence  of  dva  two,  as  having  two 

folds]. 
dvi-ta,  (inst.)  adv.  {doubly)  as  well,  vii. 

86,  1  [dvi  two]. 
dvi-pad,   a.  (Bv.)   ttvo-footed,  iv.   51,   5 

[Gk.  Si-TTod-,  Lat.  bi-ped-]. 
dvis  hate,  II.  dv^sti,  x.  34,  3. 
dv6s-as,  n.  hatred,  ii.  33,  2  [dvis  hate], 

Dhan-a,  n.  ivealth,  money,  iv.  50,  9  ;  x. 
34,  10.  12. 

1.  dhdn-van,  n.    ivaste  land,   i.  35,   8; 
desert,  v,  83,  10. 

2.  dhdn-van,  n.  bow,  ii.  33,  10. 
dham  blow,  I.  P.  dhdmati,  ps.   dham- 

ydte,  X.  135,  7. 
vi-  blow  asunder,  iv,  50,  4. 
dhdm-ant,  pr.  pt.  blonring,  i.  85,  10. 
dhdr-man,  n.  ordinance,  law,  i.  160,  1  ; 

X.  90,    16   [that  which    holds    or   is 

established  :  dhr  hold]. 
1.  d\xB,pat,  III.  dddhati,  v.  83,  1  ;  supply 

with  (inst.),   ii.  35,   12  ;    bestour,   ipv. 

dhehi,  x.  14,  11  ;  dhattd,  i.  85,  12  ; 

ii.  12,  5  ;  x.  15,  7  ;  dadhata,  x.  15,  4. 


2.  dha] 


237 


[nas 


7  ;  dadhatana,  x.  15,  11  ;  dhattam, 
iv.  51,  11 ;  dadhantu,  vii.  63,  6  ;  per- 
form, ipf.  dhatta,  i.  85,  9  ;  bestow,  s 
ao.  sb.  dhasathas,  i.  160,  5  ;  establish, 
pf.  dadh6,  X.  129,  7  ;  ds.  desire  to 
bestow,  didhisanti,  ii.  35,  5  ;  support, 
didhisami,  ii.  35,  12  [Gk.  ti9t}/j.i]. 
adhi-  put  on  (ace.) :  pf,  dadhire,  i.  85, 

2  ;  ao.  drdhita,  x.  127,  1. 
a-  deposit,  root  ao.  sb.  dhas,  v.  83,  7. 
ni-  deposit,  root  ao.  dhatam,  vii.  71,  5  ; 

ps.  ao.  d-dhayi,  viii.  48,  10. 
pari-  put  around,  vi.  54,  10. 
pr^-  put  from  (ab.)  into  (Ic),  vii.  61,  3. 
vi-  impose :  pf.  dadhur,  iv.  51,  6  ;  divide, 

ipf.  ddadhur,  x.  90,  11. 
canas-  accept  gladly,  ii.  35,  1. 
purds-  place  at  the  head,  appoint  Purohita : 
pf.  dadhire,  iv.  50,  1. 
2.  dha  suck,  IV.   P.  dhdya,  ii.  33,  13  ; 

35,  5. 
dha-man,  n.  power,  i.  85,  11  ;  ordinance, 

vii.  61,  4  ;  63,  3  '[dha,  put,  establish']. 
dharayat-kavi,  a.  (gov.)  supporting  the 
sage,  i.  160,  1  [dhariyat,  pr.  pt.  cs.  of 
dhr  hold], 
dha-ra,  f.  stream,  i.  85,  5 ;  v.  83,  6  [dhav 

run]. 
dhisdna,  f.  bowl,  i.  160,  1. 
dhi,  f.  thought,  i.  1,  7  ;  iv.  50,  11. 
dhi  think.  III.  didhye. 

a-  think  to  oneself,  a-  didhye,  x.  34,  5. 
dhi-ra,  a.  thoughtful,  viii.  48,  4 ;  ivise,  i. 
160,   3 ;    intelligent,   vii.    86,    1      [dhi 
think]. 
dhuneti,  a.    (Bv.)   having  a   resounding 

gait,  iv.  50,  2  [dhuna  +  iti]. 
dhur,  f.  pole  (of  a  car),  vii.  63,  2  ;  viii. 

48,  2. 
dhii-md,  m.  smoke,  v.  11,  3  [dhii  agitaie  ; 

Gk.  6vfx6-i,  Lat.  fumu-s], 
dhiir-ti,    f.    malice,   viii.   48,   3    [dhvr 

injure]. 
dhr  support,  fix  fi,rmly  :  pf.  dadhara,  i. 

154,  4  ;  iii.  59,  1. 
dhrs-nu,  n.  adv.  forcibly,  x.  34,  14  [dhrs 

be  bold,  dare], 
dhe-nu,  f.  cow,  i.  160,  3  ;  ii.  35,  7  [yield- 
ing milk :  dhe  =  dha  suck]. 
dhru-ti,  f.  seduction,  vii.  86,  6    [dhru 
=  dhvr  injure], 

1.  N&,  pel.  as,  like,  i.  35,  6;  85,  1. 
7.  82 ;  154,  2  ;  ii.  33,  11  ;  iv.  51,  8  ;  vii. 
61,  2 ;  63,  5 ;  86.  52.  7  ;  103,  2\  3.  7; 


viii.  48,  5.  6  ;    x.  127,  4.  8 ;    168,  2 

[180]. 
2.  na,  neg.  pel.  not,  ii.  12, 5.  9.  10  ;  33,  9. 

10.  152  ;  35,  62  ;  iii.  59,  2<  ;  iv.  51,  6; 

vi.  54,  33.  4.  9 ;  vii.  61,  5^  ;  63,  3  ;  86, 

6  :  103,  8 ;  viii.  48,  10  ;  x.  14,  2  ;  15, 

132  ;  34,  2-5.  12  ;  129,  1<.  2.  72 ;  168, 

3.  4  [180]. 
nakt-am,  ace.  adv.  by  night,  vii.  71,  1. 

2  ;  X.  34,  10  [stem  nakt,  cp.  Lat.  nox 

-=  noct-s]. 
na-ksatra,  n.  star ;  day-star,  vii.  86,   1 

[ndk  night  +  ksatr^  dominion  =  ruling 

over  night]. 
nad-i,  f.  stream,  ii.  35,  3  [nad  roar]. 
iia-pat,  m.  son,   ii.  35,  1.   2.  3.   7.   10. 

13 ;    grandson,    x.    15,   3   [Lat.   nepot- 

*  nephew ']. 
naptr,  m.  (weak  stem  of  n^pat)  son  : 

gen.  naptur,  ii.  35,  11  ;   dat.  naptre, 

ii.  35,    14    [na-pitr   having   no  father 

—  *  nephew ',  '  grandson  ']. 
nabh-as,  n.  sky,  v.  83,   3    [Gk.   vicjyos, 

OSl.  nebo]. 
nam  bend,  I.  nama  ;  A  :  ii.  12,  13  ;  iv. 

50,  8 ;  before  (dat.),  x.  34,  8  ;  int.  nan- 

namiti  bend  low,  v.  83,  5. 
prdti-   bend  towards  :    pf.  nanama,  ii. 

33,  12. 
nam-as,  n.  homage,  i.  1,  7  ;  ii.  33,  4.  8  ; 

35,  12  ;  iii.  59,  5  ;  iv.  50,  6  ;  v.  83,  1; 

vii.  61,  6  ;  63,  5  ;  86,  4  ;  x.  14, 15  ;  15, 

2  ;  34,  8  [nam  bend]. 
namas-yd.,  den.  adore,  ii.  33,  8  [namas 

homage]. 
namas-ya,  a.  adorable,  iii.  59,  4. 
ndr-ya,  a.  manly,  i.  85,  9. 
nd.v-a,  a.  neiv,  iv.  51,  4  ;   vii.  61,  6  ;    x. 

135,   3   [Gk.  veo-s,    Lat.  novu-s,  OSl. 

novu,  Eng.  new]. 
Ndva-gv-a,  m.  an  ancient  priest,  iv.  51, 

4  ;  pi.  a  family  of  ancient  priests,  x. 

14,  6  [having  nine  coios  :  gu  =  go]. 
nd,v-yas,  cpv.  a.  renewed,  v.  11,  1  [Lat. 

nov-ior]. 

1.  nas  be  lost,  TV.  P.  nasya ;  ao.  nesat, 
vi.  54,  7. 

2.  nas  reach,  I.  ndsa. 
VI-  reach,  ii.  S5,  6. 

nds,  f.  night,  vii.  71,  1. 

nas-ta,  pp.  lost,  vi.  54,  10  [nas  be  lost]. 

nas,  prs.  prn.,  A.  us,  i.  1,  9  ;  35,  112; 

ii.  33,  I.  2.  3.  5.  14  ;    iv.  50,  11  ;    vii. 

61,  72 ;  63,  6  ;  71,  2.  4.  6  ;  86,  8  ;  viii. 

48,  6.  8. 15  c  ;  x.  14, 14  ;   15,  1.  6  ;  34, 


nahj 


238 


[pathikrt 


14  ;  to  us,  X.  127,  4  ;  D.,  i.  1,  9a  ;  85, 
12  ;  160,  5  ;  ii.  33,  15  ;  iv.  50,  2  ;  v. 
83,  5.  6  ;  vi.  54,  5.  10 ;  vii.  63,  6^  ; 
vii.  86,  8 ;  103, 10  ;  viii.  48,  8.  9. 12. 14. 

15  a;  X.  14,  2;  15,4;  34,14;  127,6; 
135,  5  ;  G.  of  us,  ii.  33.  4.  13  ;  v.  11,  4  ; 
83,  6;  vi.  54,  5  ;  86,  5  ;  viii.  48.  4^.  7. 
9 ;  X.  14,  2.  6.  7  ;  15,  8  ;  135,  1. 

nah  bind,  IV.  ndhya. 
sam-  knit  together :  irr.  pf.  2.  pi.  anaha, 

viii.  48,  5. 
na  =  na  not,  x.  34,  8. 
naka,  n .  firmament,  i.  85,  7  ;    vii.  86,  1  ; 

X.  90,  16. 
nail,  f.  flute,  x.  135,  7. 
nath-itd,  pp.  distressed,  x.  34,  3  [nath 

seek  aid^. 
nadyi,  m.  son  of  streams,  ii.  35,  1. 
nadh-amana,  pr.  pt.  A.  seeking  aid,  suj)- 

pliant,  ii.  12,  6  ;  33,  6. 
nana,  adv.  separately,  ii.  12,  8. 
nabhi,  f.  navel,  x.  90,  14. 
na-man,  n.  name,  ii.  33,  8  ;  35,  11  ;  vii. 

103,  6   [Gk.   ovofxa,   Lat.   nonien,    Go. 

namb,  Eng.  name~\. 
nari,   f.   tvoman,    ii.   33,   5    [from    ndr 

man']. 
nasatya,  m.  du.  epithet  of  the  A^vins, 

vii.  71,  4  [na  +  asatyd  not  untrue']. 
ni-kft-van,  a.  deceitful,  x.  34, 7  [ni  doivn 

+  kr  do]. 
ni-eitd,  pp.   known,    ii.    12,   13    [ni  +  ci 

note], 
ninyd,  n.  secret,  vii.  61,  5. 
ni-todin,  a.  piercing,  x.  34,  7. 
ni-dra,  f.   sleep,    viii.   48,    14    [ni+dra 

sleep  ;  cp.  Gk.  hap-davoj,  Lat.  dor-mio]. 
ni-dhi,  m.  treasure,  viii.  29,  6  ;   deposit, 

X.  15,  5  [ni  down  -t- dhi  —  dh.h  put]. 
ni-dhruvi,  a.  persevering,  viii.  29,  3  [ni 

+  dhriivi  firm]. 
ni-pad^,    m.  valley,  v.  83,   7    [ni   doion 

+  pada,  m.foot], 
nir-d,yana,  n.   exit,  x.    135,   6   [nis  out 

+  dy-ana  going  :  i  go]. 
ni-vat,  f.  depth,  x.  127,  2  [ni  down]. 
ni-v6sani,  a.    cau,sing   to   rest,   1.   35,    1 

[from  cs.  of  ni  +  vis  ca,use  to  turn  in], 
ni-satta,  pp.  with  a,  having  sat  down  in 

(Ic),  x^.  15,  2  [ni  +  sad  sit  down]. 
ni-sdd-ya,  gd.  having  sat  down,  ii.  35, 10 ; 

x.  15,  6;  with  a,  x.  14,  5. 
ni-sinc-dnt,  pr.  pt.  pouring  down,  v.  83, 

6  [sic  sprinkle]. 
niskd,  m.  necklace,  ii.  33,  10. 


nis-krta,  n.  appointed  place,  x.  34,  5  [pp. 

arranged  :  nis  out  +  kr  make]. 
ni  lead,  I.  n^ya ;  2.  pi.  ipv.,  x.  34,  4. 

sdm-  conjoin  with  (inst.),  vi.  54,  1. 
nic-a,  adv.  down,  x.  34,  9  [inst.  of  nyanc 

doivnward^. 
nu,  adv.  now,  i.  154,  1  ;  ii.  33,  7  ;  iv.  51, 

9  ;  X.  34,   142 .   igg^  j  .  _  i^ter.  pel. 

pray?  vii.  86,  2  [Gk.  vv,  01.  nu,  OG. 

nu]. 
nud  push,  VI.  nudd,  ;  pf.  3.  pi.  A.  nu- 

nudre,  i.  85,  10.  11. 
prd-  push  away  :  pf.  vii.  86,,  1. 
nu,  adv.  =  nu  now,  vii.  63,  6  [OG.  nil], 
nu-tana,  a.  present,  i.  1,  2  [nil  now]. 
nii-ndm,  adv.  now,  iv.  51,  1  ;  vii.  63,  4; 

viii.  48,  3  ;  x.  15,  2  [nil  now]. 
nf,  m.  man,  pi.  N.  nd,ras,  i.  85,  8  ;  154, 
'5  ;  V.  11,  2.  4  ;   vii.  103,  9  [Gk.  du^p, 

dvdpos]. 
nr-caksas,  a.  (Bv.)  observer  of  men,  viii, 

48,  9.  15;  X.  14,  11  [nr  mart  +  caksas 

look]. 
nr-pati,  m.  lord  of  men,  vii.  71,  4. 
nr-mna,  a.  manliness,  valour,  ii.  12,  1  [cp. 

nr-mdnas  manly]. 
ne-tf,  m.  guide,  ii.  12,  7  [ni  lead]. 
no  =  na  +  u  also  not,  vi.  54,  3. 
nau,  f.  ship,  x.   135,  4  [Gk.  vav-s,  Lat. 

ndv-i-s]. 
ny-anc,  a.  downward,  v.  83,  7  [ni-  down 

+  -anc  -ward]. 
ny-iipta,  pp.  throivn  down,   x.  34,  5.  9 

[ni  +  vap  strew]. 

Paks-in,  a.  winged,  x.  127,  5  [paksa,  m. 

%ving]. 
pdc-ant,   pr.  pt.  cooking,  ii.  12,   14.  15 

[pac  cook,  Lat.  coquo  for  pequo,  OSl.  3. 

s.  pecetii]. 
pdnca,  nm.  five,  iii.  59,  8  [Av.  pmica, 

Gk.  nfvre,  Lat.  qulrujue]. 
pdn-i,  m.  niggard,  iv.  51,  3   [pan  bar- 
gain]. 
pat  fly,  I.  pdta,  x.  14,  16  ;   cs.  pataya 

fall,  V.  83,  4  [Gk.  rrtT-f-rai  flies,  Lat. 

pet-o]. 
pdt-i,  m.  lord,  pi.  N.  pd,tayas,  iv.  50,  6 ; 

51,  10;  viiL  48,  13  [Gk.  irSai-^]. 
p6,th,  m.  path,  viii.  29,  6  ;  x.  14,  10  [cp. 

Gk.  Traro-?]. 
path-£,   m.  p<(th,  i.  35,   11;    x.    14,  7: 

168,  3. 
pathi-kft,  m.  path-maker,  x.  14,  15  [kr-t 

making :  kr  +  determinative  t]. 


pathiraksi] 


239 


[pinv 


pathi-raksi,  a.  (Tp.)   luatching  the  path, 

X.  14,  li. 
path-ya,  f.  jpa</i,  x.  14,  2. 
pad  fall,  IV.  A.  pddya  ;  pp.  papada,  x. 

34,  11. 

iiVSb-  fall  dotvn,  vi.  54,  3. 
p^d,  foot,  du.  ab.  padbhyam,  x.  90,  12. 

14  [Gk.  7ro5-,  L&t.ped-,  Eng.  foof]. 
pad-a,  n.  step,  i.  154,  3.  4.  5.  6;  ii.  35, 

14  [pad  walk  ;  Gk.  -ned-o-v  '  grovind  ']. 
pad-vant,  a.  having  feet,  x.  127,  5. 
pan-ayya,  gdv.  praiseivorfhy,  i.   160,    5i 

[pan  admire].  " 

pantha,  m.  path,  i.  35,  11 ;   vii.  71,  1  ; 

x.  14,  1  [cp.  Gk.  ir6pTo-s~\. 
panya-tama,  spv.  gdv.  most  highly  to  he 

praised,  iii.  59,  5  [panya,  gdv.  praise- 
worthy :  pan  admire], 
paprath-ana,  pf.  pt.  A.  spreading  oneself, 

iv.  51,  8  [prath  spread]. 
pd-y-as,  n.  milk,  moisture,  i.   160,  3  [pi 

swell]. 
par-a,  si.  farther,  ii.  12,  8  ;  higher,  x.  15, 

1  ;  remote,  x.  15,  10  [pr  pass]. 
para-md,  spv.  a.  farthest,  iv.  50,  3  ;    x. 

14,  8  ;  129,  7  ;  highest,  i.  154,  5.  6  ;  ii. 

35,  14  ;  iv.  50,  4. 

par-ds,  adv.  far  away,  ii.  35,  6  ;    beyond, 

X.  129,  1.  2. 
pards-tad,   adv.  from   afar,   vi.   54,    9 ; 

above,  x.  129,  5. 
para-y£nt,   pr.   pt.  departing,    x.    34,  5 

[jp&ra,  away,  Gk.  Tre/jct  beyond,  +i  go], 
para- vat,  f.  distance,  i.  35,  3  ;  iv.  50,  3. 
pdri,  prp.  round  ;   with  ab.  from,  ii.  35, 

10  ;  X.  135,  4  [Av.  pairi,  Gk.  vtpi]. 
pari-dhi,  m.pl.  sticks  enclosing  the  altar, 

X.  90,   15    [pdri  round  +  dhi  reduced 

form  of  dha  put]. 
pari-bhu,  a.  being  around,  encompassing 

(ace),  i.  1,  4  [bhii  be]. 
parivatsar-ina,     a.    yearly,   vii.    10,   8 

[pari-  +  vatsard,  m.  complete  year]. 
pari-skrta,  pp.  adorned,  x.  135,  7  [pari 

round  +  skr  =  kr  make  =  put]. 
pareyi-vams,  red.  pf.  pt.  having  passed 

aivay.  x.  14,  1  [pdra  away  +  iy-i-vams  : 

from  i  go]. 
Parjdnya,    m.   a   god    of  rain,   v.    83, 

1-5.  9. 
Parjanya-jinvita,  pp.  quickened  by  Par- 

janya,  vii.  103,  1  [jinv  sec.  root  ^  ji- 

nu  from  ji  quicken]. 
pary-a-vivrtsant,  pr.  pt.  ds.  wishing  to 

revolve  hither  (sicc.),  vii.  63,  2  [yrtturn]. 


parva-ta,  m.  i,  85,  10  ;  ii.  12,  2.  11.  13 

[jointed;  Lesbian  Gk.  neppara '  limits ']. 
pdr-van,  n.  joint,  section,  vii.  103,  5 ;  viii. 

48,    5     [cp.     Gk.    rrepfav    in    irfpaiuoj 

'  finish  '  for  irepfavicj]. 
pav-i,  m.  felly,  vi.  54,  3. 
pavitra-vant,    a.   purifying,    i.    160,    3 

[pavitra,  n.  means  of  purification  ;  root 

V\x  purify]. 
pas  =  spas  see,  i.  35,  2  ;   x.  14,  7  [Av. 

spas,  Lat.  spec-io]. 
pas-u,  m.  beast,  x.  90,  8  ;   victim,  x.  90, 

15     [A v.    pasu-,     Lat.     pecu-s.     Go. 

faihu]. 
pasu-tfp,  a.  cattle-stealing,  vii.  86,  5  [trp 

be  pleased  loith], 
pasca-tad,    adv.    behind,    viii.    48,    15 

[pasca  inst.  adv.  Av.  pasca  *  behind'], 
pascad,  (ab.)  adv.  behind,  x.  90,  5  ;  after- 
wards, X.  135,  6. 

1.  pa,  drink,  I.  piba,  iv.  50,  10  ;  root  ao. 
apama,  viii.  48,  3  [cp.  Lat.  bibo 
'drink']. 

sam-  drink  together,  x.  135,  1. 

2.  pa  protect,  II.  pati, /rom  (ab.),  ii.  35, 
6  :  vii.  61,  7  ;  63,  6  ;  71,  6  ;  86,  8;  viii. 

^48,  15. 
path-as,  n.  path,  vii.  63,  5  ;    domain,  i. 

154,  5  [related  to  pdth,  m.  path], 
pad-a,  m.  foot,  x.  90,  11;    one-fourth,  x. 

90,  3.  4  [sec.  stem  formed  from  ace. 

pad- am  of  pi.dfoot]. 
papaya,  inst.   f.   adv.  evilly,   x.   135,    2 

[papd,  a.  bad]. 
par-fi,,  m.  farther  shore,  ii.  33,  3  [pr  pass 

^  =  crossing  ;  Gk.  wopo-s  '  passage']. 
parthiva,  a.  earthly,  i.  154,  1  ;   x.  15,  2 

[a.  from  prthivi  earth]. 
pav-akd,  a.  purifying,  iv.  51,  2  ;  vii.  49, 

2.  3  [pvL  purify]. 
pi  swell,  I.  payate  ;  pf.  pipaya,  ii.  35,  7  ; 

viii.  29,  6. 
pi-tu,  m.  drink,  x.  15,  3  [pa  drink]. 
pi-tf,  m.  father,  i.  1,  9  ;  160,  2K  3  ;  ii.  33, 

1.  12. 13  ;  iv.  50,  6  ;  v.  83,  6  ;  vii.  103, 

3  ;  viii.  48,  4;  x.  14,  5.  6;  34,  4;  135, 

1  ;  pi.  fathers,  ancestors,  viii.  48,  12.  13; 

X.  14,   2.  4.  7.  8.  9;    15,  1-13  [Gk. 

Trar-qp,  Lat.  pater.  Go.  fadar]. 
pitr-ya,  a.  paternal,  vii.  86,  5  ;  viii.  48,  7 

[pitf  father]. 
pinv  i/ield  abundance,  I.  pinva,  iv.  50,  8; 

over/low,  v.  83,  4  [sec.  root  ^  pi-nu 

from  pi  swell]. 
prd-  pour  forth,  v.  83,  6. 


pis] 


240 


[pratna 


pis  adorn,  VI.  pimsa :    pf.  pipisur,  vii. 

103,  6 ;  A.  pipise,  ii.  33,  9. 
pi-td,  pp.  drunk,  viii.  48,  4.  5.  10.  12. 
piyusa,  m.  n.  milk,  ii.  35,  5  [pi  sweW}. 
putra,  ni.  son,  i.  160,  3  ;   v.  11,  6  ;   vii. 

103,  3  ;  X.  15,  7  ;  34,  10. 
piinar,  adv.  again,  vi.  54,  10  ;  x.  14,  8  ; 

90,  4  ;  135,  2 ;  back,  x.  14,  12. 
punar-han,  a.  striking  back,  x.  34,  7. 
punana,  pr.  pt.  purifying,  vii.  49,  1  [pii 

purify]. 
pur,  f.  citadel,  ii.  35,  6  [pr  fill]. 
puram-dhi,  f.  reward,  iv.  50,  11  [a.  dhi 

&t's/ow;m^  (reduced  foi-m  of  dlisi)  abund- 
ance, pur-am  ace.]. 
pur^s-tad,  adv.  in  the  east,  iv.  51,  1.  2. 

8  ;  forward,  v.  83,  8  ;  before,  viii.  48, 

15  ;  in  front,  x.  135,  6. 
pura,  adv.  formerly,  iv.  51,  7. 
pura-na,  a,,  f.  i,  ancient,  iv.  51,  6  ;  m.  pi. 

ancients,  x.  135,  1.  2  [pura yb?merZ?/]. 
puru-tama,  a.  spv.  most  Jrequent,  iv.  51, 

1  [puru,  Gk.  TToAu-s]. 
puru-tra,  adv.  in  w,any  places,  x.  127,  1 ; 

in  many  ways,  vii.  103,  6. 
puru-riipa,  a.  (Bv.)  having  many  forms, 

ii.33,  9. 
Puru-sa,  m.   the  primaeval  Male,  x.  90, 

1.  2.*4.  6.  7.  11.  15. 
purusa-ta,  f.  human  frailty,  x.  15,  6. 
puro-hita,  pp.  placed  in  front,  m.  domestic 

priest,  i,  1,  1  ;  V.  11,  2  [puras  +  hita, 

pp.  of  dha  put]. 
puro-Mti,  f.  priestly  service,  vii.  61,  7. 
pus-td,  n.   (pi.)  earnings,  ii.   12,   4  [pp. 

of  pus  thrive]. 
pus-ti,  f.  earnings,  ii.  12,  5  ;  prosperity, 

viii,  48,  6. 
^VL  purify,  IX.  punati,  i.  160,  3, 
pur-na,  pp.  full,  i,  154,  4  ;  vii.  103,  7 

[j^v  fill :  cp.  Gk.  TToXXoL  '■  many  ',  Eng. 

full]. 
purusa,  m.  metrical  for  purusa,  x.  90, 

^3.  5. 
pur-va,  Si,,  former,  i.  1,  2  ;  being  in  front, 

iv.  50,  8  ;  early,  ancient,  x.  14,  2.  7. 15 ; 

15,  2.  8.  10  ;  90,  16. 
piirva-jd,  a.  born  of  old,  x.  14,  15  [ja  be 

born], 
purva-bhaj,  a.  receiving  the  preference,  iv. 

50,  7  [bhaj  share]. 
purva-su,  a.  bringing  forth  first ,  ii.  35,  5. 
piirvahn-d,  m.  morning,x.fi4:,  11  [purvA 

early  +  ahna  ^^  ahan  day]. 
purv-yd,  a.  ancient,  i.  35,  11  ;  x.  14,  7. 


Piis-an,  m.  a  solar  deity,  vi.  54,  1-6.  8- 

10  prosperer  [pus  thrive]. 
pr  take  across.  III.  P.  piparti  ;   ipv.  pi- 

prtam,  vii.  61,  7  ;  II.  P.  pdrsi  =  ipv., 

ii*.  33,  3. 
pre  mix,_yil.  prnakti. 

sdra-,  A.  priikt^,  mingle,  vii.  103,  4. 
prchd-mana,  pr.  pt.  A.  asking  oneself,  x. 

34,  6  [prach  ask]. 
pft-ana,  f.  battle,  i.  85,  8. 
prthiv-i,  f.  earth,  i.  35,  8  ;  154,  4  ;  i'u  12, 

2  ;  iii.  59,  1.  3.  7  ;  iv,  51,  11  ;  v,  83, 
4.  5,  9  ;  vii.  61,  3  ;  x.  168,  1  \_the  Iroad 
one  =  prthvi,  f.  of  prthu  from  prath 
S2)read]. 

pfs-ni,  a,  speckled,  i.  160,  3  ;  vii.  103,  4. 

*6.  10. 
Prsni-matr,  a.  (Bv.)  having  Pr^ni  as-  a 

mother,  i.  85,  2. 
pfsat-i,  (pr.  pt.)  f.  spotted  mare,  i.  85, 

"4.  5. 
prsad-ajyd,  n,  clotted  butter,  x.  90,  8. 
pfs-ant,  (pr.  pt.)  a.  variegated,  iv.  50,  2. 
Tpf'fill,  IX.  prnati,  ii.  35,  3. 

a- fill  up,  V.  11,  5  ;  vii.  61,  2. 
p^pis-at,  pr.  pt.  int.  thickly  painting,  x. 

127,  7  [pis  paint]. 
p6s-a,  m,  prosperity,  i.  1,  3  [pus  thrive]. 
pra-keta,    m.    beacon,    x.    129,    2    [pra 

+  cit  appear]. 
prach  ask,  VI.  prcha,  ii,  12,  5  ;  vii.  86, 

3  [sec.  root :  pras  +  clia  ;  cp.  Lat. 
posco  =  pore-SCO  andprec-or ,  OG./orsc-on] . 

pra-ja,  f.  offspring,  ii.  33,  1  ;  pi.  progeny, 
ii.  35,  8  ;  =  men,  v.  83,  10  [cp.  Lat. 
pro-gen-ies]. 

praja-vant,  a,  accompanied  by  offspring, 
iv.  51,  10. 

prati-kamdm,  adv.  at  pleasure,  x.  15,  8 
[kama  desire]. 

prdtijan-ya,  a.  belonging  to  adversaries, 
iv,  50,  9 ;  n,  hostile  force,  iv.  50,  7 
[pratl-jand,  m.  adversary]. 

prati-divan,  m.  adversary  at  play,  x.  34, 
6  [div/jZa?/]. 

prati-dosdm,  adv.  towards  eventide,  i.  35, 
10  [dosa  evening]. 

prati-budhyamana,  pr.  pt.  awaking  to- 
wards   (ace),  iv.  51,  10. 

prati-mSna,  n,  match,  ii.  12,  9  [counter- 
measure  :  ma  measurci]. 

prd,-tir-am,  ;>cc.  inf.  to  prolong,  viii.  48, 
10  I  tr  cross]. 

pra-tnd,  a.  ancient,  iv.  50,  1  [prd 
before]. 


prath]  241 

prath  spread  out,  I.  A.  pratha  :  ppf.  pa- 

prdthat,  vii.  86,  1. 
pra-tham^,  ord.  first,  i.  35. 1* ;  v.  11,  2; 

vi.  54,  4  ;    X.  14,  2  ;    34,'  12  ;    90,  16  ; 

129,  4 ;  chief,  ii.  12, 1  [  =  pra-tamd/ore- 

most;  OF.fra-tama]. 
prathama-ja,  a.  first-born,  x.  168,  3  [ja 

=  jan]. 
prathamd-m,  adv.  first,  iv.  50,  4. 
pra-dls,  f.  control,  ii.  12,  7  [dis  pom<]. 
pra-bodh^yant,   cs.  pr.  pt.  awakening, 

iv.  51,  5  [budh  wake]. 
prd-yata,  pp.  extended,  i.  154,  3  ;  offered, 

X.  15,  11.  12  [yam  stretcli  out:]. 
pra-yati,   f.    impulse,    x.    129,    5    [yam 

extendi, 
pr^yas-vant,  a.  offering  oblations,  iii.  59, 

2  [pray-as  enjoyment  from  pri  please^. 
pra-yotf,  m.  loarder  off;  vii.  86,  6  [2.  yu 

separate]. 
pra-vdt,  f.  slo2)e,  dowmcardpath,  i.  35,  3; 

height,  x.  14,  1  [-pri,  fonvard]. 
pravate-ja,  a.  born  in  a  windy  place,  x. 

34,  1  [pra-vata+ja  =-  jan]. 
pra-vasa,  m.  traveller,  viii.  29,  8  [pra 

+  vas  dwell  away  from  home], 
pra-vista,  pp.  having  entered,  vii.  49,  4 

[vis  enter], 

pra-sarga,  m.  discharge,  vii.  103,  4  [srj 

emit] . 
pra-savitf,   m.    rouser,    vii.    63,    2    [su 

stimulate], 
pra-siti,  f.  toils,  x.  34,  15  [si  bifid], 
pra-suta,pp.  aroused,  vii.  63, 4  [su  impel]. 
pra-stard,  m.  streicn  grass,  x.  14,  4  [str 

strew], 
pra,  fill  [extended  form,  pr-a,  of  pf  fill], 

a-  pervade,  s  ao.  apras,  x.  127,  2. " 
pranc,  a.,  f.  prac-i,  forward,  x.  34,  12  ; 

facing,  x.  135,  3  [pra  +  anc]. 
prana,  m.   breath,  x.   90,  13    [pra  +  an 

bj-eaihe], 
pra-vrs,  f.  rainy  season,  vii.    103,   3.  9 

[vrs  rain], 
pravrs-a,  a. ,  f.  i,  belonging  to  the  rains,  vii. 

103,  7. 
pra-vep-a,  a.    dangling,  x,   34,    1    [pra 

+  vip  tremble], 
priy-d,  a.  dear,  i,  85,  7  ;   154,  5  ;   ii.  12, 

15  ;  viii.  48,  14  ;  x.  15,  5  [prJ  please], 

Phaligd,  cave,  iv,  50,  5. 


[bru 


Bad-dha,   pp. 

bind]. 


bound,  X.  34,  4  [bai:!dh 


1902 


bandh  bind,  ix.  badhnati  :  ipf.  abadh- 

nan,  x.  90,  15. 
bandh-u,  a.  akin,  i,  154,  5  ;  m.  bond,  x. 

129,  4  [bandh  bind], 
babhru,  a.  {ruddy)  brown,  ii.  33,  5.  8.  9. 

15  ;  vii.  103,  10  ;  viii.  29, 1  ;  x.  34,  5. 

11.  14. 
barh-ana   magic  i^ower,    x.    34,    7   [brh 

make  big], 
barhi-sdd,  a.  (Tp,)  sitting  on  the  sacrificial 

grass,   x.    15,  3.   4   [for    barhih-sad  ; 

sad  sit], 
barhis-ya,  a.  placed  on  the  sacrificial  grass, 

X.  15,  5  [barhis]. 
barh-is,  n.  sacrificial  grass,  i.  85,  6.  7  •  v. 

11,2;  X.  14,  5;  15,  11;  90,  7. 
bah-u,  a.  7nany,  ii,  35,12 ;  x.  14,  1 ;  34, 13. 
badh  drive  away,  I.  A.  badhate,  x.  127, 

2 ;    int.    badbadhe   press    apart,    vii. 

61,  4. 
apa-  drive  aivay,  i.  35,  3.  9  ;  85,  3. 
bah-u,  m.  arm,  i.  85,  6 ;  du.  x.  90,  11.  12 

[Av.  bdzu,  Gk.  irrjxv-s,  OG.  buog]. 
bibhy-at,  pr.  pi.  fearing,  x.  34,  io  [bhi 

fear], 
bibhr-at,  pr.  pt.  bearing,  vii.  103,  6  [bhr 

bear], 
bil-ma,  n.  shavings.ji,  35,  12. 
budh-ana,  ao.  pt.  A.  leaking,  iv.  51,  8. 
budh-na,  m.  n.  bottom,  x.  135,  6  [Lat. 

fundus], 
brh-at,  (pr.  pt.)  adv.  aloud,  ii.  33,  15  : 

35,  15.  ^  ^       , 

brh-ant,  a.  lofty,  i.  35,  4  ;  v.  11,  1  ;  vii. 

61,  3  ;  86,  1  ;  x.  34,  1  ;   ample,  i.  160, 

5  ;  n.  the  great  world,  x.  14,  16  [pr.  pt. 

of  brh  make  big], 
Bfhas-pati,  m.  Lord  of  prayer,  name  of 

a  god,  iv.  50,  1.  2.  3.  4.  5.  6.  7.  10.  11 ; 

x.  14,  3  [brh-as  prob.  gen.  =  brhds  ; 

cp.  brahmanas  pati]. 
bodhi,  2.  s.  ipv.  ao.  of  bhri  be,  ii.  33,  15 

[for  bhii-dhi]. 
brah-man,  n.  2yraijer,  ii.  12,  14  ;  vii.  61, 

2.6;  71,  6;  103,  8  [hrh  sioell]. 
brah-man,    m.   priest,    'iv.    50,    8.    9 ; 

Brahmin,  ii.  12,  6  [brh  sivell]. 
brahmand,  m.  Brahmin,  vii.  103,  1.  7 

8  ;  90,  12. 
bruv-ant,  pr.  pt.  calling  (ace),  viii.  48,  1 

[brii  S2)eak]. 
bruv-and,  pr.  pt.  speaking,  iii.  59, 1  [brii 

speak] . 
bru   speak,   II.   braviti,    i.   35,  6  ;    sb. 

bravat,  vi.  54,  1.  2;   tell,  op.x.  135,  5. 


R 


Bhaksa] 


242 


[madacyiit 


ddhi-  speak  for  (ace),  i.   35,   11  ;    x, 

15,  5._ 
lipa-,  A.  implore,  iv.  51,  11. 

Bhaks-a,  m.  draught,  x.  34,  1  [bhak-s, 

sec.  root  consume  from  bhaj  partake  of]. 
bhaj  partake  of  (gen.),  x.  15,  3  ;   s  ao., 

viii.  48,  1.  7. 
bhad-rd,  a.  auspicious,  i.  1,  6  ;  ii.  35,  15  ; 

iii.  59,   4 ;    iv.   51,    7  ;    ^.  14,   6.   12 

[praiseworthy  :  bhand  be  praised^. 
Bhar-atd,  m.  pi.  name  of  a  tribe,  v. 

11,  1. 
bhdr-ant,  pr.  pt.  bearing,!.  1,  7  [bbr 6ear]. 
bhdv-ya,  a.  that  will  be,  future,  x.  90,  2 

[gdv.  of  bhu  be]. 
bha  shine,  II.  P.  bhati. 
^va-  shine  down,  i.  154,  6. 
vi-  shine  forth,  ii.  35,  7.  8  ;  v.  11,  1. 
hhid  s2)lit,  VII.  bhindtti  [Lat,  yjwd-o]. 

vi-  split  open,  i.  85,  10. 
bhisdk-tama,  m.  spv.  best  healer,  ii.  33, 

4  [bhisdj  healing]. 
bh.isd,j,  m.  physician,  ii.  33,  4. 
bhi "/ear,  I.  A.  bhdyate,  i.  85,  8  ;  ii.  12, 

13 ;    pf.    bibhaya,   v.   83,    2 ;    s   ao. 

dbhaisur,  viii.  48,  11. 
bhi-md,  a.  terrible,  i.  154,  2;   ii.  33,  11 

[bhi/ear]. 
bhur  quiver,  int.  jdrbhuriti,  v.  83,  5. 
bhuv-ana,  n.  creature,  i.  35,  2.  5.  6  ;  85, 

8;  154,  2.4;    160,  2.  3;   ii.  35,  2.8; 

vii.  61,  1  ;   ivorld,  ii.  33,  9 ;   v.  83,  2. 

4  ;  iv.  51,  5  ;  x.  168,  2.  4  [bhu  &e]. 
bhii  become,  be,  I.  bhdva,  i.  1,  9 ;    v.  83, 

7.  8  ;  ipv.,  X.  127,  6  ;  pr.  sb.,  viii.  48, 

2  ;  ipf.  dbhavat,  v.  11,  3.  4;  x.  135,  5. 

6  ;    come  into  being,  x.  90,  4 ;    pf.  ba- 

bhiava,  ii.  12,  9 ;    vii.  103,  7  ;    x.  34, 

12  ;  pf.  op.  babhuyat,  iv.  51,  4  ;  root 

ao.,  viii.  48,  3  ;    d,bliiavan,  vii.  61,  5  ; 

root    ao.    sb.    bhuvani,   vii.    86,   2 ; 

ipv.  bhutu,  iv.  50,  11  [cp.  Gk.  cpv-w, 

La,t.  ftt-i-t]. 
abhi-  be  superior  to  (ace),  iii.  59,  7. 
i,.  arise,  pf.,  x.  129,  6.  7;  168,  3. 
avis-  appear,  vii.  103,  8. 
sdm-  do  good  to  (dat.),  viii.  48,  4. 
bha-td,  pp.  been,  x.  90,  2  ;    n.  being,  x. 

9jO,  3. 
bhii-man,   n.   earth,   i.  85,  5  ;    vii.   86, 

1  ;    X.    90,     1.     14     [cp.    Gk.    </)C-/^a 

*  growth'], 
bhu-ri,  a.  great,  ii.  33,  9;    much,  ii.  33, 

12 ;  adv.  greatly,  i.  154,  6. 


bhiari-srnga,   a.    (Bv.)  many-horned,    i. 

154,  6. 
bhiir-ni,  a.  angry,  vii.  86,  7. 
bhus  strive,  I.  P.  bhusati  [extended  form 

of  bhu  be']. 
pdri-  surpass,  ii.  12,  1. 
bhr  bear  fill,  bibharti,  ii.  33,  10 ;    iii. 

59,  8  ;  hold,  iv.  50,  7  ;  viii.  29,  3.  4.  5 

[Gk.  (pkpoj,  Lat.  fero,  Arm.  berem,  01. 

berim,  Go.  baira]. 
V1-,  I.  bhara,  carry  hither  and  thither,  v. 

11,  4. 

Bhfg-u,   m.  pi.    a   family   of  ancient 

priests,  x.  14,  6. 
bhesaj-d,  a.  healing,  ii.  33, 7 ;  n. medicine, 

remedy,   ii.   33,  2.  4.    12.    13    [bhisdj 

healing], 
bhog-a,  m.  use,  x.  34,  3  [bhuj  enjoy], 
bhoj-d,  m.  liberal  man,  iv.  51,  3. 
bhoj-ana,  n.food,  v.  83_,10[bhuj  enjoy]. 
bhyas  =  bhi    fear,  I.'  A.  bhydsate,    ii. 

12,  1. 

bhraj  shine,  I.  A.  bhrajate. 

VI-  shine  forth,  i.  85,  4.  _ 
bhraja-mana,  pr.  pt.   A.   shining,   vii. 

63,4. 
bhra-tr,  m.  brother,  x.  34,  4  [Gk.  (ppdrwp, 

Lat.  f rater,    01.    brathir.   Go.  brothar, 

OSl.  bratrv^. 

Mah,  nidmh    be   great,   mdmhate   and 

mdhe  (3.  s.). 
sdm-  consecrate,  vii.  61,  6. 
maghd-vant,  m.  liberal  patron,  ii.  33,  14  ; 

35,  15  [magh-d  bounty  :  mah  be  great]. 
maghoni,  a.  f.  bounteous,  iv.  51,  3  [f.  of 

maghdvan]. 
mandiika,  m.  frog,  vii.  103,  1.  2.  4.  7. 

10.' 
raath-itd,    pp.   kindled  by  friction,  viii. 

48,  6. 

math-yd-mana,  pr.  pt.  ps.  being  rubbed, 

V.  11,  6. 
mad  rejoice,  I.  mdda,  in  (Ic),  i.  85,  1  ; 

154,  5  ;  in  (inst.),  154,  4  ;  x.  14,  3.  7 ; 

loith  (inst.),  x.  14,  10  ;    be  exhilarated, 

viii.  29,  7  ;  drink  with  exhilaration,  vii. 

49,  4  ;  cs.  madaya,  A.  rejoice,  x.  15, 
14  ;  in  (inst),  x.  14,  14  ;  (gen.),  i.  85, 
6  ;  ivith  (inst.),  x.  14,  5  ;  gladden,  x. 
34,  1  [Gk.  fiadooj,  Lat.  madeo  'drip'], 

radd-a,  in.  intoxication,  i.  85,  10  ;    viii. 

48,  6. 
mada-cyut,  a.  reeling  with  intoxication,  i. 

85,  7  [cyu  m.ove]. 


madant] 


243 


[masa 


mad-ant,   pr.    pt.  rejoicing,    iv.   50,    2 ; 

delighting  in  (inst.),  iii.  59,  3. 
m^dh-u,  n.  honey,  mead,  i.  154,  4.  5  ;  iv. 

50,  3  ;  viii.  48,  1  ;   x.  34,  7  ;  a.  sweet, 

i.  85,  6  [Gk.  n(9v,  Lith.  medu-s,  OSl. 

medu.  Eng.  mead]. 
m^dhu-mat-taraa,  spv.  a.  most  honied, 

V.  11,  5;  X.  14,  15. 
madhu-scut,  a,  (T p.) dripping  iviih  honey, 

distilling    sweetness,   vii.    49,    3    [scut 

drip']. 
madhya,  a.  middle,  vii.  49,  1.  3  ;    x.  15, 

14  [Lat.  mediu-s]. 
m.a>dh.ya,-mi,,spv._a,.  7niddlemost,  x.  15,  1. 
man  think,YIlI.  A.  manute,  viii.  29,  10 ; 

IV.  A.  manyate,viii.  48,  6  ;  x.  34,  13. 
m^n-as,  n.  mind,  x.  90,  13  ;  129,  4  ;  135, 

3  [Av.  mano,  Gk.  fievos]. 
manas-vant,  a.  ivise,  ii.  12,  1. 
man-a,  f.  jealousy,  ii.  33,  5  [man  think]. 
man-isa,  f.  thought,  vii.  71,6  ;  ivisdom,  x. 

129,  4  :  prayer,  v.  11,  5 ;  hymri  of  praise, 

V.  83,  10  [man  think], 

Mdn-u,  m.  an  ancient  sage,  ii.  33,  13. 
mano-ju,  a.  swift  as   thought,    i.   85,   4 

[mdnas  mind  +  ju  to  speed]. 
mdn-tra,  m.  hymn,  ii.  35,  2  ;   spell,  x. 

14,  4. 
mand  exhilarate,  I.  manda  :   is  ao.  A. 

dmandisatam,  vii.  103,  4. 
lid-   gladden,   pf.  mamanda,  ii.   33,  6 

[  =  mad  rejoice]. 
mand-as-and,  ao.  pt.  rejoicing,  iv.  50,  10 

[mand  =  mad  rejoice]. 
mand-ra,  a.  gladdening,  v.  11,  3  [raand 

exhilarate]. 
mandrd-jihva,  a.  (JBv.)  pleasant-tongued, 

iv.  50,  1. 
md.n-man,  n.  thought,  vii.  61,  6  ;  hymn, 

i.  154,  3  ;  vii.  61,  2  [man  think]. 
man-yu,  m.  intention^  vii.  61,  1  ;   wrath, 

vii.  86,  6  ;   viii.  48,  8  ;    x.  34,  8.  14 

[man  think]. 
raayo-bhu,a.  benificent,  ii.SS,  13  [may-as 

gladness  +  bhu  =  bhu  being  for  =  con- 
ducing to]. 
Mar-lit,  m.  pi.  the  storm  gods,  i.  85, 1. 

4-6.  8.  10.  12 ;  ii.  33,  1.  13  ;  v.  83,  6. 
mariit-vant,  a.  accompanied  by  the  Maruts, 

ii.  33,  6. 
mard-i-tf,  m.  one  kJio  pities,   x.    34,  3 

[mrd  be  gracious], 
raix'ta,,  m.  mortal,  iii.  59,  2  [Gk.  fiop-ro-s, 

Ppo-To-s '  mortal ',  Lat.  mor-ta  '  goddess 

of  death ']. 


mart-ya,  a.  mortal;  m.  mortal  man,  i.  35, 

2  ;  vii.  61, 1 ;  71,  2  ;  viii.  48,  1.  3.  12 ; 

X.  15,  7. 
marmrjyd-mana,    pr.   pt.    int.    making 

bright,  ii.  35,  4  [mrj  wipe]. 
mdh,  a.  great,  ii.  33,  8 ;  G.  mahds,  iv. 

50,  4  ;  f.  -1,  V.  11,  5  [Av.  mas  'great' ; 

from  mah  be  great]. 
mah-5.n,  m.  greatness,  ii.   12,   1  ;   35,  2 

[mah  be  great]. 
mah-dnt,  a.  great,  iii.  59,  5  ;    v.  11,  6  ; 

83,  8  ;  vii.  63,  2 ;  x.  34,  12  [pr.  pt.  of 

mah  be  great]. 
maha-vadha,  a.   (Bv.)  having  a  mighty 

weapon,  v.  83,  2. 
mah-i,  a.  g^-eat,  i.  160,  5  ;  ii.  12,  10  ;  v. 

83,  5  ;  viii.  29,  10  [mah  be  great:]. 
mahi-tva,  n.  greatness,  vii.  61,  4. 
mahi-tvand,  n.  greatness,  i.  85,  7. 
mah-in,  a.,  f.  -i,  great,  i.  160,  2.  5. 
mah-i-man,m.  greatness,  i.  85,  2;  ii.  35, 

9  ;  iii.  59,  7  ;  vii.  86,  1  ;  x.  90,  3.  16  ; 

168,  1  ;  power,  x.  129,  3  ;  -pi. powers,  x. 

129,^5. 
mah-i,  a.  f.  great,  ii.  33,  8.  14  ;  x.  14,  1 

[mah  be  great]. 
md-hyam,  prs.  prn.   D.  to  me,  x.  34,  1. 

2  [cp.  Lat.  mihi]. 
ma  measure.  III.  A.  mfmite. 
VI-  measure  out:  pf.  vi-mame, i.  154,  1. 

3;  160,  4;  ii.  12,  2. 
ma,  enc.  prs.  prn.  A.  me,  ii.  33,  6.  7  ;  viii. 

48,  53.  6.  10  ;  x.  34,  1.  2  ;  127,  7  [Lat. 

me,  Eng.  me]. 
ma,  proh.  pel.  not,  ii.  33,  1.  4^.  5  ;   viii. 

48,  8.  142 ;    X.  15,  6  ;   34,  13.  14  [Gk. 

/j.rj  'not ']. 
ma-kis,  proh.  prn.  pel.  not  any  one,  vi. 

54,  7  [Gk.  fx^-Tis  '  no  one ']. 
ma-kim,   proh.    prn.    pel.    no    one,    vi. 

54,  72. 
Matali,  m.  a  divine  being,  x.  14,  3. 
ma-tf,  f.  mother,  i.  160,  2  ;   v.  11,  3  ;   x. 

34,  4.  10  [Gk.  iJ.TjTT)p,   Lat.  mater,  01. 

mdthir,  Eng.  another]. 
madhvi,  m.  du.  lovers  of  honey,  vii.  71,  2 

[raadhu  honey]. 
manusa,  a.  human  ;    m.  man,  vii.  63,  1 

[mdnus  man]. 
mam,  prs.  prn.  A.  me,  vii.  49,  1-4. 
ma-ya,  f.  mysterious  power ^  i.  160,  3  [ma 

make]. 
ma-yii,     a,     lowing,    vii.    108,    2    [ma 

belloio] . 
mas-a,  m.  month,  vii.  61,  4  [mas  moon 


R    2 


mita] 


244 


[yad 


mi-ta,  pp.  set  up,  iv.  51,  2  [mi  set  up']. 
mita-jnu,  a.  {Hy.)  Jirm-kneed,  iii.  59,  3. 
Mi-trd,,  m.  a  sun  god,  iii.  59,  1-9  ;  vii. 

61,  4  ;    63,  1.  6  ;    n.  friendship,  x.  34, 

14. 
Mitra-Vdruna,  du.  cd.  Mitra  and  Varuna, 

i.  35,  1  ;  vii.  61,  2.  3.  6.  7  ;  63,  5.  " 
mi  damage,  IX.  minati  [cp.  Gk.  ixi-vv-oj, 

Lat.  mi-nu-o'].  . 
a-  diminish,  ii.  12,  5. 
pra-  infringe,  vii.  63,  3  ;    103,  9  ;    viii. 

48,  9.  ^ 
midh-vams,  a.  bounteous,  ii.  33,  14;  vii. 

86,  7  [unred.  pf,  pt.,  probably  from 

mih  rain']. 
miikha,  n.  mouth,  x.  90,  11-13. 
muc  release,  VI.  munca :  ppf.  amumuk- 

tam,  vii.  71,  5._ 
mud  be  merry,  I.  A.  moda. 
prd,ti-  exult,  v.  83,  9. 
}nrg-d,  m.  beast,  i.  154,  2  ;  ii.  33,  11. 
mrj  toi2)c,  II.  marjmi. 

sam-  rub  bright,  ii,  35,  12. 
mrd  be  gracious,  VI.  mrla,  ii.  33,  11.  14; 

viii.  48,  9  ;  x.  34,  14  ;  cs.  mrlaya,  id., 

viii.  48,  8. 
mrlay-aku,  a.  merciful,  ii.  33,  7  [mrd  be 

gracious]. 
mrl-ika,  n.  mercy,  vii.  86,  2;   viii.  48,  12 

[mrd  be  gracious]. 
mr-tyu,  m.  death,  x.  129,  2  [mr  die]. 
mrs  touch,  VI.  mrsa. 
pdri-  embrace,  x.  34,  4. 
mrs  fee  heedless,  IV.  mrsya. 

SbTpi-  forget,  vi.  54,  4. 
me,  enc.  prs.  prn.  D.  to  me,  vii.  63,  3  ; 

86,  3.  4;  X.  34, 13  ;  G.  of  me,  ii.  35,  1 ; 

vii.  86,  2  ;  viii.  29,  2  [Gk.  fioi]. 
miaujavata,  a.  coming  from  Mujavant,  x. 

34,  1. 

Ya,  rel.  prn.  who,  which,  that:  N.  yas,  i. 

35,  6  ;  154, 1\  3.  4  ;  160,  4  ;  ii.  12,  I- 
7.  9-15  ;  33,5.  7  ;  iii.  59,  2.  7  ;  iv.50, 

I.  7.  9 ;  vi.  54,  1.  2.  4 ;  vii.  61,  1  ;  63, 
1. 3  ;  vii.  71,  4';  86, 1 ;  viii.  48,  10^.  12  ; 
X.  14,  5  ;  34,  12  ;  129,  7  ;  f.  ya,  iv.  50, 
3  ;  n.  ydd,  i.  1,6;  ii.  35,  15  ;  vii.  61, 
2  ;  63,  2  ;  108,  5.  7  ;  x.  15,  6  ;  90,  23. 
12  ;  129,  1.  3.  4  ;  135,  7  ;  with  kim  ca 
whatever,  v.  83,  9  ;  A.  yd,m,  i.  1,  4  ;  ii. 
12.  5.  7.  9  ;  35,  11  ;  viii.  48,  1  ;  x,  135, 
3.  4  ;  I.  y^na,  i.  160,  5  ;  ii.  12,  4  ;  iv. 
51,  4  ;  f.  ydya,  iv.  51,  6  ;  Ab.  ydsmad, 

II.  12,  9  ;  G.  ydsya,  i.  154,  2  ;    ii.  12, 


1.  7*.  142  .  35^  7  .  V  83,  43 ;  vii.  61, 
2  ;  X.  34,  4  ;  f.  yasyas,  x.  127,  4  ;  L. 
yasmin,  iv.  50,  8 ;  x.  135,  1 ;  du.  ydu, 
X.  14,  11  ;  pi.  N.  y6,  i.  35,  11  ;  85,  1. 

4  ;  iv.  50,  2  ;  x.  14,  3.  10 ;  15,  1-4.  8- 
10.  132.  142  ;  90,  7.  8  ;  with  k4  ivhat- 
ever,  x.  90,  10  ;  f.  yas,  vii.  49,  1.  2.  3; 
n.  yani,  ii.  33,  13  ;  ya,  i.  85,  12  ;  ii. 
33,  133;  iv.  50,  9  ;  vii.  86,  5  ;  A.  m. 
yan,  x.  14,  3  ;  15,  13^  ;  G.  f.  yasam, 
vii.  49,  3  ;  L.  f.  yasu,  iv.  51,  7  ;  vii. 
49,  44  ;  61,  5. 

yaks-d,  n.  mystery,  vii.  61,  5. 

yaj  sacrifice,  I.  ydja ;   ipf.  ayajanta,  x. 

90,  7.  16. 
yaj-atd,  a.  adorable,  i.  35,  3.  4  ;  ii.  33, 10 

[Av.  yazata  ;  from  yaj  worship], 
yaj-dtha,    m.    sacrifice,    v.    11,    2    [yaj 

worship] . 
ydja-mana,  m.  sacrificer,  vi.  54,  6  [pr. 

pt.  A.  of  y9j  ivorship]. 
yaj-us,    n.   sacrificial  formula,  x.   90,   9 

[yaj  worship], 
yaj-nd,  m.  ivorship,  sacrifice,  i.  1,  1.  4  ; 

ii.  35,  12 ;   iv.  50,  6.  10 ;   v.  11,  2.  4  ; 

vii.  61,6.  7;  x.  14,5.13;  15,  6.  13  ; 

90,  7-9.  15.162  [Av.  yasna,  Gk.  dyvo-s]. 
yajiid-ketu,  a.  (Bv.)  whose  token  is  sacri- 
fice, iv.  51,  11. 
yajddL-manman,  a.  (Bv.)  ivhose  heart  is 

set  on  sacrifice,  vii.  61,  4. 
yajn-iya,  a.  worthy  of  worship,  holy,  iii. 
,59,   4  ;    adorable,   x.    14,  5.   6    [yajiia 

ivorship]. 
yat  array  oneself,  I.  ydta  :  pf.  1.  85,  8  ; 

cs.   yatdya   marshal,   stir,  iii.  59,   1  ; 

clear  ofi]  x.  127,  7. 
ya-tas,  adv.  whence,  x.  129,  6.  7  [prn. 

root  yd]. 
yd-ti,  prn.  how  many,  x.  15,  13  [prn. 

root  yd]. 
yd-tra,  rel.  adv.  where,  i.  154,  5.  6  ;  vii. 

63,  5  ;  viii.  29,  7  ;  48,  11 ;  x.  14,  2.  7 ; 

90,  16  [prn.  root  yd]. 
yd-tha,  rel.  adv.  how^  x.  135, 5.  6 ;  so  that, 

ii.  33, 15  ;  unaccented  =  iva  like,  viii. 

29,  6  [prn.  root  yd]. 
yatha-vasdm,  adv.  according  to  (thy,  hi.s) 

iDill,    X.    15,    14 ;    168,    4    [vdsa,   m. 

ivillT]. 
yd-d,  cj.  lohen,  i.  85,  3.  4.  5.  7.  9  ;  iv.  51, 

6  ;  V.  83,  2-4.  9  ;  vii.  103,  2-5  ;  x.  34, 

5  ;  90,  6.  11.  15  ;  in  order  that,  vii.  71, 
4  ;  .so  that,  vii.  86,  4  ;  since,  i.  160,  2  ; 
if,  viii.  48,  9  [n.  of  rel.  yd]. 


yadi  va] 


245 


[ra 


yad-i  va,  cj.  whether,  x.  129,  7  ;■  or,  or  else, 

ibid,  [ya-d-i  if,  rel.  jidv.  +  va  or']. 
y-dnt,  pr.  pt.  going,  vii.  61,  3  [i  go"]. 
yam  extend,  bestow,  I.  yacha,  iv.  51,  10 ; 
V.  83, 5  ;  pf.  A.  yeraire  submit  to  (dat.), 
iii.  59,  8  ;  s  ao.  bestow  on  (dat.),  ii.  35, 
15*. 
adhi-  exte^id  to  (dat.),  i.  85,  12. 
a-  guide  to  (Ic),  root  ao.  inj.  yamat,  x. 

14,  14. 
ni-  bestow,  iv.  50,  10. 
prd-  present  a  share  of  (gen.),  x.  15,  7. 
vi-  extend  to,  i.  85,  12. 
Yam-a,  m.  god  of  the  dead,  i.  35,  6  ;  x, 

14,  1-5.  7-16;  15,  8;  135,  1.  7. 
yas-ds,  a.  glorious,  i.  ],  3;  iv.  51,  11; 

viii.  48,  5. 
yahvi,  f.  swift  one,  ii.  33,  9  ;  35,  14. 
ya  go,  II.  yati,.i.  35,  33.  10  ;  vii.  49,  3  ; 
X.  168,  1. 
a-  come,  i.  35,  2  ;  x.  15,  9. 
upa  a-  come  hither,  vii.  71,  2. 
a  upa  come  hither  to,  vii.  71,  4. 
pari  pra-  proceed  around,  iv.  51,  5. 
yataydj-jana,  a.  (gov.  cd.)  stirring  men, 
iii.  59,  5  [yatdyant,  pr.  pt.  cs.  of  yat 
array  oneself + j^na,  man], 
yatu-dhana,  m.  sorcerer,  i.  35,  10  [yatii, 
m.  sorcery  +  dhana  practising  from  dha 
put,  ^o]. 
ya-ma,  m.  course,  iv.  51,  4  [ya  go]. 
ya-man,  n.  course,  i.  85,  1  ;  approach,  x. 

127,  4  [ya  go]. 
yu  separate.  III.  yuy6ti,  ii.  33,  1.3;  vii. 
71,  1.  2  ;  s  ao.  depart  from  (ab.),  ii.  33. 
9 ;  cs.  yavdya  save  from,  viii.  48,  5 ; 
yavaya  ivard  off,  x.  127,  6^. 
yuk-td,  pp.  yoked,  vii.  63,  2  [yuj  yoke, 
Gk.    ^cvKTo-s,     Lat,     iunctu-s,     Lith. 
jiinkta-s']. 
.  yukt^-gravan,  a.  (Bv.)  ivho  has  to  ivork 
the  stones,  ii.  12,  6. 
yuj   yoke,  VII.  yundkti :    pf.  yuyuj^, 
X.  34,    11  ;    rt.  ao.   ayugdhvam,   i. 
85,  4. 
prd-  yoke  in  front,  i.  85,  5. 
yudhya-mana,  pr.  pt.  A.  fighting ;    m. 

fighter,  ii.  12,  9  [yudh  fight]. 
yuyudh-i,  m.  warrior,  i.  85,  8  [from  red. 

stem  of  yudh  fight], 
yuva-ti,  f.  young  maiden,  ii.  35,  4,  11  [f. 

of  yuvan  youth]. 
yuv-an,  a.  young,  ii.  33,  11  ;  m.  youth,  ii. 

35,  4  [Lat.  iuven-i-s]. 
yuv-6.m,  prs.  prn.  N.  you  two,  vii.  71,5; 


dat.  yuvd,bhyam  to  yoti  two,  vii.  61,  7 

[=  yu-  +  araj. 
yuva-yii,  a.  addressed  to  you,  vii.  71,  7. 
yuy-am,  prs.  prn.  pi.  N.  you,  iv.  51,  5  ; 

vii.  61,  7  ;    63,  6  ;    71,  6  ;    86,  8  [for 

yus-dm,  Av.  yu'^s,  yiisem.  Go.  yus], 
yog- a,    m.    acquisition,   vii.    86,   8    [yuj 

yoke] . 
yoj-ana,  n.  league,  i.  35,  8  [_yoking  from 

yuj  yoke]. 
yo-ni,  m.  womb,  ii.  35,  10  ;  abode,  iv.  50, 

2 ;   X.  34,   11  ;    receptacle,  viii.    29,    2 

[holder  fvoxa  yu  hold]. 
yos-a,  f.  woman,  x.  168,  2. 
yos,  n.  blessing,  ii.  33,  13 ;  x.  15,  4. 

Kamh  hasten,  I.  r^mha  ;   cs.  ramhdya 

cause  to  speed,  i.  85,  5. 
raks  protect,  I.  rdksa,  i.  35,  11  ;  160,  2  ; 

iv.  50,  2  ;  vi.  54,  5  ;   viii.  48,  5  [Gk. 

d\€^oD  'ward  oft'']._ 
raksa-mana,  pr.pt.  A,%)rotecting,  vii.  61, 

3  [raks  protect]. 
raks-as,  m.  demon,  i.  35,  10  ;  v.  83,  2. 
raks-i-tr,  m.  guardian,  x.  14,  11  [raks 

protect] . 
raghu-pdtvan,  a.  (Tp.)  flying  swiftly,  i. 

85,  6  [raghu  sivift:  Gk.  kXaxv-s]. 
raghu-syad,    a.,  sivift- gliding,    i.    85,    6 

[raghu  swift  +  syand  run]. 
raj-as,  n.  space,  air,  i.  35,  4.  9 ;  154,  1  ; 

160, 1.  4  ;  X.  15,  2  ;  129,  1  [Gk.  €pe)3os, 

Go.  riqis-a], 
ran-ya,  a.  glorious,  i.  85, 10  [ran  rejoice], 
rdi-tna,  n.  gift,  treasure,  i.  35,8  [rsi.give]. 
ratna-dha,  a.  (Tp.)  bestowing  treasure,  i. 

1,1. 
rd-tha,  m.  car,  i.  35,  2.  4.  5 ;   85,  4.  5  ; 

ii.  12,  7.  8  ;  V.  83,  3.  7  ;  vii.  71,  2-4; 

viii.  48,  5  ;  x.  135,  3-5  ;  168,  1  [r  go]. 
rath-ya,  a.  belonging  to  a  car,  i.  35,  6. 
rad  dig,  I.  rdda:  pf.  rarada,  vii.  49,  1. 
radh-ra,  a.  rich,  ii.  12,  6  [radh  succeed]. 
randh  make  subject,  IV.  P.  rddhya :  red. 

ao.,  ii.  33,  5. 
rap-as,  n.  bodily  injury,  ii.  33,  3.  7. 
ram  set  at  rest,  IX.  ramnati :  ipf.  ii.  12, 

2 ;  I.  A.  rama  rejoice  in  (Ic),  x.  34,  13. 
ray-i,  m.  ivealth,  i.  1,  3  ;  85,  12  ;  iv.  50, 

6.  10 ;  51,  10  ;  viii.  48,  13  ;  x.  15,  7. 

11  [probably  from  ri  =  reduced  form 

of  ra  give]. 
r^v-a,  m.  roar,  iv.  50,  1.  4.  5  [ru  C7~y]. 
ra^-mi,  m.  ray,  i.  35,  7  ;  cord,  x.  129,  5. 
ra  give,  II.  rati  ;  2.  ind.  rasi  =  ipv.,  ii. 


raj] 


246 


[vadant 


33,  12  ;  III.  ipv.  2.  pi.  raridhvam,  v. 

83,  6. 
raj  rule,  over  (gen.),  I.  P.  rajati,  i.  1,  8. 
raj-an,  m.  king,  i.  85,  8  ;   iii.  59,  4  ;   iv. 

50,  7.  9  ;  vii.  49,  3.  4  ;  86,  5  ;  viii.  48, 
7.  8  ;  X.  14,  1.  4.  7.  11.  15  ;  34,  8. 12  ; 
168,  2  [raj  rule,  Lat.  rego-']. 

raj-ant,  pr.  pt.  ruling  over  (gen.),  i.  1,  8 

[raj  rwZe]. 
rajan-y^,  a.  royal ;   m.  warrior  (earliest 

name  of  the  second  caste),  x.  90,  12. 
ratri,  f.  night,  i.  35,   1  ;    x.  127,  1.  8 ; 

129,  2. 
radh-as,  n.  gi/t,  blessing,  ii.  12,  14  [radh 

gratify']. 
radho-d^ya,  n.  hedoical  of  wealth,  iv.  51, 

3  [d6ya,  gdv.  to  he  given  from  da  give], 
ri  release,  IX.  rinati,  ii.  12,  3. 

dnu-  fow  along,  i.  85,  3. 
ric  leave,  VII.  P.  rindkti,  vii.  71,  1  [Gk. 

KfiTTQj,  Lat.  linquoi. 
ati-  extend  beyond :  ps.  ipf.  aricyata,  x. 

90,  5. 
ris,  f.  injury,  ii.  35,  6. 
ris  be  hurt,  TV.  risyati,  vi.  54,  3 ;  a  ao. 

inj.,  vi.  54,  7.9;  injure,  viii.  48,  10. 
rih  kiss,  II.  r6dhi,  ii.  33,  13. 
ruk-md,  m.  golden  gem,  vii.  63,  4  [rue 

shine]. 
rue  shine,  I.  roca ;  cs.  roeaya  cause  to 

shine,  viii.  29,  10. 
rue-an^,    rt.    ao.    pt.   A.  beaming,    iv. 

51,  9. 

ruj  burst,  VI.  P.  ruja  :    pf.  ruroja,  iv. 

50,  5. 
ruj-dnt,  pr.  pt.  shattering,  x.  168,  1. 
Rud-ra,  m.  name  of  a  god,  i.  85,  i  ;   ii. 

33,  1-9.  11-13.  15 ;  pi.  =  sons  of 
Rudra,  the  Marufs,  i,  85,  2  [rud  cry, 
howl]. 

rudh  obstruct,.YlI.  runaddhi,  runddh^, 
X.  34,  3. 
dpa-  drive  away :   rt.  ao.  arodham,  x. 

34,  3. 

rus-ant,  pr.  pt.  gleaming,  iv.  51,  9. 
ruh  groio,  I.  r6hati,  rohate. 
dti-  grow  beyond  (ace),  x.  90,  2. 
a-  rise  tip  in  (ace),  viii.  48,  11. 
riipd,  n.form,  x.  168,  4  ;  beauty,  i.  160,  2. 
re-nu,  m.  dust,  x.  168,  1  [perhaps  from 

ri  run  =  disperse]. 
r6-tas,  n.  seed,  v.  83,  1.  4  ;   x.   129,  4 

[ri  flow]. 
reto-dha,  m.  impregnator,  x.  129,  5  [r6- 
taa  seed  +  dha  placing]. 


rebh-fi.,  m.  singer,  vii.  63,  3  [ribh  sing], 
revat,  adv.  bountij'ully,  ii.  35,  4  [n.  of 

revant]. 
re-vat-i,    f.    wealthy,    iv.    51,    4    [f.    of 

revant]. 
re-vdnt,  a.  wealthy,  viii.  48,  6  [re  =  rai 

wealth]. 
rodas-i,  f.  du.  the  two  worlds  (  =  heaven 

and  earth),  i.  85,   1  ;  160,  2.  4;  ii. 

12,  1  ;  vii.  64,  4  ;  86,  1. 
rai,  m.  wealth,  vi.  54,  8  ;    vii.    86,   7 ; 

viii.    48,    2  ;    G.   ray^s,   viii.   48,    7 

[bestowal  from  ra  give  ;  Lat.  re-s]. 
Rauhind,  m.  name  of  a  demon,  ii.  12, 12 

[metronymic:  son  of  Rohirii]. 

Lak-s^,   n.    stake   (at   play),    ii.    12,   4 

[token,  mark  :  lag  attach]. 
lok-d,  m.  place,  x.  14,  9  ;  world,  x.  90, 

14  [bright  space  =  rok-4  light;  cp.  Gk. 

XtvKd-s  '  white',  Lat.  lux,  luc-is]. 

Vag-nu,   m.    sound,    vii.    103,    2    [vac 

speak\ 
vae  utter.  III.  P.  vfvakti  ;  ao.  op.,  ii. 

35,  2  ;  speak,  ps.  ueydte,  x.  90,  11  ; 

135,  7  [Lat.  voc-dre  'call'], 
ddhi-  speak  for  (dat.),  viii.  48,  14. 
prd-  proclaim,   i.    154,   1  ;   vii.   86,  4  ; 

declare,  x.  129,  6. 
vde-as,  n.  speech,  v.  11,   5  [vac  speak; 

Gk.  Ittos]. 
vaeas-ya,  f.  eloquence,  ii.  35,  1. 
vdj-ra,  m.  thunderbolt,  i.  85, 9  ;  viii.  29,  4 

[vaj  be  strong  ;  Av.  vazra  '  club  ']. 
vajra-biihu,  a.  (Bv.)  bearing  a  bolt  in  his 

arm,  ii.  12,  12.  13  ;  33,  3. 
vajra-hasta,  a.  (Bv.)  having  a  bolt  in  his 

hand,  ii.  12,  13. 
vajr-in,  m.  bearer  of  the  bolt,  vii.  49,  1. 
vatsl,  m.  calf,  vii.  86,  5  [yearling  from 

*vatas,  Gk.  firos  year,  Lat.  vetus  in 

vetus-tas  'age']. 
vats-in,  a.,  f.  -i,  accompanied  by  calves, 

vii.  103,  2. 
vad  speak,  I.  v^da,  ii.  33,  15 ;  op.  ii. 

35,  15;  vii.  103,  5« ;  x.  34,  12. 
dcha-  invoke,  v.  83,  1. 
a-  ^dter,  ii.  12,  15  ;  viii.  48,  14. 
prd-  ritter  forth,  is  ao.,  avadisur,  vii. 

103,  1. 
sdm-  converse  about  (ace.)  ivith  (inst.), 

vii.  86,  2. 
vdd-ant,   pr.  pt.  speaking,   vii.   103,  3. 

6.  7. 


van] 


247 


[va 


van  win,  VIII.   vandti  win  [Eng.  win  ; 

cp.  Lat.  ven-ia  'favour']. 
a-,  ds.  vivasa  seek  to  ivin,  ii.  33,  6  ;  v. 

83,  1. 
van- lis,    m.    enetny,    iv.    50,    11    [eager, 

rival :  van  win']. 
v^ne-vane,  Ic.   itv.  cd.  in  every,  wood,  v. 

11,  6. 

vand  praise,   I.   A.   vandate,   iv.  50,   7 

[nasalized  form  of  vad], 
pari-  extol,  with  (inst.),_ii.  33,  12. 
vanda-mana,  pr.  pt.   A,  approving,   ii. 

33.  12. 
vap  streio,  I.  vdpati,  vapate. 

nl-  lay  low,  ii.  33,  11. 
vapus-ya,  a.  fair,  i.  160,  2  [vapus,  n. 

beautiful  appearance]. 
vay-dm,  prs.  prn.  N.  pi.  we,  i.  1,  7  ;   ii. 

12,  15  ;  iii,  59,  3.  4  ;  iv.   50,  6 ;  51, 
11  ;  vi.  54,  8.  9  ;  vii.  86,  5  ;  viii.  48,  9. 

13,  14  ;    X.  14,  6  ;  127,  4  [Av.  vaem, 
Go.  ivais,  Eng.  we]. 

vdy-as,  n.  force,  ii.   33,  6  ;    viii.  48,  1 

[food,  strength  :  vi  enjoy]. 
vay-a,  f.  offshoot,  ii.  35,  8. 
vayuna-vat,   a.  clear,   iv.  51,   1    [vay- 

lina]. 
vayo-dha,  m.  bestoiver  of  strength,  viii. 

48,  15  [vdyas /orce  +  dha  bestowing]. 
v^r-i-man,   n.  expanse,   iii.    59,    3    [vr 

cover]. 
vdr-i-vas,    n.    wide    space,    vii.   63,    6  ; 

prosperity,  iv.  50,  9  [breadth,  freedom  : 

vr  cover], 
varivo-vit-tara,   cpv,    m.   best  finder  of 

relief,  best  banisher  of  care,  viii.  48,  1 

[vdrivas  +  vid  find]. 
v^r-iyas,  cpv.   a.   wider,  ii.   12,  2  [uru 

wide]. 
Var-una,  m.  vii.  49,  3.  4  ;  61,  1.  4  ;  63, 

1.  6  \  86,  2.  3-.  4.  6.  8  ;  x.  14,  7  [Gk. 

ovpavo-s  '  heaven ' ;  vr  cover,  encompass], 
vdr-na,   m.   colour,    ii.  12,    4    [coating  : 

vr  cover]. 
v^rta-mana,  pr.  pt.  A.,  with  a  rolling 

hither,  i.  35,  2  [vrt  turn], 
vdrt-man,  n.  track,  i.  85,  3  [vrt  turn]. 
vardh-ana,   n.  strengthening,   ii.   12,    14 

[vrdh  increase]. 
vfi,rdha-inana,  pr.  pt.  A.  growing,  i.  1 , 

8  [vrdh  groiv], 
vdrvrt-ana,  pr.  pt.  A.  int.  rolling  about, 

X.  34,  1  [vrt  turn], 
vars-d,  n.  rain,  v.  83,  10  [vrs  rain], 
vars-ya,  a.  rainy,  v.  83,  3'^. ' 


val-d,  m.  enclosure,  cave,  iv.  50,  5  [vr 

cover], 
valgii-ya,  den.  honour,  iv.  50,  7, 
vas  desire,  II.  vdsti,  s.  1.  vdsmi,  ii.  33, 

13 ;   pi.  1.  usmasi,  i.  154,  6. 
,1.  vas  shine,  VI.  P.  uchati :  pf.  pi.  2. 

usa,  iv.  51,  4  [Av.  usaiti  'shines']. 

2.  vas  wear,  II.  A.  vdste  [cp.  Gk.  IV- 
vvfxi  =  feavv/xi,  AS.  werian,  Eng.  wear], 

abhi-,  cs.  clothe,  i.  160,  2, 

3.  vas  dwell,  I.  P.  vasati  [AS.  wesan  'be\ 
Eng.  was ;  in  Gk.  darv  =  fdarv]. 

pra-  go  on  journeys,  viii.  29,  8. 
vas,  enc.  prs.  prn.  A.  you,  i.  85,  6  ;  iv. 

51,  10.  11  ;  D.  to  or  for  you,  i.  85,  6. 

12 ;  iv.  51,  4 ;  x.  15,  4.  6 ;  G.  of  you, 

ii.  33,  13  ;  x.  34,  12.  14  [Av.  w,  Lat. 

vos], 
vas-ati,   f.   abode,  nest,   x.   127,   4   [vas 

dwell]. 
vas-ant-d,   m.    spring,   x.    90,    6    [vas 

shine], 
vas- ana,   pr.  pt.  A.    clothing  oneself  in 

(ace),  ii.  35,  9  [2.  vas  wear]. 
vas-istha,  spv.  a.  best ;    in.  name  of  a 

seer,  vii.  86,  5 ;  pi.  a  family  of  ancient 

seers,  x.  15,  8  [vas  shine], 
v6,s-u,  n.  wealth,  vi.  54,  4  ;  vii.  103,  10  ; 

X.  15,  7  [vas  shine]. 
vasu-d6ya,  n.  granting  of  wealth,  ii.  33,  7. 
vasu-mant,  a.  laden  loith  wealth,  vii.  71, 

3.  4. 
vasn-ya,  a.  for  sale,  x.  34,  3  [vasni,  n. 

price,  Gk.  wvo-s  =  fwa-vo-^  '  purchase 

price  ',  Lat.  venu-m  =  ves-num]. 
vas-yas,  ace.  adv.  for  greater  welfare,  viii. 

48,  9  [cpv.  of  vasu  good]. 
v^s-yams,  cpv.  a.  wealthier,  viii.  48,  6 

[cpv.  of  vas-u]. 
vah  carry,  draw,  drive,  I.  vdha,  vii.  63, 

2  ;  s  ao.  dvat,  x.  15,  12  [Lat.  veh-ere, 

Eng.  weigh], 
dnu-  drive  after  :  pf.  anuhir^,  x.  15,  8. 
a-  bring,  i.  1,  2  ;  85,  6  ;  vii.   71,  3  ;  x. 

14,  4. 
ni-  bring  :  pf.  uhathur,  vii.  71,  5. 
vdh-ant,  pr.  pt.  carrying,  i.  35,  5 ;  bear- 
ing, ii.  35,  9  ;  bringing,  vii.  71,  2. 
vdh-ant-i,  pr.  pt.  f.  bringing,  ii.  35,  14. 
vah-ni,  m.  driver,  i.  160,  3  [vah  drive]. 
va   blow,    II.    P.    vati    [Av.    vaiti,    Gk. 

drjai  =  d-frj-oi ;  cf.  Go.  waian,  German 

wehen  'blow'], 
prd-  blow  forth,  v.  83,  4. 
va,  enc.  cj.  or,  iv.  51 ,  4  ;  x.  15,  2  [Lat.  ve]. 


vac] 


248 


[vi^va 


vac,  f.  voice,  vii.  103,  1.  4.  5.  6.  8  ;  x.  34, 

5  [vac  speak ;  Lat.  vox  =  voc-.s]. 
vaj-a,  m.  conflict,  i.  85,  5  ;  booiij,  ii.  12, 

15 ;  vi,  54,  5  [vaj  be  strong], 
vaja-yu,  a.  desirous  of  gain,  ii.  35,  1. 
vaj -in,  a.  victorious,  x.  34,  4  [vaja]. 
vand,  m.  pipe,  i.  85,  10. 
va-ta,  m.  wind,  v.  83,  4 ;  x.  168,  1.  2.  4 

[va  blotv  ;  cp,  Lat.  ven-tu-s,  Gk.  drjTrj-s], 
vam,  enc.  prs.  prn.  du.  A.  you  tico,  iv. 

50,  10  ;    vii.  61,  6^  ;    63,   5  ;     71,  1  ; 

D.  for  you  tivo,  vii.  61,  2.  5- ;  vii.  71, 

4  ;  G.  of  you  two,  i.  154,  6  ;  iv.  50,  11  ; 

vii.  61,'l ;  71,  3,  4. 
va-md,  n.  tvealth,  vii.  71,  2  [va  =  van 

tvin~\. 
vayav-ya,  a.  relating  to  the  loind,  aerial, 

X.  90,  8  [vayu]. 
va-yii,  m.  ivind,  x.  90,  13  [va  bloio']. 
var-ya,  gdv.  desirable,  i.  35,  8  [vr  c7toose]. 
vavas-at,  pr.  pt.  int.  lowing,  iv.  50,  5 

[vas  Zozo]. 
vavrdh-ana,  pr.  pt.  A.  having  grown,  x. 

14,  3  [vrdh  groic], 
vasi,  f.  axe,  viii.  29,  3. 

vasar-d,  a.  vernal,  viii.  48,  7  [*vasar 
spring  ;  Gk.  eap,  Lith.  vasarcc]. 

vas-tu,  n.  abode,  i.  154,  6  [vas  divell  : 
Gk.  facTv]. 

VI,  m.  bird,  i.  85,  7  ;  viii.  29,  8  ;  pi.  N. 
vdyas,  X.  127,  4  [Av.  vi-,  Lat.  avis']. 

vi-kraraana,  n,  wide  stride,  i.  154,  2  ;  x. 

15,  3. 

vi-cakramana,  pf.  pt.  A.  having  strode 

out,  i.  154,  1  [kram  stride]. 
vi-carsani,  a.  active,  i.  35,  9. 
vij,  pi.  stake  at  play,  ii.  12,  5. 
vi-tata,   pp.    extended,    x.    129,   5   [tan 

stretch], 
vi-tardm,  adv.  far  away,  ii.  33.  2  [cpv. 

of  prp.  VI  aioay]. 
vit-ta,  n.  properly,  x.  34,  13  [pp.  ofvid 

find,  acquire :  acquisition]. 

1.  vid  knoiv,  II.  P.  v^tti  ;  i)r.  sb.  knoic  of 
(gen.),  ii.  35,  2  ;  ipv.  viddhi,  viii.  48, 
8  ;  pf.  v6da,  viii.  29,  6  ;  s.  2.  v^ttha, 
x.  15,  13  ;  3.  v6da,  x.  129,  6^.  72  ;  pi. 
1.  vidma,  x.  15,  13  [Gk.  olSa,  'iSfx^v  ; 
AS.  ic  wdt,  ive  witon  ;  Eiig.  /  ivot  ;  Lat. 
vid-ere  'sec ']. 

prd-  know,  x.  15,  13. 

2.  vid  find,  VI.  vindd,  vi.  54,  4 ;  x.  31, 
3' ;  pf.  viveda,  x.  14,  2  ;  a  ao.,  v.  83, 
10  ;  viii.  48,  3. 

knM'  find  out,  ii.  12,  U  ;  v.  11,  6. 


a-,  s  ao.  win  hither,  x.  15,  3, 
nis-  find  out,  x.  129,  4. 
vid-dtha,  m.  divine  ivorship,  i.  85,  1  ;  ii. 

12,  15  ;    33,  15  ;  35,  15  ;    viii.  48,  14 

[vidh  worship]. 
vi-dyut,  f.  lightning,  ii.  35,  9  ;  v.  83,  4 

[vi  afar  +  dyut  shine], 
vid-vams,  unred.  pf.  pt.  knowing,  vi.  54, 

1  [Gk.  pei5(ijs]. 
vidh  ivorship,  VI.  vidha,  ii.  35,  12  ;   iv. 

50,  6  ;   vi.  54,  4 ;  viii.  48,  12.  13  ;  x. 

168,  4. 
prati-  'pay  worship  to,  vii.  63,  5. 
vidh-ant,  pr.  pt.  m.  worshipper,  ii.  35,  7. 
vi-dhana,  n.  task,  iv.  51,  6  [dis-position '. 

vi  prp.  +  dhana  from  dha  imt], 
vi-prcli-am,  ace.  inf.  to  ask,  vii.  86,  3. 
vip-ra,  a.  wise,  iv.  50,  1  ;  m.  sage,  i.  85, 

11 ;    vii.  61,  2 ;   x.  135,  4  [inspired  : 

vip  tremble  ivith  emotion], 
vi-bhat-i,  pr.  pt.  f.  shining  forth,  iv.  51, 

1.  10.  11  [bha  shine], 
vi-bhidaka,  ni.  a  nut  used  as  a  die  for 

gambling,  vii.  86, 6  ;  x,  34, 1  [probably 

from   vi-bhid  sj^lit   asunder,  but  the 

meaning  here  applied  js  obscure], 
vi-bhraja-mana,  pr.  pt.  A,  shining  forth, 

vii.  63,  3  [bhraj  shine  ;   Av.  brdzaiti 

'  beams  ',  Gk.  (pKiyoj  '  flame  ']. 
vi-madhya,  m.  middle,  iv.  51,  3. 
vi-rapsa,   m.   abundance,  iv.  50,   3   [vi 

+  raps  he  full], 
Vi-raj,   m.    name    of  a   divine   being 

identified  with  Purusa,x.  90,  5^  [far- 
ruling]. 
vira-sah,    a.   overcoming    men,    i.    35,    6 

[  =  vira-sah  for  vira-sah]. 
vi-ruk-mant,  m.  shining  loeapon,  i.  85,  3 

[rue  shine]. 
vi-riipa,  a.   having  different  colours,  vii. 

103,  6  [rupd,  n.form]. 
Vivas-vant,  m.  name  of  a  divine  being, 

V.    11,  3;     X.   14,  5    [vi  +  vas   sfiine 

afar]. 
vis,  f.  settlement,  x.  15,  2  ;  abode,  vii.  61, 

3  ;  settler,  i.  35,  5  ;  subject,  iv.  50,  8. 
vis  enter,  VI.  visd. 
a-  enter,  iv.  50,  10  ;  viii.  48,  12.  15. 
ni-  come  home,  go  to  rest,  x.  34,  14  ;  168, 

3  ;  s  ao.,  aviksniahi,  x.  127,  4  ;  cs. 

vesdya  cause  to  rest,  i.  35,  2. 
vis-pdti,  m.  master  of  the  house,  x.  135,  1. 
vi^va,  prn.  a.  all,  i.  35,  3.  6  ;  85,  3.  8; 

154,  2.  4  ;  ii.  12,  4.  7.  9  ;  33,  3.  10  ;  35, 

2.  15 ;  iii.  59,  8  ;  iv.  50,  7  ;  v.  83,  2. 4. 


visvatas] 


249 


[vfsnyavant 


9  ;  vii.  61,  1.  5.  7  ;  63,  1.  6  ;  x.  15,  6; 

90,  3  ;  127,  1  ;  168,  2. 
visva-tas,  adv.  on  every  side,  i.  1,  4  ;  viii. 

48,  15  ;   X.  90,  1  ;  in  all  directions,  x. 

135,  3. 
visva-danira,  adv.  always,  iv.  50,  8. 
visvd-deva,  a.  [Bv.]  belonging  to  all  the 

gods,  iv.  50,  6. 
visva-psnya,  a.  laden  with  all  food,  vii.  71, 

4  [psnya  from  psa  eat']. 
visva-rupa,  a.  (Bv.)  omniform,  i.  35,  4  ; 

ii.  33,  10  ;  v.  83,  5. 
visva-sainbhii,  a.  beneficial  to  all,  i.  160, 

1.   4   [s^m  prosperity  +  bliii  being  for, 

conducing  to]. 
visvd-ha,  adv.  always,  ii.  12,  15  ;  viii. 

48,  14  ;  -ha,  id.,  i.  160,  5  ;  for  ever,  ii. 

35,  14. 
visvaha,  adv.  always,  i.   160,  3  [visva 

alia  all  days]. 
visve  devas,  m.  pi.  the  all-gods,  vii.  49, 

4  ;  viii.  48,  1. 

vis  loork.  III.  vivesti  :    pf.  vivesa,  ii. 

35,  13. 
vi-sita,  pp.  unfastened,  v.  83,  7.  8  [vi 

+  si  bind]. 
visu-na,  a.  varied  inform,  viii.  29,  1. 
visuci,  a.  f.  turned  in  various  directions,  ii. 

33,  2  [f.  of  vis V- arte], 
vi-stha  host  (?),  x.  168,  2. 
Vis-nu,  m.  a  solar  deity,  i.  85,  7  ;  154, 

1.  2.  3.  5 ;  x.  15,  3  [vis  he  active]. 
visv-anc,  a.  turned  in  all  directions,  x. 

90,  4. 
vi-sargil,  m.  release,  vii.  103,  9  [vi  +  srj 

let  go], 
vi-sarjana,  n.  creation,  x.  129,  6  [vi  +  srj 

let  go]. 
vf-srsti,  f.  creation,  x.  129,  6.  7  [vi  +  srj 

let  go], 
vi-srasas,  ab.  inf.  from  breaking,  viii.  48, 

5  [vi  +  sras/aM]. 
vi-bayas,  a.  mighty,  viii.  48,  11. 
vi  guide,  II.  v6ti,  i.  35,  9. 

tipa-  come  to  (ace),  v.  11,  4. 
vi-r^,  m.  hero,  i.  85,  1  ;   ii.  33,  1  ;   35,  4 

[Av.  vlra,  Lat.  vir,  01.  fer,  Go,  wair, 

Lith.  vyra,  'man']. 
vir6i-vat-tama,  spv,  a.  most  abounding  in 

heroes,  i.  1,  3. 
virfii-vant,  a.  possessed  of  heroes,  iv.  50,  6. 
vlriidh,  f.  plant,  ii.  35,   8  [vi  asunder 

H-rudb  groio]. 
vlr-yil,   n.   heroic    deed,    i.    154,    1.   2 ; 

heroism,  iv.  50,  7  [virfi,  hero]. 


1.  vr  cover,  V.  vrnoti,  vrnute. 

a-,  int.  ipf.  a-varivar  contain,  x.  129,  1. 
vi-  unclose,  rt.  ao.  avran,  iv.  51,  2. 

2.  vr  choose,  IX.  A.  vrnite,  ii.  33,  13  ;  v. 
11,  4  ;  X.  127,  8. 

vfk-a,  m.  ivolf  x.   127,  6   [Gk.  \vko-s, 
Lat.  lu'pu-s,  Lith.  vilka-s,  Eng.  wolf]. 
vrk-i,  f.  she-wolf,  x.  127,  6. 
vrkta-barhis,  a.  (Bv.)   whose  sacrificial 
grass  is  spread,  iii.  59,  9  [vrkt^,  pp.  of 
vrj  +  barhis,  q.  v.]. 
vrk-sa,  m.  tree,  v.  83,  2  ;  x.  127,  4  ;  135, 
1    [vrk  simpler   form   of  vrasc  cut, 
fell].  ' 
vrj  twist,  VII.  vrnakti,  vrrikt^. 

pari-  pass  by,  ii.  33,  14. 
vrj-ana,  n.  circle  (  =  family,  sons),  vii. 

61,  4  \_enclosure_=  vrj]. 
vrnana,  pr.  pt.  A.  choosing,  v.  11,  4  [vr 

choose]. 
vrt  turn,  I.  A.  vartate  roll,  x.  34,  9; 
cs.  vartdya  turn,  i.  85,  9. 
a-,  cs.  whirl  hither,  vii.  71,  3. 
nis-,  cs.  roll  out,  x.  135,  5. 
pra",  cs.  set  rolling,  x.  135,  4. 
anu  pra-  roll  forth  after,,  x.  135,  4. 
sam-  be  evolved,  x.  90,  14. 
adhi  sam-  come  upon,  x.  129,  4. 
Vr-tra,  m.  name  of  a  demon,  i.  85,  9  ; 
n.  foe  (pi.),  viii.  29,  4  [encompasser : 
vr  cover]. 
vr-tva,  gd.,  having  covered,  x.  90,  1. 
vrdh  grow,  I.  vdrdha,  i.  85,  7  ;  ii.  35, 
11 ;  cause  to  prosper,  iv.  50, 11 ;  increase, 
pf.  vavrdhur,  x.  14,  3  ;  cs.  vardhaya 
strengthen,  v.  11,  3.  5. 
vrdh-6,  dat.  inf.  to  increase,  i.  85,  1. 
vrs  rain,  I.  vdrsa  rain  :  is  ao.  avarsis, 
'v.  83,10. 

abhi-  rain  upon,  ao.  vii.  103,  3. 
vfsan-vasu,  a.   (Bv.)  of  mighty  loealth, 

iv.  50,  10  [vrsan  bidl]. 
vfs-an,  m.  bull,'  i.  85,  7.  12 ;  154,  3.  6 
*  ii.  33,  13  ;  35,  13 ;  iv.  50,  6  ;  v.  83,  6 
(with  asva  =  stallion) ;    vii.    61,    5 
71,  6;    stallion,  vii.  71,  3  [Av.  arzan 
Gk.  (pffrjv], 
vrsa-bha,  m.  bull,  i.  160,  3  ;  ii.  12,  12 

'33,  4.  6-8.  15  ;  v.  83,  1  ;  vii.  49,  1. 
vrsa-ld,  m.  beggar,  x.  34,  11  \_little  man] 
vfsa-vrata,  a,  (Bv.)  having  inighty  hosts. 

i.  85,  4  [vfsan  bidl,  stallion]. 
vrs-ti,  f.  rain,  v.  83,  6  [vrs  raifi], 
vfsnya-vant,  a.  mighty,  v.  83,  2  [vfs 
nya  manly  strength,  from  vfsan  bull]. 


v6dana] 


260 


[6umbh 


v6d-ana,  n.  possession,  x.  34,  4  [vid  find, 
acquire^. 

vedh-ds,  ni.  disposer,  iii.  59,  4  [vidh 
worship,  be  gracious]. 

ven  long,  I.  P.  venati. 
dnu-  seek  the  friendship  of,  x.  135,  1. 

volhf,  n.  vehicle,  vii.  71,  4  [vah  draiv 
+  tr  ;  Av.  vastar  '  di-aught  animal ' 
Lat.  vector']. 

vai,  pel.,  ii.  33,  9.  10  [180]. 

Vairupa,  m.  son  of  Virupa,  x.  14,  5. 

Vaivasvata,  m.  son  of  Vivasvant,  x.  14,  1. 

vdisya,  m.  man  of  the  third  caste,  x.  90, 
12  [belonging  to  the  settlement  =  vis]. 

vaisvanara,  a.  belonging  to  all  men,  epi- 
thet of  Agni,  vii.  49,  4  [visva-nara]. 

vy-akta,  pp.  distinguished  by  (inst.),  x. 
14,  9;  palpable,  x.  127,  7  [vl  +  anj 
adorn]. 

vyac  extend.  III.  P.  vivyakti. 
sdm-  roll  up,  ipf.  avivyak,  vii.  63,  1. 

vyath  waver,  I.  vydtha,  vi.  54,  3. 

vyd,tlia-mana,  pr.  pt.  A.  quaking,  ii. 
12,  2. 

vyusti,  f.  daybreak,  vii.  71,  3  [vi  +  vas 
shine]. 

vy-oman,  n.  heaven,  iv.  50,  4  ;  x.  14,  8; 
129,  1.  7  [vi  +  oman  of  doubtful  ety- 
mology]. 

vraj-d,  m.  pen,  fold,  iv.  51,  2  [vrj  en- 
close], 

vra-td,  n.  will,  ordinance,  iii.  59,  2.  3  ; 
V.  83,  5  ;  viii.  48,  9  ;  service,  vi.  54,  9 
[vr  choose]. 

vrata-carin,  a.  practising  a  voiv,  vii.  103, 
1  [car-in,  from  car  go,  practise]. 

vrata,  m.  troop,  host,  x.  34,  8.  12. 

Sams  praise,  I.  sdmsa,  vii.  61,  4  [Lat. 

censeo]. 
sdms-ant,  pr.   pt.  praising,  ii.   12,    14  ; 

iV.  51,  7. 
sata,  n.  hundred,  ii.  33,  2  ;  vii.  103,  10 

[Gk.  (.Ktiro-v,  Lat.  centum,  Go.  hund], 
sam-tama,  spv.  a.  »no.s<  beneficent,  ii.  33, 

2.  13  ;  X.  15,  4  [i^am,  n.  healing]. 
saph^-vant,  a.  having  hoofs,  v.  83,  5. 
sabdla,  a.  brindled,  x.  14,  10. 
sdm,  n.  healing,  ii.  33,   13  ;  comfort,  v. 

11,  5  ;  viii.  48,  4  ;    health,  x.  15,  4  ; 
prosperity,  viii.  86,  8^. 

Sdmbara,   m.    name  of  a   demon,   ii. 

12,  11.  . 

66y-ana,  pr.  pt.  A.  lying,  ii.  12,  11  ; 
vii.  103,  2  [si  lie]. 


sardd,  f.  autumn,  ii.  12,  11  ;  vii.  61,  2  ; 

X.  90,  6. 
sdr-u,  f.  arroio,  ii.  12,  10  ;  vii.  71,  1  [Go. 

hairu-s]. 
sardh-ant,  pr.  pt.  arrogant,   ii.   12,    10 

[srdh  be  defiant], 
sar-man,  n.  shelter,  i.  85,  12 ;  v.  83,  5  ; 

X.   129,  1   [Lith.    szdtma-s    'helmet', 

OG.  helm  '  helmet ']. 
sdv-as,  n.  power,  v.  11,  5  [sii  swell]. 
sasam-and,    pf.  pt.   A.   having  prepared 

(the  sacrifice),  i.  85,  12  ;   ii.   12,  14  ; 

strenuous,  iv.  51,  7_[sam  toil], 
sasay-ana,  pf.  pt.  A.  lying,  vii.  103,  1 

[si  lie], 
sas-vant,  a.  ever  repeating  itself,  many,  ii. 

12,  10  ;  -vat,  adv.  for  ever,  i.  35,  5  [for 

sa  +  svant,  orig.  pt.  of  su  swell,  Gk. 

a-iravT-]. 
saktd,   m.    teacher,   vii.    103,    5  [sak  be 

able]. 
sas  order,  II.  sasti,  saste. 
dnu-  instruct,  vi.  54,  I. 
abhi-  guide  to  (ace),  vi.  54,  2. 
sik- van  yZame  (?),  ii.  35,  4. 
siks    be    helpful,  2^ay  obeisance,  I.  siksa, 

iii.  59,  2  [ds.  of  sak  be  able]. 
siksa-mana  (pr.  pt.  A.),  m.  learner,  vii. 

103,  5.  * 
siti-pdd,  a.  (Bv.)  ivhite-footed,  i.  35,  5. 
sithira,  a.  loose  ;    n.  freedom,  vii.  71,   5 

[Gk.  KaOapo-s  'free,  pure'], 
siva,  a.  kind,  x.  34,  2. 
sisu,  m.  child,  ii.  33,   13  [sii  sirell,  cp. 

Gk.  Kveof]. 
sisriy-and,  pf.  pt.  A.  abiding,  v.  11,  6 

[sri  resort]. 
si-ta,  a.  cold,  x.  34,  9  [old  pp.  of  sya 

coagidate], 
sirs-dn,  n.  head,  x.  90,  14  [sir(a)s  head 

+  an;  cp.  Gk.  Kopa-r]  'head'], 
suk-rd,,  a.  shining,  i.  160,  3  ;  bright,  ii. 

33,  9 ;  iv.  51,  9 ;  clear,  ii.  35,  4  [sue 

be  bright,  Av.  sux-ra  'flaming'], 
suc-i,  a.  bright,  i.  160,  1 ;  bright,  ii.  35,  8 ; 

iv.  51,  2.  9  ;   v.  11,  1.  3  ;  viii.  29,  5 ; 

clear,  vii.  49,  2.  3;  pure,  ii.  33,   13; 

35,  3^  [sue  shine]. 
^uhh,  f.  brilliance  ;  =  shining  path  (cog. 

ace),  iv. ^1,  6. 
subh-aya,  A.  adorn  oneself,  i.  86,  3. 
subh-rd,  a.  bright,  i.  35,  3  ;  85,  3  ;  iv. 

51,  6  [subh  adorn]. 
6unibh,  adorn,  I.  A.  sumbhate. 
prd-  adorn  oneself,  i.  85,  1. 


SiiskaJ 


251 


[sadyds 


siis-ka,  a.  dry,  vii.   103,  2  [for  sus-ka, 

Av.  hus-ka'}. 
8U8-ma,  m.  vehemence,  ii.  12,  1.  13;  im- 
pulse, iv.  50,  7  ;  force,  vii.  61,  4  [svas 

blow,  snortl. 
su-ra,  m.  hero,  i.  85,  8  [A v.  sura  ^strong\ 

Gk.  d-Kvpo-s  *  in-valid  ']. 
^iiidra,    m.    man   of  the  servile   caste,    x. 

^90,  12. 
sui^uj-dna,  pf.   pt.    A.   trembling  C'}),   x. 

34,  6. 
aua-ii,fi.i7ispiring,  i.  154,  3  [svas  breathe]. 
srnv-dnt,  pr.  pt.  hearing,  vi.  54,  8  [sru 

hear']. 
srdh-ya,  f.  arrogance,  ii.  12,  10  [srdh  be 

arroganf]. 
sr  crush,  IX.  srnati. 
sara-  be  crushed :  ps.  ao.  sari,  vi.  54,  7. 
scut  drip,  I.  scota,  iv.  50,  3. 
sya-vd,   a.   dusky,   i.  35,   5  [OSl.  si-vH 

'grey']. 
syena,  m.  eagle,  vii.  63,  5  ;    m.  hawk, 

X.  127,  5. 
srfi,d  heart  only  with  dha  =  put  faith  in, 

believe  in  (dat.),  ii.  12,  5  [Lat.  cord-, 

Gk.  Kaph-irj  '  heart ']. 
srav-as,  n.  fame,  i.    160,  5  ;    iii.  59,  7 

[sru  hear  ;    Gk.  KK^fos  '  fame  ',  OSl. 

slovo  'word'], 
sravas-yu,  a.  fame- seeking,  i.  85,  8. 
sri-ta,  pp.  reaching  to  (Ic"),  v.  11,3. 
sri,  f.  glory,  i.  85,  2  ;  iv.  33,  3  ;  x.  127,  1. 
|ru,  V.  srnoti,  hear,  ii.  33,  4  ;  x.  15,  5  ; 

pi.  3.  ^rnvire  =  ps.,  x.  168,  4. 
^ru-td,   pp.   heard;  famous,    ii.    33,    11 

[sru  hear,  Gk.  kXv-t6-s  '  famous ',  Lat. 

in-clu-tu-s  '  famous ']. 
^r^-stha,  spv.  a.  best,  ii.  33,  3. 
sro-tra,  n.  ear,  x.  90, 14  [sru  hear]. 
^rdus-ti,  f.  obedient  mare,  viii,  48,  2  [^rus 

feear,  extension  of  sru]. 
sva-ghn-in,  m.  gambler,  ii.  12,  4. 
sv^n,  m.  dog,  x.  14,  10.  11  [Av.  span, 

Gk.  tcvojv]. 
sva-srii,  f.  mother-in-law,  x.  34,  3  [OSl. 

svekry,  svekruve]. 
svity-dnc,   a.    whitish,  ii.   33,   8    [sviti 

(akin  to  sveta,  Go.  hweits,  Eng.  white) 

+  anc], 

Sas,  nm.  six,  x.  14,  16  [Av.  xsvas,  Gk. 
€f,  Lat.  sex,  01.  se.  Go.  saihs,  Eng.  six]. 

B&,  dem.  prn.  N.  s.  m.  that,  he,  i.  1,  2.  4. 
9  ;  154,  5  ;  160,  3  ;  ii.  12, 1-14  ;  ii.  33, 


133;  35,  1.  4.  5.  8.  10;  iii.  59,  2.  8; 
iv.  50,  52.  7.  8  ;  51,  4  ;  v.  11,  2.  6  ;  83, 

5  ;  vii.  61,  1.2;  86,  6  ;  x.  14,  14 ;  34, 
11  ;  90,  1.  5;  129,  7  ;  as  such  =  thus, 
ii.  12,  15 ;  viii.  48,  9  [Av.  ho,  Gk.  6, 
Go.  sa]. 

sam-yant,  pr.  pt.  going  together,  ii.  12,  8 

[sam  +  i  go]. 
sam-rarana,  pf.  pt.  A.  sharing  gifts,  x. 

15,  8  [sam  +  ra  give] . 
sam-vatsara,  m.  year,  vii.  103,  1.  7.  9. 
sam-vid-ana,  pr.   pt.   A.   uniting,   -with 

(inst.),  viii.  48,  13 ;  x.  14,  4  [vid^nd]. 
sam-vrj,  a.  conquering,  ii.  12,  3. 
s^kh-i,  m.  friend,  ii.  35,  12  ;  vii.  86,  4  ; 

viii.  48,  42.  10 ;  x.  34,  2.  5  ;  168,  3. 
sakh-y^,  i\.  friendship,  viii.  48,  2. 
sam-gamana,  m.  assembler,  x.  14,  1. 
sac  accompany,  L  A.  sacate,  i.  1,9;  vii. 

61,  5;  associate  with,  viii.  48,  10;  reach. 

X.  90,   16   [Gk.   en-erm,    Lat.  sequitur, 

Lith.  sekii]. 
sdc-a,   adv.   prp.  with  (Ic),   iv.   50,    11 

[sac  accompany]. 
sdjan-ya,  a.  belonglyig  to  his  oivn  peopile, 

iv.  50,  9  [sa-jana,  kinsman]. 
sa-j6sas,  a.  acting  in  harmony  with  (inst.), 

viii.  48,  15  [josas,  n.  pleasure]. 
sat,  n.  the  existent,  x.  129,  1  [pr.  pt.  of 

as  be]. 
sat-pati,  m.  true  (?)  lord,  ii.  33,  12. 
sat-ya,  a.  true,  i.  1,  5.  6  ;   ii.  12,  15  ;    x. 

15,  9.  10  [sat,  n.  truth +  Ya,]. 
satya-dharman,a.  (Bv.)  ivhose  ordinances 

are  true,  x.  34,  8. 
satyanrt^,  n.  Dv.  cd.  truth  and  falsehood, 

vii.  49,  3  [satya  +  dnrta]. 
sad  sit  doivn,  I.  P.  sidati,  i.  85,  7  ;  sit 

down  on  (ace),   a  ao.  sadata,  x.  15,  11 

[Lat.  stdo]. 
a-  seat  oneself  on  (ace. ),  i.  85,  6  ;  occupy : 

pf.  sasada,  viii.  29,  2. 
ni-  sit  doivn,  pf.  (ni)sedur,  iv.  50,  3  j 

inj.  sidat,  v.   11,   2  ;  settle  :  pf.  s.  2. 

sasdttha,  viii.  48,  9. 
sdd-as,  n.  seat,  iv.  51,  8;    viii.  29,  9; 

abode,  i.  85,  2.  6.  7  [Gk.  eSos]. 
sadas- sodas,  ace.  itv.  cd.  on  each  seat,  x. 

15,  11. 
sd-da,  adv.  always,  vii.  61,  7  ;  63,6  ;  71, 

6  ;  86,  8. 

sa-dfs,  a.,  f.  -i,  alike,  iv.  51,  6  ^having  a 

similar  appearance] . 
sa-dy^s,  adv.  in  one  day,  iv.  51,  5  ;   at 

once,  iv.  51,  7. 


sadhamada] 


252 


[sadana 


sadha-mada,   m.  joint  feast,   x.   14,    10 

\_co-reveIrij  ;  sadha  =  saha  together^. 
sadha-stha,  n.   gathering  place,   i.   154, 

1.3. 
san  gain,  VIII.  P.  sanoti,  vi.  54,  5. 
san6.ya,  a.  old,  iv.  51,  4  [from   sdna  ; 

Gk.  evo-s,  01.  sen,  Lith.  senas  'old']. 
sant,  pr.  pt.  being,  x.  34,  9  [as  be  ;   Lat. 

(prae)-sent-'}. 
sam-dfs,  f.  sight,  ii.  33,  1. 
sapta,  nni.  seven,  i.  35,  8 ;  ii.  12,  3.  12  ; 

X.  90, 152  [Grk.  cTTTa,  Lat.  septem,  Eng. 

seven~]. 
sapta-rasmi,  a.  (Bv.)  seven-reined,  ii.  12, 

12  ;  seven-rayed,  iv.  50,  4. 
saptasya,  a.  (Bv.)  seven-mouthed,  iv.  50, 

4;  51,  4  [saptd  +  asya,  n.  mouth']. 
s^p-ti,  m.  racer,  i.  85,  1.  6. 
sa-prdthas,  a.  (Bv.)  renoivned,  iii,  59,  7 

[accompanied  by  prathas,  n. /ame]. 
sa-badha,  a.  zealous,  vii.  61,  6  [badha, 

m.  stress"]. 
sabha,  f.   assembly  hall,  x.  34,  6  [OGr. 

sippa  '  kinship  ',  AS.  sib]. 
samd,  a.  level,  v.  83,  7  [Av.  hama  *  equal ', 

Gk.  ojxo-s,  Eng.   same,  cp.    Lat.  sm- 

sam-^d,  f.  battle,  ii.  12,  8. 

sdm-ana,  n.  festival,  x.  168,  2  [coming 

together] . 
samana,  adv.  in  the  same  way,  iv.  51,  8^ 

[inst.,    with    shift   of  accent,   from 

samana  being  together], 
samand,  a.,  f.  i,  same,  ii.  12,  8  ;   iv.  51, 

9;  vii.  86,  3  ;  uniform,  vii.  63,  2  ;  com- 
mon, ii.  35,  3  ;  vii.  63,  3  ;  103,  6. 
samand-tas,  adv.  from,  the  same  place,  iv. 

51,  8. 
sam-idh,  f.  faggot^  x.  90,  15  [s^m  +  idh 

kindle]. 
samudr^-jyestha,   a.   (Bv.)    having   the 

ocean  as  their  chief,  vii.  49,   1    [sam- 

udrd,    m.    collection    of  ivaters  +  jye- 

stha,  spv.  chief]. 
saraiudrartha,  a.  (Bv.)  having  the  ocean  as 

their  goal,  vii.  49,  2  [drtha,  m.  goal], 
sam-fdh,  f.   unison,    vii.    103,    5    [sdm 

+  rdh  thrive]. 
s^m-prkta,  pp.  mixed  with  (inst.),  x.  34, 

7  [pre  mix]. 
sam-pfcas,  ab.  inf.  from  mingling  with, 

ii.  35,  6  [pre  mix]. 
sdm-bhrta,  pp.  collected,  x.  90,  8  [bhr 

bear]. 
sam-raj,  m.  sovereign  king,  viii.  29,  9. 


sa-yuj,  a.  united  with  (inst.),  x.  168,  2. 
sa-rdtham,  adv.  (cog.  ace.)  on  the  same 

car,  'With  (inst.),  v.  11,  2;    x.  15,  10; 

168,  2. 
sd.r-as,  n.  lake,  vii.  103,  7  [sr  run]. 
saras-i,  f.  lake,  vii.  103,  2. 
sarg-a,  m.  herd,  iv.  51,  8  [srj  let  loose]. 
sart-ave,  dat.  inf.  tofloiv,  ii.  12,  12  [sr 

floiv]. 
srp  creep,  I.  P.  sarpati. 

vf-  slink  off,  X.  14,  9, 
sarpfr-asuti,  a.  (Bv.)  having  melted  butter 

as  their  draught,  viii.  29, 9  [sarpis  (from 

srp  run  =  melt)  +  a-suti  brew  from  su 

press]. 
s^rva,  a.  all,  vii.  103,  5 ;  x.  14,  16  ;  90, 

2  ;    129,  3  [Gk.  '6ko-s  =  oA-fo-s,  Lat. 

salvu-s  *  whole  ']. 
sdrva-vira,  a.  consisting  entirely  of  sons, 

iv.  50,  10  ;  X.  15,  11. 
sarva-hut,  a.  (Tp.)  completely  offering,  x. 

90,  8.  9   [hu-t :    hu  sacr(/?ce  +  deter- 
minative t]. 
sal-ila,  n.  water,  x.  129,  3 ;   sea,  vii.  49, 

1  [sal  =  sTfloiv], 
Sav-i-tf,  m.  a  solar  god,  i.  35,  1-6.  8- 

10 ;  vii.  63,3;  x.  34,  8.  13  [Stimulator 

from  su  stimulate]. 
sas  sleep,  II.  P.  s^sti,  iv.  51,  3. 
sas-ant,  pr.  pt.  sleeping,  iv.  51,  5. 
sah  overcome,  I.  sdha,  x.  34,  9  [Gk.  ex^i 

ao.  e(T{e)x-ov]. 
sah-as,  n.  might,  iv.  50,  1  ;  v.  11,  6^  [sah 

overcome] . 
sa-hasra,  nm.  a  thousand,  x.  15,  10  [Gk. 

X^Atoj,  Lesbian  x^^^'ot  from  xco-'^o]. 
sahdsra-pad,  a.  (Bv.)  thousand-footed,  x. 

90,  1  [pad /oo4 
sahdsra-bhrsti,  a.  (Bv.)  thousand-edged, 

i.  85,  9  [bhrs-ti  from  bhrs  =  hrs  stick 

up]. 
sah^sra-sirsan,    a.    thousand-headed,    x. 

34,  14. 
sahasra-sav^,  m .  thousandfold  Soma-press- 

ing,  vii.  103,    10   [savd,    m.    pressing 

from  su  press]. 
sahasraksd,  a.  (Bv.)  thousand-eyed,  x.  90, 

1  [aksd  eye  =  aksi], 
sd-huti,  f.  joint  praise,  ii.  33,  4   [hiiti 

invocation  from  hu  call], 
sa  bind,  VI.  sydti. 
VI-  discharge,  i.  85,  6. 
sa,  dem.  prn.  N.  s.  f.  that,  iv.  50,  11  ;  vii. 

86,  6 ;  as  such  =  so,  x.  127,  4. 
sad-ana,  n.  seat,  x.  135,  7  [sad  sit]. 


sadharana] 


253 


[suvita 


sadharana,  a.  belonging  jointly,  common, 
vii.    63,    1    [sa-adharana    having   the 
same  supporf]. 
sadh-ii,  a.  good,  x.  14,  10. 
sadhu-ya,  adv.  straightway,  v.  11,  4. 
Sadh-ya,  m.  pi.  a  group' of  divine  beings, 

X.  90,  7.  16. 
san-as-i,  a.  bringing  gain,  iii.  59,  6  [san 

gain']. 
san-u,  n.  m.  back,  ii.  35,  12. 
sa-man,  n.  chant,  viii.  29,  10  ;  x.  90,  9  ; 

135,  4. 
saya-ka,  n.  arrow,  ii.  33,   10  [suitable  for 

hurling :  si  hurl]. 
sarameyd,  m.   son   of  Saramd,    x.    14, 

10. 
sasananasana,  n.  (Dv.)  eating  and  non- 
eating  things,  x.  90,  4  [sa-asana  +  anas  • 
ana], 
simh^,  m.  lion,  v.  83,  3. 
sic  pour,  VI.  sinca,  i.  85,  11  [OG.  s'lg-u 
'drip  ',  Lettic  sik-u  *fall '  of  water]. 
ni-  pour  down,  v.  83,  8. 
sidh  repel,  I.  P.  sedhati. 

apa-  chase  away,  i.  35,  10. 
sindh-u,  m.  river,  i.  35,  8  ;  ii.  12,  3.  12  ; 

Indus,  V.  11,  5  [Av.  hind-u-s]. 
sisvid-and,  pf.  pt.  A.  sweating,  vii.  103, 

8  [svid  perspire  :  Eng.  sweat]. 
Sim,  enc.  prn.  pel.  him  &e.,  i.  160,  2. 
su  press,  V.  sunoti,  sunut6,  V.  14,  13 

[Av.  Jiu]. 
sii,  adv.  well,  ii.  35,  2 ;   v.  83,  7  ;  vii. 

86,  8  [Av.  hu-,  01.  su-]. 
su^krta,  pp.  well-made,  i.  35,  11  ;  85,  9  ; 

well  prepared,  x.  15,  13;  34,  11. 
su-kratu,  a.  (Bv.)  very  wise,  v.   11,  2  ; 

vii.  61,  2  [kratu  wisdom]. 
sukratu-ya,  f.  insight,  i.  160,  4. 
su-ksatra,  a.   (Bv.)   wielding  fair  sway, 

iii.'  59,  4. 
su-ksiti,  f.  safe  dwelling,  ii.  35,  15. 
su-ga,  a.  easy  to  traverse,  i.  35,  11  ;  vii. 

63,  6. 
su-janman,    a.    (Bv.)    producing     fair 

creations,  i.  160,  1. 
su-ta,  pp.  pressed,  viii.  48,  7  ;  x.  15,  3. 
su-tasta,    pp.    well-fashioned,    ii.    35,    2 

[tsiks  fashion]. 
sut^-soma,    (Bv.)   m.    Soma-presser,    ii. 

12,  6. 
su-t^ra,  a,  easy  to  pass,  x.  127,  6. 
su-ddmsas,  a.  (Bv.)  wondrous,  i.  85,  1 

[damsas  ivo7tder]. 
su-daksa,  a.  (Bv.)  most  skilful,  v.  11,  1. 


su-danu,  a.  bountiful,    i.    85,    10  ;    vii. 

61,  3. 
su-diigha,  a.  (Bv.)  yielding  good  milk,  ii. 
35,  7  [dtigha  milking  :  dugh  =  duh]. 
su-dhita,    pp.  well-established,  iv.  50,  8 

[dhita,  pp.  of  dba  put], 
su-dhfs-tama,    s-pv.    a.    very   proud,    i. 

160,'  2.' 
su-nitha,  a.  (Bv.)  giving  good  guidance, 

i.  35,  7.  10. 
sunv-ant,  pr.  pt.  pressing  Soma,  ii.  12, 

14.  15 ;  vi.  54,  6  [su  press]. 
su-patha,  n.  fair  path,  vii.  63,  6. 
su-parnd,  a.  (Bv.)  having  beautiful  wings  ; 

m.  bird,  i.  35,  7. 
su-palasd,  n.  fair-leaved,  x.  135,  1. 
su-p6sas,  a.   (Bv.)    well-adorned,  ii.  35, 

1  [pesas,  n.  ornament]. 
su-praketa,  a.  conspicuous,  iv.  50,  2  [pra- 

ketd,  m.  token]. 
su-praja,  a.  (Bv.)  having  good  offspring, 

iv.  50,  6  [praja]. 
su-pratika,  a.  (Bv.)  lovely,    vii.    61,    1 
[having    a  fair   countenance :      prati- 
ka,  n.], 
su-prdniti,  a.  (Bv.)  giving  good  guidance, 

X.  15,  11. 
su-prapana,  a.  (Bv.)  giving  good  drink  ; 

n .  good  drinking  place,  v.  83,  8. 
su-bhaga,  a.  having  a  good  share,  opulent ; 

genial,  vii.  63,  1. 
su-bhii,  a.  excellent,  ii.  35,  7  [su  well  + 

bhu  being]. 
sii-bhrta,  pp.  well  cherished,  iv.  50,  7. 
su-makha,  m.  great  warrior,  i.  85,  4. 
su-mati,  f.  good-^vill,  iii.  59,  3.  4  ;    iv. 

50,  11;  viii.  48,  12;  x.  14,  6. 
su-manas,  a.  (By.)  cheerful,  vii.   86,   2 
[Av.  hu-manah-  '  well-disposed  ' ;  cp. 
second  part  of  €v-fievqs]. 
sv-mrlika,  a.  (Bv.)  very  gracious,  i.  35, 

10  [mrlika,  n.  mercy]. 
su-medhas,  a.  (Bv.)  having  a  good  under- 
standing, wise,  viii.  48,  1. 
su-mna,  n.  good-will,  ii.  33,  1.  6. 
sumna-yu,  a.  kindly,  vii.  71,  3. 
su-rabhi,  a.  fragrant,  x.  15,  12. 
sura,  f.  liquor,  vii.  86,  6  [Av.  hura]. 
su-retas,  a.   (Bv.)  abounding  in  seed,  i. 

160,  3. 
su-vdrcas,  a.  {By.)  full  of  vigour,  x.  14,  8. 
su-vac,  a.  (Bv.)  eloquent,  vii.  103,  5. 
suv-itd,  n.  welfare,  v.  11,  1   [su  tvell  + 
ltd,   pp.   of  i  go  :    opposite    of  dur- 
iU]. 


suvidatra] 


254 


[stha 


su-vidatra,  a.  bountiful,  x.  14,  10  ;  15, 

3.  9. 
su-vira,  a.  (Bv. )  having  good  champions  = 

strong   sons,    i.    85,    12 ;     ii.    12,    15 ; 

33,  15  ;  35,  15  ;  viii.  48,  14. 
su-virya,  n.  host  of  good  champions,  iv. 

51,  10. 
su-vrkti,  f.  song  of  praise,  ii.  35,  15  ;  vii. 

71,    6    [su  +  rk-ti    from    arc    praise, 

cp.  rcj. 
su-vrjana,  a.  (Bv.)  having  fair  abodes,  x. 

15,'  2. 
su-sipra,  a.  (Bv.)  fair-lipped,  ii.  12,  6; 

33,  5. 
su-seva,  a.  most  propitious,  iii.  59,  4.  5  ; 

viii.  48,  4. 
su-sakhi,    m.   good  friend,    viii.   48,    9 

[sakhi  friend']. 
su-stuti,  f.  eulogy,  ii.33, 8  [stuti  praise']. 
su-stubh,    a.    well-praising,    iv.    50,    5 

[stubh  2^'(^i'ise]. 
su-hdva,  a.  (Bv.)  easy  to  invoke,  ii.  33,  5 

[hdva  invocation], 
su,  adv.  loell,  v.  83,  10  [=  su  well]. 
su-ndra,  a.   bountiful,  viii.    29,    1    [Av. 

htmara]. 
su-nu,  m.  son,  i.  1,  9  ;  85,  1  ;  viii.  48,  4 

[Av.  hunu,  OG.  sumi,  Litli.  sunk,  Eng. 

sow], 
supayana,   a.   (Bv.)   giving   easy  access, 

easily  accessible,  i.  1,  9  [sii  +  upayana]. 
siir-a,  m.  sun,  vii.  63,  5  [svar  light]. 
suri,  m.  patron,  ii.  35,  6. 
siir-ya,  m.  sun,  i.  35,  7.  9  ;  160,  1  ;   ii. 

12,  7  ;  33,  1  ;  vii.  61,   1  ;   63,  1.  2.  4  ; 

viii.  29,  10;  x.  14,  12;  90,  13  [svar 

light], 
arfloiv,  III.  sisarti. 
tipa  prd-  stretch  forth  to,  int.  3.  s.  sarsr-e, 

ii.  35,  5. 
srj  emit,  VI.  srjati  [A v.  her^zaiti]. 
ava-  discharge  downward,  ii.  12,  12  ;  cast 

off,  vii.  86,  5. 
lipa-  send  forth  to  (ace),  ii.  35,  1. 
srp-rd,  a.  extensive,  iv.  50,  2  [srp  creep], 
s^-na,    f.     missile,    ii.    33,    11     [si    dis- 
charge]. 
sena-ni,  in.  leader  of  an  army,  general, 

X.  34,  12. 
s6-ma.  111.  juice  of  the  Soma  plant,  i.  85, 

10;  ii.  12,  14  ;  iv.  50,  10  ;  vii.  49,  4 

viii.  48,  3.  42.  7-15;  x.  14,  13  ;  34, 1 
Soma  sacrifice,   vii.    103,    7   ( su   press 
A  v.  ho,oma] . 
soma-pa,  m.  Soma  drinker,  ii.  12,  13. 


soma-pitha,  m.  Soma  draught,  x.  15,  8 

[pitha  from  pa  drink]. 
som-in,  a.  soma-pressing,  vii.  103,  8. 
som-yd,  a.  Soma-loving,  x.  14,  6  ;  15,  1. 

5.  8. 
saumanas-d,  n.  good  graces,  iii.  59,  4  ; 

x.  14,  6  [su-mdnas]. 
skand  leap,    I.    P.    skdndati,    int.    inj. 

kaniskan,  vii.  103,  4. 
skabhaya,  den.  prop,  establish,  i.  154,  1 

[from  skabh,  IX.  skabhnati]. 
sk^mbh-ana,  n.  prop,  support,  i.  160,  4. 
Stan  thunder,  II.  P. ;    cs.  standyati,  id., 

V.  83,  7.  8  [Gk.  (xrevoj  •  lament'], 
stan-dtha,  m.  thunder',  v.  83,  3. 
standyant,  pr.  pt.  thundering,  v.  83,  2  ; 

X.  168,  1. 
stanayi-tnu,  m.  thunder,  v.  83,  6. 
stabh    or    stambh.   2^*'op,    support,    IX. 

stabhnati,  ii.  12,  2. 
VI-  prop  asunder,  pf.  tastambha,  iv.  50, 

1  ;  vii.  86,  1. 
stav-ana,  pr.  pt.  A.  =  ps.  being  praised^ 

ii.  33,  11  [sXm  praise], 
sthi-ra,  a.  firm,  ii.  33,  9.  14  [stha  stand]. 
stu  praise,  11.  stduti,  ii.  33,  11  ;  v.  83,  1. 

prd-  praise  aloud,  i.  154,  2. 
stu-td,  pp.  praised,  ii.  33,  12. 
stuv-dnt,  pr.  pt.  jiraising,  iv.  51,  7  ;  vi. 

54,  6. 
ste-nd,    m.    thief,    x.    127,    6    [sta    be 

stealthy]. 
sto-tf,  m.  praiser,  vi.  54,  9  ;    vii.  86,  4 

[stu  praise]. 
sto-ma,  m.  song  of  praise,  ii.  33,  5  ;    vii. 

86,  8;  X.  127,  8  [stu  pmtse]. 
stoma-tasta,    a.     (Tp.)    fashioned    into 

(=  being   the   subject  of)  praise,   x. 

15,  9. 
stri,  f.  umnan,  x.  34,  11  [Av,  sM]. 
stha  stand,  I.    tistha ;    pf.   tasthur,   i. 

35,  5  ;  rt.  ao.  s.  3.  asthat,  i.  35,  10 ; 

iv.  51,  1  ;  pi.  3.  asthur,  iv.  51,  2  [Av. 

histaiti,  Gk.  'iarTjfii,  Lat.  sisto]. 
ati-  extend  beyond,  x.  90,  1. 
ddhi-  ascend,  x.  135.  3  ;    stand  upon,  i. 

35,  6. 
d.pa-  start  off,  viii.  48,  11. 
abhi-  overcome,  iv.  50,  7. 
a-  mount,  i.  35,  4  ;  mount  to  (ace),  i,  85, 

7  ;  occupy,  ii.  35,  9. 
lid-  arise,  v.  11,  3. 
lipa-    approach,     rt.     ao.     asthita,    x. 

127,  7. 
pfi,ri-  surround,  pf.  tasthur,  ii.  35,  3. 


spas] 


255 


[hasta 


pra-  step  forth,  x.  14,  14. 
spas,  m.  spy,  vii.  61,  3  [Av.  spas  ;    cp. 

Lat.  au-spex,  Gk.  (XHojip  *owl']. 
spr  win,  V.  sprnoti. 
nis-  rescue,  rt.  ao.  2.  du.  spartam,  vii. 

71,  5. 
sprh,  cs.  sprhaya  long  for,  x.  135,  2  [Av. 

sper^zaite']. 
sphiir  spurn,  VI.   sphura,    ii.    12,   12 ; 

spring,  x.    34,    9    [A v.    sparaiii,    Gk. 

anaipoj   'quiver',    Lat.    sperno,    Lith. 

spiriii  'kick',  OG.  spurnu  'kick'], 
sma,  enc.  pel.  just,  indeed,  ii.  12,  5  [180]. 
sya,  dem.  prn.  that,  ii.  33,  7  [OP.  hya,  f. 

hyd  ;  OG.  f.  siul^. 
aya,nd  flow,  I.  A.  syd.ndate,  v.  83,  8. 
syuma-gabhasti,  a.   (Bv.)    drawn  with 

thongs,  vii.  71,  3  [syu- man  banc? ;  Gk. 

v-iJirjv  '  sinew ']. 
syona,  n.  soft  couch,  iv.  51,  10. 
srama,  m.  disease,  viii.  48,  5. 
sru  flow,  I.  srdva,  vii.  49,  1  [Gk.  pij-'et 

'flows']. 
sva,  poss.  prn.  own,  i.  1,  8  ;  ii.  35,  7  ;  iv. 

50,  8 ;  vii.  86,  2.  6  ;  x.  14,  2  [A v.  hva, 

Gk.  (t6-s,  o-s,  Lat.  suu-s']. 
svi-tavas,  a.  (Bv.)  self  strong,  i.  85,  7. 
1.  svadha,  f.  funeral  offering,  x.  14,  3.  7  ; 
,;i    15,  3.  12-14. 
B.  sva-dha,  f.  ownpoimr,  x.  129,  2 ;  energy, 

x.  129,  5  ;  vital  force,  ii.  35,  7  ;  hliss,  i. 

154,  4  [sva  own  and  dha  put ;  cp.  Gk. 

€-$o-s  '  custom ']. 
svadha-vant,  a.  self-dependent,   vii.  86, 

4.8. 
sv-apas,   a.    (Bv.)  skilful,   i.  85,  9  [su 

+  apas  '  doing  good  work '], 
svap-na,  m.  sleep,  vii.  86,  6  [Gk.  virvo-s, 

Lat.  somnu-s,  Lith.  sdpna-s^. 
svayam-jd,  a.  rising  spontaneously,   vii. 

49,  2. 
sva-y-dm,  ref.  prn.  self,  ii.  35,  14;    of 

their  own  accord,  iv.  50,  8  [115  a], 
svar,  n.  light;  heaven,  ii.  35,  6  ;  v.  83,  4. 
sva-raj,  m.  sovereign  ruler,  x.  15,  14. 
svd.ru,  m.  sacrificial  post,  iv.  51,  2. 
svar-vid,  m.  finder  of  light,  viii.  48,  15. 
sva-vant,  a.  bountiful,  i.  35,  10  [^possess- 
ing property :  sva,  n.]. 
svfirsr,   f.    sister,   vii.  71,    1  ;    x.   127,  3 

[Lat.  soror,    OSl.  sestra.    Go.   swistar, 

Eng.  sister]. 
sv-asti,  f.  n.  well-being,  i.  1,  9  ;  35,  1 ; 

ii.  33,  3  ;  vii.  71,  6  ;  86,  8  ;  x.  14, 11  ; 

inst.  s.  svasti  for  welfare,  viii,  48,  8 ; 


pi.    blessings,   vii.    61,   7  ;    63,  6    [su 

well  +  asti  being]. 
svad-u,  a.  sweet,  viii.  48,  1   [Gk.  ■^Sv-s, 

Lat.  svdvi-s,  Eng.  siveet]. 
sv-adhi,  a.   (Bv.)  stirring  good  thoughts, 

viii.  48,  1. 
sv-abhu,  a.  invigorating,  iv.  50,  10. 
svalia,ij.Aai7,  as  a  sacrificial  call,  x.  14,3. 
svid,  enc.  emph.  pel.,  iv.  51,  6  ;  x.  34, 

10;  129,  52;  135,  5;  168,  3. 

Ha,  enc.  emph.  pel.,  i.  85,  7  ;  vii.  86,  3  ; 

X.  14,  13;  90,  10.  16;  129,  2  [later 

form  of  gha]. 
ha-tva,  gd.  having  slain,  ii.  12,  3  [han 

strike]. 
han  slay,  II.  hdnti,  i.  85,  9  ;  ii.  33,  15  ; 

smite,  V.  83,  2^.  9  ;  I.  jighna  slay,  viii. 

29,   4  ;    pf.  jaghana,  ii.   12,   10.   11  ; 

ps.  hanyate,  iii.  59,  2  ;  ds.  jighamsa, 

vii.  86,  4. 
han-tf,  m.  slayer,  ii.  12,  10, 
har-as,  n.  wrath,  viii.  48,  2  [heat ;  from 

hr  be  hot :  (ik.Oep-os  '  summer'], 
har-i,  m.  bay  steed,  i.  35,  3  [Av.  zairi- 

'  yellowish ';  Lat.  helu-s,  Lith.  zelu, 

OG.  gelo]. 
har-ita,  a.  yellotv,  vii.  103,  4.  6.  10  [Av. 

zairita  '  yellowish  ']. 
hary-asva,  a.  (Bv.)  draion  by  hay  steeds, 

viii.  48,  10. 
hav-a,  m.  invocation,  x.  15,  1  [hii  call]. 
havana-srut,  a.  (Tp.)  listening  to  invoca- 
tions,  ii.   33,   15   [hdvana  (from  hii 

call)  +  sru-t  hearing  from  sru  hear  with 

determinative  t]. 
havir-ad,  a.  (Tp.)  eating  the  oblation,  x. 

15,  10  [havis  +  ad], 
havis-pa,  a.  drinking  the  oblation,  x.  15, 

10  [havis  +  pa]. 
hav-is,    n.  oblation,  ii.  33,  5;    35,    12; 

iii.  59,  5  ;  iv.  50,  6  ;  vi.  54,  4  ;  viii. 

48,  12.  13  ;  X.  14,  1.  4.  13.  14;    15,  8. 

11.  12  ;  90,  62;  168,  4  [hu  sacrifice]. 
hav-i-man,  n.   invocation,  ii.  33,  5  [hu 

call]. 
hav-ya,  (gdv.)  n.   what  is  to  be  offered, 

oblation,  iii.  59,  1 ;  vii.  63,  5  ;  86,  2  ; 

X.  14,  15 ;  15,  4  [hu  sacrifce], 
havya-vahana,   m.   carrier   of  oblations, 

V.  11,  4  [vahana  from  vah  carry], 
havya-sud,  a.  (Tp.)  sweetening  the  obla- 
tion, iv.  50,  5  [sud  =  svad  stveeten]. 
hdsta,  m.  hand,  ii.  33,  7  ;    vi.  54,  10 ; 

viii.  29,  3-5. 


hastavant] 


256 


[hva 


hasta-vant,  a.  having  hands,  x.  84,  9. 

1.  ha  leam,  III.  P.  jahati. 

ava-,  ps.  hiyate,  lejeft  behind,  x.  34,  5. 

2.  ha  go  away,  III.  A.  jihite. 

apa-  depart,  vii.  71,  1  :  3.  s.  sb.  s.  ao. 

hasate,  x.  127,  3. 
lid-  spring  up,  v.  83,  4. 
hi,  cj.  for,  i.  85,  1 ;   154,  5  ;  160,  1  ;  ii. 

35,  1.  5.  9;   iv.  51,  5;   viii.   48,   6; 

since,  viii.  48,  9  ;  x.  34,  11  ;  pray,  x. 

14,  4. 
hims,  injure,  VII.  hindsti  injure  ;  is  ao. 

inj.,  x.  15,  6  [probably  a  ds.  of  han 

strike']. 
hi-ta,  pp.  jpZacecZ,  v.  11,  6  [later  form  of 

dhita  from  dha  put ;  Gk.  O^to-s  set]. 
hi-tvaya,  gd.  leaving  behind,   x.    14,    8 

[1.  ha  leave], 
hima,   m.   winter,   ii.  33,   2   [Av.  zima, 

OSl.  zima  'wiater';    Gk.  bva-x'-tJ'-o-s 

'subject  to  bad  storms',  'horrid  ']. 
hiran-ya,  n.  gold  ornament,  ii.  33,  9. 
hiranya-da,   a.    (Tp.)    giver  of  gold,   ii. 

35,'  10. 
hiranya-pani,  a.  (Bv. )  golden-handed,  i. 

35,"  9. 
hiranya-praiiga,  a.  (Bv.)  having  a  golden 

pole,  i.  35,  5. 
hiranya-ya,  a.  golden,  i.  35,  2  ;  85,  9  ; 

ii.'35,  10;  viii.  29,  1. 
hiranya-rupa,  a.  (Bv.)  having  a  golden 

form,  ii.  35,  10. 
hiranya-varna,  a.  (Bv.)  golden-coloured, 
ii."35,  9-Jl. 


hiranya-sami,  a.  {'By.)  having  golden  pins, 

i.  35,  4. 
hiranya-samdrs,  a.  (Bv.)  having  a  golden 

aspect,  ii.  35,  10. 
hiranya-hasta,  a.  (Bv.)  golden-handed,  i. 

35,'  10. 
hiranyaks^,  a.  (Bv.)  golden-eyed,  i.  35,  8 

[aksd,  =  aksi  eye], 
hid  be  angry,    I.  h6da  :    pf.  jihila,  x. 

34,  2. 
hi-n^,  pp.  forsaken,  x.  34,  10  [ha  leave]. 
hu  sacrifice,  offer,  III.  juhoti,  iii.  59,  1  ; 

X.  14,  13-15. 
a-  offer,  Hi.  59,  5. 
hii  call,  J..  A.  havate,  ii.  12,  8.  9  ;  33,  5  ; 

VI.  A.  huv6,  vii.  61,  6  ;    71,   1  ;  x. 

14,  5. 

hr  be  angry,  IX.  A.  hrnite,  ii.  33,  15 ; 

'ivith  (dat.),  vii.  86,  3. 
hfd,  n.  heart,  ii.  35,  2  ;  v.  11,  5  ;  vii. 
*86,  8;   viii.  48,  4.  12  ;   x.  129,  4  [Av. 
zard^. 
hfd-aya,  n.  heart,  x.  34,  9. 
he-ti,  f.  dart,  ii.  33,  14  [hi  impel]. 
he-tii,  m.  cause  :  ab.  hetos  for  the  sake 

of,  X.  34,  2  [impidse :  hi  impel]. 
ho-tr,  m.  invoker,  i.  1,  1.  5  ;   v.   11,  2 

[hvi  call]. 
hotra-vid,  a.  (Tp.)  knowing  oblations,  x. 

15,  9  [ho-tra,  Av.  zao-thra ;  cp.  Gk. 
XV-rpa  '■  pot']. 

hva  call,  IV.  hvaya,  i.  35,  1*. 
vi-  call  divergently,  ii.  12,  8. 


GENERAL  INDEX 


The  letters  a,  b,  c,  d  following  the  references  to  hymns  indicate  the  first, 
second,  third,  and  fourth  Pada  respectively  of  the  stanza. 


Accent,  in  Sandhi :  koso  'va,  vi.  54,  3 ; 
sundv6  'gne,  i,  1,  9  ;  brahmano  'sya, 
X.  90,  12  a ;  Svarita  followed  by 
Udatta:  nv  antdr,  vii.  86,  2;  kve- 
danim,  i.  35,  7  c  ;  tanva  susujanah, 
X.  34,  6  b ;  vapusye  nd,  i.  160,  2  c  ; 
Udatta  changed  to  Svarita  :  te  'var- 
dhanta,  i.  85,  7a;  in  compounds : 
Dvandvas,  dyava-prthivi,  i.  35,  9  b  ; 
160,  2  ;  Karmadharayas,  su-j£van,  i. 
85,  10  b  ;  dsascant,  i.  160,  2 ;  su- 
makhasas,  i.  85,  4  a  ;  a-ksiyamanp, 
i.  154,  4  b  ;  sutastam,  ii.  35,  2  a  ;  a- 
hitam,  viii.  29,  4  ;  Tatpiuusas,  Par- 
janya-jinvitam,  vii.  103,  1  c  ;  deva- 
hitim,  vii.  103,  9  a  ;  kavi-sastas,  x. 
14,  4c;  Agni-svattas,  x.  15,  11a; 
ekaparasya,  x.  34,  2  c  ;  Bahuvriliis, 
su-parnas,  su-nithds,  i.  35,  7  a  b  ;  a- 
renavas,  i.  35,  lib;  su-damsasas,  i. 
85,  1  b  ;  hiranyaks§,s,  i.  35,  8  c  ; 
uru-vyfi.casa,  i.  160,  2  a  ;  asu-hema, 
su-pesasas,  ii.  35,  led;  ftn-agas,  v. 
83,  2  c  ;  visva-caksas,  uru-caksas, 
vii.  63,  1  ;  tri-vandhuras,  vii.  71, 
4  b;  su-sakha, viii.  48,  9d;  govern- 
ing compounds,  yavayaj-janas,  iii. 
59,  5b;  in  declension,  nadyas,  ii. 
35,  3  b  ;  d&dhat,  i.  35,  8  d  ;  grnate, 
iii.  59,  5  b  ;  nidhinam,  viii.  29,  6  ; 
bahunara,  ii.  35,  12;  prthivyas,  i. 
35,  8  a  ;  160,  la;  in  syntax  :  at 
beginning  of  sentence,  ii.  35,  12  c  ; 
iv.  50,  2  d.  11  c  ;  v.  83,  4  a  b.  7  a  ;  vii. 
63,  4  d ;  71,  2  d  (irr.) ;  86,  1  d  ;  viii. 
48,  6  b.  8  a  ;  x.  15,  4  b  ;  34,  4  d.  14  a  ; 
with  kuvit,  ii.  35,  1  c.  2  b  ;  iv.  51,  4  a; 
of  cd.  verb,  i.  35,  9  c  ;  v.  83,  4  a  b ; 
shift  of,  justam,  iii.  59,  5  c ;  di- 
dfksu,  vii.  86,  3  a;  visvd-,  i.  160, 
1  a.  5  c ;  cdtur-,  iv.  51,  5  d  ;  amuya, 
X.  135,  2  b. 

1902 


Accusative,  double,  ii.  33,  4;  35,  1  ;  iv. 
51,  11  b  ;  of  goal,  x.  14,  13  c;  of  time, 
vii.  103,  1  a  ;  X.  168,  3  b. 

Agni,  description  of,  pp.  1-3 ;  viii. 
29,  2. 

Ahura  =  Asvira,  meaning  of,  i.  35,  7  ; 
in  Avesta,  pp.  119,  124. 

Alliteration,  x.  14,  7  a  b.  9. 

Ambiguity,  intentional,  vii.  103,  8  c. 
9d. 

Ambiguous  form :   samsa,  2.  s.  ipv.  or 

_  1.  s.  sb.;  vii.  61,  4  a. 

Amredita  compounds  :  div^-dive,  i.  1, 
3.  7  ;  grh6-grhe,  v.  11,  4b;  vdne- 
vane,  v.  11,  6b;  gatre-gatre,  viii, 
48,  9  b  ;  piba-piba,  see  note  on  x. 
14,  7. 

Anaphoric  repetition  :  Agnis,  v.  11,  4; 
drhan,  ii.  33,  10  ;  ayamsam,  ii.  35, 
15  a  b ;  iy^m,  vii.  71,  6  ;  ava,  vii.  86, 
5  ;  u,  X.  127,  3  ;  kas,  x.  135,  5  ;  tti- 
bhyam,  v.  11,  5  ;  tvam,  viii.  48,  15  ; 
t§,  X,  15,  5  ;  ni,  x.  127,  5  ;  Pusa,  vi. 
54,  5  ;  Mitrds,  iii.  59,  1  ;  ma,  ii.  33,  4; 
X.  135, 2.  3  (ydra  kumara)  ;  yds,  ii.  12, 
1-4  &c. ;  ydsya  vrat§,  v.  83,  5  ;  yasu, 
vii.  49,  4  ;  y€,  x.  15,  2  ;  vi,  ii.  33,  2  ; 
sdm,x.  14,  8  ;  hvayami,  i.  35,  1  ;  use 
of  sd,  i.  1,  9  ;  V.  11,  6  ;  of  t6,  x.  15,  7d. 

Angirases,  description  of,  viii.  29,  10. 

Antithesis :  pracyavdyanto  aeyuta,  i. 
85,  4b;  6ko  tribhis,  i.  154,  3d; 
6ko  visva,  i.  154,  4  d  ;  pdre  dvare, 
ii.  12,  8  b ;  samandm  nana,  ii.  12, 
8  c  d  ;  sdm  lipa,  ii.  35,  3  a  ;  jihman- 
am  urdhvdh,  ii.  35,  9  b ;  jigrtdm 
jajastdm,  iv.  50,  11  ;  dsammrstah. 
sucih,  V.  11,  3  a;  anagas  duskfbah,  v. 
83,  2  c  d  ;  dyajvanam  yajnamanma, 
vii.  61,  4  c  d  ;  krsmr  arusaya,  vii.  71, 
1  b  ;  dcetayad  acitah,  vii.  86,  7  c  ; 
samandm   viriipah,    vii.    103,    6  c  ; 


258 


amartyo  martyan,  viii.  48,  12  b;  sat 
6kara,  X.  14,  16  b  ;  nica  upari,  a- 
hastasohasta-vantarn,sitah  nir  dah- 
anti,  X.  34,  9  d  ;  6ka  visvatah,  x. 
135,  3  c. 
Antithetical  accent,  i.  35,  9  c  ;  85,  7  b; 
ii.  35,  3  a  ;  iv.  51,  11  d  (ca-ca);  v.  83, 

4  a  b  ;  x.  129,  5  b. 

Anudattas  following  a  Svaiita,  un- 
marked, vii.  61,  2. 

Aorist,  <;hai'acteristic  use  of,  viii.  29,  3. 

Apas  Waters,  description  of,  pp.  115-16. 

Apam  napat,  description  of,  pp.  67-8. 

Apposition,  adjective  in,  i.  85,  12  b  ; 
substantive  in,  x.  90,  15  d. 

A^vins,  description  of,  pp.  128-30;  viii. 
29,  8. 

Aspiration,  initial,  ii.  12,  10  b  (s)  ; 
V.  11,  4  c  (h);  vi.  54,  10  b  (h) ;  vii. 
103,  10  b  (h) ;    viii.  48,  10  b  (h)  ;    x. 

14,  14  a  (h);  15,  12  b  (h) ;  90,  6  d  (h); 
129,  2  d  (h) ;  loss  of,  i.  160,  3  d 
(duksata). 

Asyndeton,  i.  1,  3  a ;  35,  10  c  ;  85,  9  d ; 
i60,  5  b  ;  iii.  59,  9  a  ;  iv.  50,  11  d  ;  vii. 
61,  4  a  ;  63.  1  c.  4  d.  6  b  ;  71,  1  d  ;  x. 

15,  4  d;  127,  6a;  &c.  &c. 
Atris,  p.  152. 

Attraction,  of  antecedent,  v.  50,  8  ;  x. 
15,  6  ;  127,  4  b  ;  of  case,  viii.  48,  5  c  ; 
X.  14,  2  c  ;  of  gender,  i.  35,  6  a  ;  154, 

5  e  ;  X.  129,  4  b ;  of  number,  x.  90, 
12  b  ;  of  number  and  gender,  x.  90, 
8  c. 

Autumns  =  years  of  life,  vii.  61,  2. 
Avesta,  pp.  44,  67,  79,  116,  119,  124, 
135,  154,  171,  212. 

Bird,  said  of  Savitr,  i.  35,  7  a. 
Brhaspati,  description  of,  pp.  83-4. 
Brahmanas,  ritual  of,  vii.  103,  8. 

Cadence,    trochaic    (of  Gayatri),    viii. 

29,  7. 
Caesura,  irregular  long  syllable  after, 

i.  35,  8  b  d  ;   v.  11,  3c;   after  third 

syllable,  vii.  61,  1  d  ;  hiatus  after,  vii. 

71,  6a;  a  preceding  o  not  shortened 

before  a,  i.  35,  lid. 
Case-form  retained  in  compound,  Ii. 

33,  2  a  (tva-). 
Castes  in  RV.,  only  mention  of,  p.  195. 
Cerebralization,     of     n     in     external 

Sandhi,  ii.  33,  3  c  (nas)  ;  viii.  48,  4  d 

(nas).  7  c  (nas) ;  in  internal  Sandhi, 


V.  83,  8d  (suprappnam)  ;  x.  15,  11  b 

(su-prauitayas)  ;    of  s  :  i.  85,  5  c    vi 

syanti)  ;    6  a  (raghu-syddas)  ;    154, 

2  b   (giri-sthas)  ;    ii.    33,    4  b    (du- 

stuti) ;    iv.  50,  3  b  (ni  sedur) ;  vii. 

103,  7  c  (pari  stha)  ;  8  c  (sisvidanas) ; 

viii.  48,  9  b  (ni-sasdttha)  ;  9  d  (su- 

sakha)  :   in  all  the  above  cases  the 

Sandhi  is  annulled  in  the  Pada  text. 
Change  from  sing,  to  pi.,  syntactical, 

iv.  51,  11;  from  2.  to  3.  prs.,  i.  85,  5 ; 

ii.  33,  1  ;    from  3.  to  2.  prs.,  i.  85,  4  ; 

ii.  12,  15  ;  35,  6  a  b  ;  vii.  103,  5  d. 
Cognate  ace,  i.  154,  2a;  iv.  51,  6c:  v. 

11,  6  c  ;  vii.  49,  4  b  ;  viii.  29,  1  b.  7a; 

X.  14,  10  d  ;  15,  10  b  ;  34,  13  a  ;  135, 

2  c. 
Collective  use  of  singular,  ii.  33,  1  c 

(arvat).    3  a   (jata") ;     vii.    103,    2  a 

(enam).  4  c  (mandukas).  1  c.  6  d.  8  a 

(vac). 
Comparative  pel.  to  be  supplied,  vii. 

103.  1  b.  7  a. 
Compound  ;  first  member  in  Pada  text, 

unchanged,  iv.  50, 10  b  (vrsan-vasu) ; 

interpreted  in  the  RV,  itself,  x.  15, 

12  a  (jat^vedas). 
Concord,  of  satam,  ii.  33,  2  ;  of  sahds- 

ram,    x.   15,  10  c;    irr.,  viii.  48,    Ic 

(yam  for  yad) ;  iv.  51,  9  c  (m.  adj. 

with  f.  noun). 
Contraction,  irr.  secondary,  vii.  86,  4  d 

(tureyam). 
Creation,  hymn  of,  pp.  207-11. 

Dative,  of  advantage,  ii.  35,  7  d  ;  v. 
11,  1  d  ;  X.  34,  6  d  ;  final,  i.  85,  9  c  ; 
ii.  12,  9;  33,  3  ;  v.  11,  1  b.  2d  ;  vii. 
86,  7  d  ;  viii.  48,  10  d. 

Dice  hymn,  x.  34,  pp.  186-95, 

Dissyllabic  pronunciation  of  long 
vowels,  i.  35,  8  b  (tri) ;  154,  1  d 
(tredba).  3  a  (sus6,m)  ;  vi.  54,  10  a 
(pardstad)  ;  vii.  63,  6  a  (nu) ;  86,  4  a 
(jyestham)  ;  viii.  29,  6  (nidhinam). 

Doubtful  interpretation,  i.  85,  11a 
(disa) ;  154,  6  b  (ayasas)  ;  85,  4 
(makhd) ;  160,  1  c  (dhisdne)  ;  ii.  12, 
1  b  (parydbhiisat).  3  b  (apadha)  ; 
33,  12  a  b  ;  35,  4  a  (dsmeras).  c  (sik- 
vabhis).  5  c  (kftas).  6  (a-d).  9d  (yah- 
vis).  14  d  (atkais^;  iv.  50,  2  (a-d); 
51, 1  b  (vayuna).  4  d  (saptasye) ;  vii. 
61,  2d.  5;  71,  4d  (visvdpsnyas' ; 
86,  3  a    (didfksu)  ;    6  a   (dhrutis)  ; 


259 


6  c  (upare).  6d  (prayota)  ;  103,  5  c 
(samfdha)  ;  viii.  48,  2d  (srausti)  ; 
X.  14,  2  d  (ena,  jajuanas).  12  a 
(udumbal^u).  16  a  b  ;  15,  3  b  (na- 
patam).  8  b  (anuhire)  ;  34,  6  b  (su- 
sujanas)  ;  90,  2  d  (atirohati) ;  129, 
5  a  (rasnais) ;  135,  5  d  (anudeyi). 
6a-d  ;  168,  2  a  (visthasl. 

Dual,  compounds,  ii.  12,  13  (members 
separated)  ;  ending  au,  when  used, 
vii.  61,  7  b,  irregularly  used  for  a, 
X.  14,  10  a  b.  11.  12. 

Durga,  ii.  12,  3;  35,  10. 

Dvandva  compounds,  not  analysed  in 
the  Pada  text,  vii.  49,  3  b  ;  latest 
form  of,  X.  90,  4d  (sasananasane). 

Dyava-Prthivi,  description  of,  pp. 36-7. 

Elliptical  vocative,  vii.  61,  1  a  (Varu- 
na). 

Emendation  of  the  text,  i,  85,  9  c  (nar- 
yapamsi). 

Etymology,  of  Agai,  p.  3  ;  of  f  ndra, 
p.  44 ;  of  Pusdn,  p.  Ill  ;  of  Marut, 
p.  22  ;  of  Rudra,  p.  57  ;  of  Usas, 
p.  93  ;  of  Siirya,  p.  124 ;  of  Varuna, 
p.  135  ;  of  Vata,  p.  216  ;  of  viddtJtia, 
1.  85,  Id;    of  Visnu,  p.  31. 

Eyes  of  night  =  stars,  x.  127,  lb. 

Fathers,  see  Pitaras. 

Frogs,  rain-producing  hymn  addressed 
to,  pp.  141-7 ;  compared  with  Brah- 
mins, vii.  103,  8  a. 

Funeral  hymn,  pp.  164-75. 

Geldner,  Prof.,  ii.  35,  9  ;  x.  15,  3. 
Gerund,  agreeing  with  ace,  x.  14,  5d  ; 

34,  11a. 
Governing  compound,  i.  160, 1  b  (dhara- 

ydt-kavi) ;  iii.  59,  5  b  (yatayajjanas). 

Haoma  =  Soma,  pp.  154,  155. 

Hiatus  in  Samhita  text,  irr.,  v.  11,  5  b 
(manisa  iyara) ;  vii.  71,  6  a  (manisa 
iydm) ;  x.  129,  5  d  (svadha  avastat). 

Identical  Padas,  viii.  48,  11  d  (=  i.  113, 

16  d);  viii.  48,  13  d  (=  iv.  50,  6d). 
Imperfect,  irr.  use  of  (=  aorist),  viii. 

48,  lib. 
Impersonal   use  of  verb,  x.    34,   11a 

(tatapa). 
Incidental  deities,  i.  85,   7  c  (Visnu) ; 

154,  6  a  (Indra)  ;  ii.  33, 1 3  a  (Mariits) ; 


V,  83,  6  a  (Maruts)  ;  viii.  48,  10  b  d 

(Indra).  12a  (Pitaras);    x.  127,  7c 

(Usas). 
Indefinite  pronoun,    v.   83,    9  d   (ydt 

kim  ca). 
Indicative  =  imperative,  ii.  33, 3  (parsi). 
Indo-European  period,  pp.  44,  67,  130, 

154,  212. 
Indo-Iranian  period,  pp.  135,  154. 
Indra,   description  of,  pp.  41-4  ;   viii. 

29,  4. 
Infinitive,  ace,  vii.  86, 3  b  (vi-pfcham)  ; 

viii.  48,  10  d  (pratiram) ;   dat.,  with 

ps.  sense,  x.  14,  2  b  (dpabhartavdi)  ; 

with  attracted  ace.  (drsdye  sury  aya) ; 

with  kr  =  cause  to  (cakrir^  vrdh6). 
Initial  s  added  to  kr,  x.  127,  3  a  (nir 

askrta)  ;  135,  7  d  (pariskrtas). 
Injunctive,  doubtful,  i.  85,  11  d  (tarpa- 

yanta). 
Instrumental,    contracted,    ii.   33,  3  c 

(svasti).    4  b  (dustuti,  sdhuti).    6  c 

(ghfni) ;  local  sense  of,  x.  168,  1  d.  3  a. 

Jacobi,  Professor,  vii.  103,  9. 

Juxtaposition  of  similar  forms,  i.  1,5  c 
(devo  dev^bhih)  ;  160,  1  d  (devo 
devi)  ;  3  a  b  (pavitravan  punati)  ; 
ii.  12,  1  b  (devo  devan)  ;  33,  3  b 
(tavd,stamas  tav^sam).  8  b  (maho 
mahim) ;  35,  3  c  (sueim  sucayah)  ; 
4  a  (yuvatdyo  yuvanam) ;  5  b  (de- 
vaya  devih)  ;  iv.  51,  4  d  (revati 
revat).  6  b  (vidhana  vidadhur)  ; 
50,  7  c  (subhrtam  bibharti)  ;  v.  11, 
4  d  (vrnana  vrnate)  ;  83,  10  (avarsir 
varslm)  ;  vii.  86,  7  c  fdcetayad  aci- 
tah)  ;  viii.  48,  2  c  (sakheva  sakhye)  ; 
X.  15,  8d  (usdnnusadbhih)  ;  34,  9  b 
(ahastaso  hdstavantam) ;  13a  (krsira 
it  krsasva) ;  x.  90,  16  a  (yaju^na 
yajnam  ayajanta). 

Karmadharaya  Bahuvrihi,  x.  15,  9  b. 

Lengthening  of  vowels,  metrical,  i.  35, 
lid  (rdksa)  ;  ii.  12,  5  (sma)  ;  33,  2 
(catayasva).  4  a  (cukrudhama).  7 
(abhi).  13  c  (avrnita).  15  (eva)  ;   35, 

3  ;  iv.  51,  2  c  (ii)  ;  iv.  50,  6  a  (eva) ; 
V.  83,  1  (acha).   7  b  (diya)  ;    vii.  61, 

4  a  (^dmsa) ;  63,  5  a  (ydtra)  ;  86,  5d 
(srja)  ; "  103,  2  d  (dtra) ;  viii.  48,  6 
(atha,  cara).  8  a  (mrlaya).  9  b  (sa- 
sattha)  ;    x,  14,  13  b"  (juhuta).  14  d  ; 


260 


15,  4  d.  11  d;  127,  6  a;  129,  6d 
(athfi) ;  15,4  b;  vii.  86,  5  b  (cakrma) ; 
X.  34,  4d  (nayata).  8  c  (na).  14  a 
(mrlata)  ;    90,  3  b   (Purusas) ;    127, 

6  a  (yavaya) ;  129,  lb  (vyoma)  ; 
135,  1  c  (atra)  ;  in  cds.  and  deriva- 
tives :  i.  35,  4  (abhi-vrtam) ;  160,  1  b 
(rta-vari)  ;  ii.  12,  4  c  (jigivan)  ;  vii. 
71,  3  b  (sumnaydvas)  ;  63,  2  a  (pra- 
savita)  ;  x.  34,  10  c  (rna-va)  ;  14,  12 
(uru-nasau)  ;  168,  3  c  (rtava). 

Locative,  absolute,  vii.  63,  5  c  ;  103, 
3  b  ;  of  the  goal,  i.  1,  4 ;  v.  11,  3  d  ; 
of  time,  vii.  103,  9  c.  lOd. 

Long  reduplicative  vowel,  i.  154,  4  d  ; 
iii.  59,  1  b  (dadhara)  ;  ii.  33,  12  (na- 
nama)  ;  35,  3  c  (didivamsam)  ;  4  d 
(didaya).  7  b  ;  viii.  29,  6  a  (pipaya). 

Loss  of  accent,  ii.  35,  lab  (asmai, 
asya)  ;  vi.  54,  4  a  (asmai)  ;  vii.  63, 
5  a  (asmai) ;  viii.  29,  6  (yatha). 

Maruts,  description  of,  pp.  21-2. 
Metre,  irregular,  i.  35,  9d  ;  iii.  59,  2  d. 

7  c.  8  c;  iv.  12,  4c;  35,  11  b  ;  50, 
2  c ;  viii.  29,  5 ;  x.  90,  2  b.  4a; 
mentioned  in  the  RV.,  p.  175. 

Anustubh :    v.  83,   9  ;  vii.  103,   1  ;  x. 

14, 'i3.  14.  16;  90,  1-15;  135,   1-7; 

Pada  redundant  by  one  syllable,  x. 

90,  4  a  ;  135,  7  c. 
Gayatri  :   i.  1,   1-9  ;  iii.  59,  6-9  ;   vi. 

54,  1-10;  x.  127,  1-8. 
Jagati :  i.  85,  1-4.  6-11  ;  160, 1-5  ;  iv. 

50,  10  ;  V.  11,  1-6 ;  83,  2-4  ;  viii.  48, 

5  ;  X.  15, 11  ;  34,  7  ;  Pada  in  Tristubh 
stanza,  i.  35,  3  a  ;  v.  83,  10  c;  vii. 
103,8;  X.  14,  la.  10b.  lib;  34,5c; 
129,3  b;  Pada  with  Tristubh  cadence, 
i.  35,  9  d ;  stanzas  in  Tristubh  hymn, 
iv.  50,  10  ;  v.  83,  2-4. 

Tristubh,  i.  35,  1-11;  85,  5.  12  ;  154,  1- 

6  ;  'ii.  12,  1-15  ;    33,  1-15  ;  35,  1-15 
iii.  59, 15;  iv.  50,  1-9.  11  ;  51,  1-11 
v.  83,  1.  5-8.  10 ;  vii.  49,  1-4  ;  61,  1-7 
63.  1-6  ;  71,  1-6  ;  86,  1-8  ;  103,  2-10 
viii.  48,  1-4.  6-15  ;    x.  14,  1-12  ;    15 
1-10.  12-14  ;    34,  1-6.  8-14;    90,  16 
129,  1-7  ;    168,  1-4  ;   Pada  in  Jagati 
stanza,  viii.  48,  5  c ;    Pada  defective 
by  one  syllable,  x.  14,  5  c.  8  d,  by 
two  syllables,  x.  129,  7  b,  redundant 
by  one  syllable,  x.  129,  6  b. 

Dvipada  (Jagati  +  Gayatri  Pada),  viii. 
29, 1-10. 


Brhati,  x.  14,  15. 
Metronymic,     irregular,     ii.     12,     11 

(Danu). 
Middle  in  passive  sense,  i.  35,  10  d ; 

154,  2  a  ;  160,  4  d.  5  a  ;  ii.  33,  5. 11  c; 

vii.  61,  5  b. 
Mithra  in  the  Avesta,  p.  119. 
Mitra,  description  of,  pp.  78-9. 
Mitra-Varuna,  description  of,  pp.  118- 

19  ;  viii.  29,  9. 

Naighantuka,  ii.  12,  14.  15  ;  35,  9. 

Nasalization  of  a  final  vowel  at  the  end 
of  an  internal  Pada,  i.  35,  6  a  (upa- 
stham  ^ka)  ;  viii,  29,  6  (yatham 
esa) ;  x.  34,  5  c  (dkratam  6mid). 

Natural  philosophy,  starting  point  of, 
p.  207  (x.  129). 

Nirukta,  ii.  12,  3.  14. 

Nominative  for  vocative,  iv.  50,  10  a. 

Numerals,  syntax  of,  ii.  33,  2 ;  x.  15, 
10  c. 

Objective  genitive,  x.  34,  3d.  7  d. 

Pada  text,  its  treatment  of  the  pel.  u, 
vi.  54,  2  ;  of  vocatives  in  o,  ii.  33,  3  b 
(vajrabaho).  15  a  (babhro)  ;  viii.  48, 
2  c.  15  c  (indo)  ;  of  Pragrhya  vowels, 
i.  35,  9  b  (e,  i)  ;  i.  160,"  1  b  (i)  ;  iv. 
50,  10  b  (ii) ;  x.  168,  1  d  (ut6) ;  of 
iinal  etymological  r,  i.  35,  11  a  (Sa- 
vitar  iti)  ;  ii.  12,  4  b  (dkar  iti)  ;  vii. 
86,  2  b  (antah)  :  viii.  48,  2  a  (antar 
iti) ;  of  internal  s  before  k,  vii.  103, 
4  c  (kaniskan)  ;  of  suffixes  :  i.  1,  1  c  ; 
160,  2  c  ;  iii.  59,  6  c  (-tama) ;  viii.  48, 
1  b  (-tara)  ;  vii.  103,  6  d  ;  x.  15,  9  a 
(-tra)  ;  vii.  103,  3  c  (gd.  -tya) ;  ii.  35, 
4  c;  iv.  51,  9  c  d  (-bhis)  ;  iv.  50,  7  d 
(den.  -ya)  ;  x.  15,  6a;  129,  4  d  (gd. 
-ya)  ;  ofcertain  long Samhita  vowels: 
i.  35,  8  b  (cyavaya) ;  85,  4  b  (pra- 
cyavAyantas).  10  b  (dadrhaudm)  ; 
X.  135,  7  (sadanam) ;  i.  160,  1  b  (rta- 
vari)  ;  ii.  12,  4  (jigivan)  ;  iii.  59,  6  a 
(carsanidbffcas)  ;  vii.  63,  2a  (prasav- 
ita)  ;  X.  15,  9  a  (tatrsur)  ;  x.  34,  10 
(rnava) ;  its  restoration  of  lost  aspi- 
rate, i.  160,  3d  (duksata)  ;  ifs  re- 
moval of  Sandhi  in  cds.,  i.  154,  2 
(^giri-sthas)  ;  x.  15,  lib  (supranl- 
tayas)  ;  its  treatment  of  dual  com- 
pounds, i.  35,  1  b  (mitravdrunau) ; 
160,  1  a  (dyava-prthivi)  ;   x.  14,  8  b 


261 


(ista-purta)  ;  its  non-analysis  of  cer- 
tain cds.,  i.  35,  9b;  v.  83,  8  c 
(dyava-prthivi) ;  i.  154,2b(ku-cara). 
4  ;  ii.  35,'  7  b  (svadha)  ;  ii.  12,  4  c 
(adat)  ;  ii.  33,  3 ;  viii.  48,  8  a  (svasti) ; 
ii.  33,  5  c  ;  viii.  48,  10  a  (rdiiddra) ; 
iv.  50,  1  (Bfhaspdti)  ;  x.*  90,  13  a 
(candr^mas) ;  135,  2  a  (visthas)  ;  ii. 
12,  1  a  (manasvan) ;  its  analysis  of 
svavan,  i.  35,  10  b  ;  its  irregular  ac- 
centuation of  cd.  augmented  verbs, 
viii.  48,  2  a  (pra  agas).  10  c  (ni 
ddhayi) ;  x.  135,  4  a  (pra  d,vartayas). 

Panini,  p.  210. 

Pantheism,  starting  point  of,  p.  195. 

Parenthetical  Pada,  x.  127,  8  b. 

Parjanya,  description  of,  p.  104. 

Partitive  genitive,  i.  160,  4a;  ii.  33,  3  b. 

4  d  ;  viii.  48,  1  a ;  x.  15,  3  d. 
Perfect  with  present  sense,  i.  85,  3  b 

(dadhire).    ii,   12,  10  b    (jaghana)  ; 

35,  3  d  (tasthur).  13  d  (vivesa)  ;   iii. 

59,   1  b    (dadhara).  7  b    (babhiiva). 

8  a  (yemire) ;  x.  34,  11  a  (tatapa). 
Periphrastic  use  of  relative,  x.  90,  7  d. 

8  d.  12  c. 
Person,  syntactical  change  of,  i.  85,  4  c 

(3,  to  2.).  5  c  (2.  to  3.) ;  viii.  48,  5  b  c 

(2.  to  3.). 
Pischel,  iv.  51,  1  (p.  93). 
Pitaras,  description  of,  p.  176. 
Play  on  words,  p.  174  (yam\ 
Pragrhya  vowels  :  i,  i.  35,  9  b  (dyava- 

prthivi) ;  160,  1  a  b  c  (dyavaprthi- 

vf,   rtavari,    dharayat-kavi,    sujan- 

mani,    devi).   4  b  c  (rodasi,  rdjasi). 

5  a  b  (mahini,  dyavaprthivi)  ;  ii.  12, 
8  a  (krandasi,  samyati).  13  fprthi- 
vi) ;  V.  83,  8  c  (dyava-prthivi) ;  vii. 
86,  1  b  (rodasi,  urvi) ;  n  :  iv.  50,  10  b 
(vrsanvasu) ;  vii.  61,  2  c  (sukratu). 
3  b  (sudanu) ;  e :  i.  35,  9  b  (ubhe)  ; 
160,  lac  {t6,  dhisane).  2  c  (sudhfs- 
tame,  vapusye).  5  a  {t€,  grhane). 
5  d  (asm§)  ;  ii.  12,  8  a  d  (vihvayete, 
havete).  13  a  (namete) ;  33,  12  d 
(asm6) ;  35,  4  c  (asm6)  ;  iv.  50,  11  b 
(asm6) ;  vii.  61,  3  c  (dadhathe) ;  viii. 
48,  10  c  (asm6) ;  x.  90,  4  d  (sasana- 
nasane) ;  o  :  ii.  33,  3  b  (vajrabaho)  ; 
viii.  48,  2  c.  4  a  (indo)  ;  x.  168,  1  d 
(ut6);  not  shortened  in  pronuncia- 
tion before  vowels :  ii,  12, 1  c  (rodasi) ; 
vii.  49,  3  b  (satyanrt^). 

Pravargya  ceremony,  vii.  103,  8. 


Predicative  adjective,  ii.  12,  2.  4  ;  33, 
2d;  iv.  50,  7  d  ;  v.  83,  3  d.  7  c  ;  vii. 
61,  4  c  ;  X.  34,  12  d^;  (nom.)  with  ps., 
X.  90,  12  b. 

Preposition,  folloAving  vb.,  i.  85,  3  c. 

6  c.  10  b.  12  b  ;  ii.  35, 11  c ;  iv.  50,  1  a. 

7  b.  9  a ;  V.  11,  2  d  ;  X.  34,  14  b  ;  90, 
4  d  ;  129,  4  a  ;  168,  2  (?) ;  following 
participle,  x.  34,  6  d  ;  separated  from 
vb.,  i.  35,  7  a.  9  c  d.  11  d  ;  85,  1  a.  2  d. 

4  a.  5  a.  6  a.  7  b.  9  d  ;  ii.  33,  2  ;  iii. 
59,  4  c  ;  iv.  50,  4  d  ;  51.  2  c  ;  vii.  61, 
6  a  ;  63,  5  c  ;  x.  15,  9  c  ;  34,  2  d.  3  a  ; 
127,  Id.  5  a.  7  a.  8a  ;  separated  from 
infinitive,  vii.  61,  6  c  ;  of  compound 
vb.  repeated,  ii.  33,  2  cd  ;  iii.  59,  7  c  ; 
vii.  61,  3  b  ;  x.  51,  1  a  b  ;  127,  5  b  c  ; 
accentuation  of  compounded,  iv.  51, 

5  c  ;  vii.  71,  2  a.  4c;  x.  14,  14  d ; 
15,  2  c. 

Present  used  in  past  sense,  i.  85,  9  c. 
Principle   clause  for  relative,    ii.   12, 

5  b.  8  d. 

Prolation  of  vowel,  x.  129,  5  b  (asiSt). 
Purusa  hymn,  pp.  195-203. 
Pusan,    description    of,   p.  Ill  ;    viii. 
29,  5. 

Quantity,  interchange  of,  i.  35,  6b;  iv. 
51,  2  d  ;  vii.  49,  2  c.  3  c. 

Batri,  c^oddess  of  Night,  description  of, 
p.  203  ;  hymn  to,  pp.  203-7. 

Reciprocal  generation,  x.  90,  5  a  b. 

Reduplication,  irregular,  viii.  48,  5  b 
(anaha). 

Refrain,  of  stanzas,  ii.  12,  1  d-14  d  ;  v. 
83,  3  d-4  d  ;  vii.  49,  1  d-4  d  ;  of 
hymns,  ii.  12,  15  d  ;  33,  15  d  ;  35, 
15  d  ;  iv.  50,  6  d  ;  vii.  61,  7  d ;  63, 

6  a-d.  6  d  ;  71,  6  a-d  ;  86,  8  d  ;  103, 
10  d;  viii.  48,  14  d  ;  x.  14,  5  d. 

Relative  clause,  antecedent  in,  iv.  50, 

7  b.  8  d  ;  principal  clause  in  place  of, 
ii.  12,  5  a.  8  d. 

Rhythm,  abnormal,  i.  160,  5  d ;  x.  90, 
2  b.  6  a.  15  a  ;  see  also  Metre,  irregu- 
lar. 

Roth,  i.  35,  10  ;  154,  6  ;  ii.  35,  9. 

Rudra,  description  of,  pp.  56-7  ;  viii. 
29,  5. 

Samprasarana,  ii.  12,  8  (hu  for  hva). 
Sandhi,  1.  of  vowels  :  artificial,  v.  83, 
6  c  (e  =  a  +  e)  ;  irr.,  ii.  12,  5  a  (seti)  ; 


262 


between  Padas,  resolved  :  a  a,  ii.  33, 

7  c.  10  a  ;  iii.  59,  4  c  ;  v.  83,  10a;  viii. 
29,  la.  3a;  x.  14,  4a;  15,4c;  34, 
11a;  90,  13  c;  129,  6c;  a  a,  i.  35, 
2c;  ii.  33,  6c;  a  i,  x.  14,  8a;  15, 
6a;  a  u,  i.  35,  5c;  a  r,  vii.  103,  9  a  ; 
a  a,  i.  85,  11  a  ;  160,  4c;  v.  11,  4  a  ; 
viii.  29,  la;  x.  90,  1  c.  3a  ;  a  a,  i. 
85,  7a;  a  r,  i.  160,  la;  a  u,  iv.  51, 
2  c  ;  Pada  initial  a  re'^torod  :  e  a,  i. 
1,  9b:  85,  9  d  ;  iv.  50,  10  b;  x.  14, 
5  c  ;  129,  3  b  ;  168,  2  d  ;  o  a,  i.  35, 
11  b  ;  ii.  35,  13  d  ;  iii.  59,  6  b  ;  iv.  50, 
10  d;  V.  11,  4d;  vii.  86,  4  d.  5b; 
103,  3  d  ;  viii.  29,  2  b ;  48,  12  b.  13  b ; 
X.  14,  9b;  15,  8  b.  12  b  ;  34,  10  d. 

2.  of  semivowels  :  at  the  end  of  a 
Pada  resolved  before  vowels  :  y  a,  i. 
154,  4a;  v.  83,  6  c  ;  vii.  86,  7a; 
viii.  48,  2a;   y  u,  x.   14,  13  c  ;    15, 

8  c.  lie;  V  a,  i.  154,  2c;  iv.  51,  3  c  ; 
X.  15,  5c;  V  e,  x.  14,  4c;  v  r,  vii. 
61,3  c. 

3.  of  consonants  :  r  before  r,  i.  35, 
lie  ;  ii.33,  2  a.  14  a;  35,  4  c  ;  v.  83, 
1  c  ;  Visaijaniya  before  k,  i.  85,  6  c  ; 
ii.  35,  1  d  :  s  before  k,  i.  85,  6c;  ii. 
35,  Id;  V.  83,  2  d  ;  vii.  103,  4  c ;  s 
before  p,  v.  11,  6  d  ;  x.  135,  4  b  ; 
t  before  s,  i.  85,  3  ;  n  before  t,  vi. 
54,  9  a  (Piisan  tdva)  ;  x.  90,  8  c  (pa- 
sun  t-) ;  n  before  c,  x.  90,  8  c  (tarns 
cakre) ;  n  before  s,  i.  35,  5  ;  ii.  12, 
10  b;  iv.  51,  2  d.  7  d  ;  v.  11,  6b;  an 
before  y,  i.  35,  10  b  ;  befoie  1,  ii.  12, 

4  c  ;  an  before  vowels  becomes  am, 
ii.  33,  4  &c.,  irregularly  remains,  x. 
90,  3  a  (etavan  asya)  ;  an  at  the  end 
of  a  Pada  before  vowels  remains,  i. 
35,  10c;  ii.  12,  10a.  12  a;  x.  90,  8c; 
before  t  at  the  end  of  a  Pada  remains, 
ii.  33,  6  a. 

Savitr,  description  of,  pp.  10-11. 
Savaria,  i.  154,  2.  3.  6  ;    160,  3.  4;   ii. 

12,'  1.  3.  8.  12.  14 ;    .S3,  5.  6.  8.  9.  10. 

12;  35,  9;    iii.  59,  1  ;   iv.  51,  1.  3.  8  ; 

V.  83,  6  ;  vi.  54,  3  ;  vii.  86,  1  ;  viii. 

29,  10;  X.  14,  3;  x.  15,3.  12. 
Secondary  root,  i.  160,  5  d  (inv  "). 
'Self  expressed  by  tmdn  in  RV.,  vii. 

63,  6b;  by  tanu,  vii.  86,  2  a.  5  b. 
Separation    of    members    of    Devata- 

dvandvas,  ii.  12,  13. 
Shortening,  of  e  and  o  before  a  :  i.  35, 

5  a.  11  c  ;  85,  3  a.  6  d  ;  154,  1  c  ;  160, 


3d.  5d;  ii.  12,  3  c.  7  d.  8  b.  9  d.  11  c; 

33,  5  c.  11  d  ;  35,  8  a  ;  iii.  59,  2  a ;  iv. 
50,  la;  51,  2  b.  3  c.  4  b  ;  vi.  54,  1  b. 
3bc.4a;vii.63,4b.6a;  86,6b.  7c.  8c; 
103,  3  d.  4  a  ;  viii.  48,  8  d.  11  c.  12  d  ; 
x.  14,  3  a  ;  15,  1  d.  2  a.  5  d.  12  c.  14  a  ; 

34,  6c.  11  c-d  ;    90,  5  b  c.  6  c;  127, 

4  a.  5  a  ;  129,  6  a.  7  c  d  ;  135,  6b;  of 
a  before  r,  i.  160,  la;  of  i  befoi-e  a, 
X.  34,  4  b;  127,  1  b,  before  u,  2  b, 
before  a,  3  b  ;  of  radical  vowel,  ii.  35, 
3  c  ;  iv.  50,  5d  ;  of  dual  a,  vii.  61,  1  a 
( Varuna).  7  a  (deva) ;  of  inst.  i,  viii. 
48,  8  a  (svasti). 

Slurred  pronunciation  of  long  vowel,  i. 

154,  3a  (susd,m).   Id  (tredha)  ;  vii. 

63,  6  a  (nu). 
Singing,    characteristic    of  the   Angi- 

rases,  viii.  29,  10. 
Singular,    for   plur,    noun,   i.   85,    10  c 

(vandm)  ;    ii.  33,  1  (drvati)  ;   change 

from  —  to  plur.,  iv.  51,  11  c. 
Six  earths,  p.  175. 
Sociative  sense  of  inst..  x.  14,  3  a  b. 

5  a  b.  10  d  ;  15,  8  c.  10  c  d.  14  c ;  34,  5  a. 
Soma,  description  of,  pp.  152-5  ;  viii. 

29,  1. 
Soma  sacrifice,  vii.  103,  7.  10  d. 
Stanzas  syntactically  connected,   i.  1, 

7.  8  ;  85,  4.  5. 
Steed,  ruddy  —  of  heaven,  i.  85,  5  c  ; 

of  the  Sun,  vii.  63,  2  d. 
Steeds  of  the  Maruts,  i.  85,  4  d. 
Strong  form  for  weak,  i.  85,  12  c  (yan- 

ta)  ;  ii.  33,  1  b  (yuyothas).  3  d  (yu- 

yodhi)  ;    iii.  59,   1  d   (juhota")  ;    vii. 

71,   1  d  (yuyotam)  ;  x.  14,  14  b  (ju- 

hota).     15  b    (juhotaaa) ;     15,    7  d 

(dadhata).  11  d  (dadhatana). 
Subjunctive     and    injunctive,     when 

identical  in  form,  distinguished  by 

ma,  ii.  33,  4  a. 
Suffixes  treated  like  second  member  of 

a  cd.,  i.  160,  1  b  (rtavari).  3  a  (pa- 

vitravan),  &c. 
Supplied,  word  to  be,  iii.  59,   7c;    v. 

II,  Ic  ;  vi.  54,  7c  ;  vii.  61,  5a.  7d  ; 

viii.  29,  5a;  x.  14,  2d.  5c;  J5,  13a; 

34,  10  b  ;  127,  4  a  c  ;  168,  1  a.  4  c. 
Surya,  description  of,  p.  124. 
Sutras,  viii.  29,  8. 
Svarabhakti    vowel,    ii.   33,    1-3.    5-7. 

9-11  (Rud-^ra)  ;  iv.  60,  11  a  (Indira); 

V.  11,  3  a  (niat*r6s). 
Svarita,  independent,  ii.  33, 3  (abhiti) ; 


263 


35,  2  c  (asurya)  ;  x.  90,  8  c  (vayav- 
yan)  ;  followed  by  Udatta,  how 
marked,  i.  35,  7  e ;  iv.  51,  9  a  ;  Abhi- 
nihita,  ii.  12,  6  c  (yd  'vita). 
Syntactical  order,  irr.,  i.  85,  5  c  (dta) ; 
160,  3  (ca). 

Threefold  division  of  the  world,  x.  15, 

1.  2. 
Tvastr   fashions    Indra's    bolt,    i.    85, 

9a  b;  viii.  29,  3. 

Unreduplicated   perfect,    ii.   33,    14  d 

(midhvas). 
Usas,  description  of,  pp.  92-3. 

Varuna,  description  of,  pp.  134-5. 

Vata,  description  of,  p.  216. 

Vedas,  first  mention  of,  p.  195. 

Vjsve  devas,  description  of,  pp.  147-8. 

Visnu,  description  of,  pp.  30-1  ;  viii. 
29,  7. 

Vocative,  elliptical,  vii.  61,  1  a  (Varu- 
na =  Mitra- Varuna) ;  accent,  vii. 
71,  Ic;  viii.  48,  7c  (Soma  rajan). 
14  a  (trataro  devas). 


Vyuha,  resolution  of  semi-vowels,  i.  1, 
6  a;  35,  la  5c.  7ac.  8d.  9  c.  10  b.  11  a; 
85,  3  d.  4  c  ;  154,  1  a.  2  a.  2  c,  &c.  &c. 

Warrior  sons,  frequent  prayer  for,  i. 
1,  3  c  ;  85,  12  d,  &c  &c. 

Words  identical  in  form  distinguished 
by  accent  :  i.  35,  11  (t6  those,  te  io 
thee)  ;  ii.  12,  4  (dasd  demon,  dasa 
demoniac))  i.  160,  Id  (dharman,  n. 
ordinance,  dharman,  m.  ordainer)  ; 
vii.  86,  5d  (daman,  n.  bond,  daman, 
m.  gift)  ;  vii.  103,  9  a  (dvadasa  twelve, 
dvadas^  twelfth)  ;  ii.  35,  6  c  (paras, 
adv. /ar  away,  pdras,  adj.  N.  other)  ;  i. 
85,  5  d ;  vii.  86,  1  d  (bhuman,  n. 
earth,  bhiimdn,  m.  abundance) ;  71,  7  m 
(yuvdbhyam  to  you  two,  yuvabhyam 
to  the  two  youths) ;  i.  35,  10  c  (rdksas, 
n.  injury,  raksds  m.  demon)  ;  iii.  59,  3 
(variman,  n.  and  variman,  m.  ex- 
panse). 

Yajurveda,  ritual  of,  vii.  103,  7  a. 

Yama,  description  of,  p.  212, 

Ya:<ka,  i.  154,  2.  3.  6;  ii.  33,  5  ;  p.  129. 


PRINTED   IN    ENGLAND 
AT  THE  OXFORD    UNIVERSITY   PRESS 


Macdonell,  A. 

A  Vedic  Reader  for  students 


PK 

237 

.M2 


PONT"-"--i 
,p.  ^  ^      ».  FNST/TUTE- 

""''-•"-  >^,  Canada 


