===== Internet Archive OCR: vedicindexofname01macduoft_djvu.txt =====

'Hlrvlln 
\\u   'lit I  ii 


ico 


;LO 


>CO 


I1U m\  n \\\ \Ywn\ 
\m\tk\mmm\ 


mM\ 


J  II 


■!■!■!    ■•'. 

uSufil 

iiUflh 


;V 


VEDIC  INDEX  OF  NAMES  AND  SUBJECTS 


WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHORS 

I.     By  Prof.  MACDONELL. 

KATYAYANA'S    SARVANUKRAMAiYl    OF   THE 

tf/GVEDA.  With  Extracts  from  Shaigurusishya's  Com- 
mentary. (Anecdota  Oxoniensia:  Aryan  Series.)  Small  4to., 
pp.  xxiv+  224.     Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.     1886. 

A  SANSKRIT-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY  :  being  a 
Practical  Handbook,  with  Transliteration,  Accentuation, 
and  Etymological  Analysis  throughout.  4to.,  pp.  xii  +  384. 
Longmans,  Green  &  Co.,  London.     1892. 

VEDIC  MYTHOLOGY.  Royal  8vo.,  pp.  189.  Karl 
J.  Trubner,  Strassburg.     1897. 

A     HISTORY     OF    SANSKRIT     LITERATURE. 

Large  crown  8vo.,  pp.  viii  4-472.  Heinemann,  London. 
1900. 

THE  BRHAD-DEVATA.  A  Summary  of  the  Deities 
and  Myths  of  the  Rigveda.  Critically  edited  in  the  original 
Sanskrit  and  Translated  into  English.  2  vols.,  royal  8vo., 
pp.  xxxvi+  198  ;  xvi  +  334.     Harvard  University.     1904. 

VEDIC  GRAMMAR.  Royal  8vo.,  pp.  456.  Karl 
J.  Trubner,  Strassburg.    1910. 

A  SANSKRIT  GRAMMAR  FOR  BEGINNERS. 
Second  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged.  Crown  8vo.,  pp. 
xvi+264.     Longmans,  Green  &  Co.,  London.     191 1. 


II.     By  Dr.  KEITH. 

CATALOGUE  OF  SANSKRIT  AND  PRAKRIT 
MANUSCRIPTS  IN  THE  INDIAN  INSTITUTE 
LIBRARY.     Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.     1903. 

CATALOGUE  OF  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS  IN 
THE  BODLEIAN  LIBRARY.  Vol.  II.  (begun  by  Prof. 
Winternitz).     Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.     1905. 

CATALOGUE  OF  SANSKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS  IN 
THE  BODLEIAN  LIBRARY.  Appendix  to  Vol.  I.  (Th. 
Aufrecht's  Catalogue).     Clarendon  Press,  Oxford.     1909. 

CATALOGUE  OF  PRAKRIT  MANUSCRIPTS  IN 
THE  BODLEIAN  LIBRARY.  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford. 
1911. 

SANKHAYANA  ARANYAKA,  with  an  Appendix  on 
the  Mahavrata.  Royal  Asiatic  Society  (Oriental  Translation 
Fund,  Vol.  XVIII.).     London.     1908. 

AITAREYA  ARANYAKA.     Edited  with  Introduction, 

Translation,  Notes,  Indexes,  and  Appendix  containing  the 
portion  hitherto  unpublished  of  the  Sankhayana  Aranyaka.  ^ 
Clarendon  Press.     1909. 


^  Mr  A 


.-pc* 


INDIAN    TEXTS    SERIES 


VEDIC    INDEX 

OF 

NAMES  AND   SUBJECTS 


BY 

ARTHUR^  ANTHONY    MACDONELL,  M.A.,  Ph.D. 

BODEN  PROFESSOR  OF  SANSKRIT  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD  ; 
FELLOW  OF  BALLIOL  COLLEGE  ;  FELLOW  OF  THE  BRITISH  ACADEMY 

AND 

ARTHUR    BERRIEDALE    KEITH,  M.A.,  D.C.L. 

Formerly  scholar  of  balliol  college  and  boden  Sanskrit  scholar  ; 
■    sometime  acting  deputy  professor  of  sanskrit  in  the  university  of  oxford 


VOL.  I 


LONDON 
JOHN    MURRAY,    ALBEMARLE    STREET,    W. 

PUBLISHED  FOR  THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  INDIA 
igi2 


PREFACE 


Inception  and  Progress  of  the  Book.  —The  origination  of  the 
present  work  was  due  to  Professor  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  at  the 
time  when,  several  years  ago,  he  was  appointed  general  editor 
of  the  Indian  Text  Series  to  be  published  under  the  auspices 
of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  India.  He  then  asked  me  to 
contribute  a  work  supplying  the  historical  material,  as  repre- 
sented by  proper  names,  to  be  found  in  the  earliest  period  of 
Indian  literature  antecedent  to  the  rise  of  Buddhism  towards 
the  close  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.  Since  the  subject  came 
within  the  range  of  my  special  studies  and  moreover  appeared 
to  be  one  of  considerable  importance,  I  agreed  to  the  proposal. 
But  I  did  so  with  hesitation,  because  my  leisure  for  a  long  time 
to  come  was  already  mortgaged  by  two  works  which  involved 
much  labour  and  on  which  I  was  already  engaged.  I  soon 
came  to  the  conclusion  that  till  those  works — the  Brhaddevata 
and  the  Vedic  Grammar — were  out  of  my  hands,  I  could  spare 
no  time  for  the  third  book,  the  mere  preparation,  to  say  nothing 
of  the  publication,  of  which  would  thus  have  to  be  postponed 
for  several  years.  Another  hindrance  would  be  caused  by  the 
tour  of  study  and  research  in  India  which  I  contemplated  making 
at  the  earliest  opportunity.  With  the  prospect  of  these  long 
delays  before  me,  I  was  tempted  to  throw  up  a  task  that  seemed 
to  have  been  rashly  undertaken.  At  the  same  time,  I  was  re- 
luctant either  to  abandon  or  to  put  off  indefinitely  what  I  had 
once  begun.  It  also  seemed  a  pity  to  relinquish  an  enterprise 
which,  if  properly  carried  out,  promised  to   be  very  useful. 


vi  PREFACE 

Under  these  circumstances,  collaboration  appeared  the  only 
way  out  of  the  difficulty.  I  bethought  myself  of  Mr.  A.  B. 
Keith,  who,  as  Boden  Sanskrit  scholar,  had  been  my  pupil  for 
four  years,  and  who  had  already  assisted  me  since  1899,  not 
only  by  reading  the  proofs  of,  but  by  suggesting  improvements 
in,  my  History  of  Sanskrit  Literature  and  my  Sanskrit  Grammar 
for  Beginners,  as  well  as  my  edition  of  the  Brhaddevatd,  then 
commencing  to  be  printed.  I  accordingly  asked  him  if  he  had 
the  time  and  inclination  to  collaborate  with  me  in  the  proposed 
work  by  at  once  beginning  to  collect  material  for  it.  He  con- 
sented without  hesitation,  and  the  Secretary  of  State  for  India 
readily  sanctioned  this  modification  of  the  arrangements  already 
made.  There  was  no  other  man  to  whom  I  could  have  en- 
trusted with  such  complete  confidence  the  task  of  carrying  out 
this  preliminary  work  accurately  and  rapidly. 

In  1909,  about  a  year  after  my  return  from  India,  Mr.  Keith 
supplied  me  with  a  considerable  part  of  his  collectanea,  while 
my  Vedic  Grammar  was  still  passing  through  the  press.  The 
regular  printing  did  not  begin  till  early  in  1910,  about  the  time 
when  that  work  was  published.  The  interval  was  taken  up 
with  preparing  a  sufficient  amount  of  'copy'  for  the  printer, 
as  well  as  with  settling  various  questions  of  arrangement  and 
typography. 

Mode  of  Collaboration. — Our  respective  shares  in  the  pro- 
duction of  the  book  are,  generally  stated,  as  follows :  Dr.  Keith 
has  collected  the  material,  while  I  have  acted  chiefly  as  an 
editor,  planning  the  scope  of  the  work,  arranging  the  distribu- 
tion of  text  and  notes,  selecting  the  type  to  be  used,  cutting 
out,  adding  to  or  modifying  the  matter,  weighing  the  evidence 
for  different  interpretations  and  conclusions,  and  deciding  as  to 
which  view,  in  case  of  possible  alternatives,  should  be  preferred. 
Having  written  up  in  its  final  form  every  article  contained  in 
the  book,  I  accept  the  responsibility  for  every  statement  and 
opinion  expressed  in  it.  I  do  not  think  that  Dr.  Keith  and  I 
have  disagreed  upon  any  material  point.    When  we  have  differed 


PREFACE  vii 

on  minor  questions,  he  has  deferred  to  my  judgment,  though 
his  view  may  have  been  right  just  as  often  as  mine.  Where 
erroneous  conclusions  have  been  drawn,  the  reader  will  be 
helped  to  correct  them  by  the  method  I  have  pursued  of 
supplying  from  the  original  texts  the  evidence  on  which  such 
conclusions  are  based. 

Scope  of  the  Work. — At  the  outset  it  was  proposed,  as  I 
have  already  stated,  that  the  book  should  furnish  the  historical 
material  in  Vedic  literature  as  represented  by  proper  names. 
As  soon,  however,  as  I  began  to  examine  more  carefully  the 
historical  material   thus  available,   I  became  convinced   that 
restriction    to   proper   names  would   result   in   a   harvest   too 
meagre  to  deserve  being  gathered  in  the  form  of  a  book.     It 
seemed  essential  to  collect  all  the  historical  matter  accessible 
to  us  in  the  earliest  literary  documents  of  India,  and  thus  to 
furnish   a   conspectus   of  the   most   ancient   phase   of  Aryan 
civilization  that  can  be  realized  by  direct  evidence.     If  properly 
and  thoroughly  treated  this  matter  would,  I  felt  sure,  yield  a 
book  of  genuine  value,  a  comprehensive  work  on  Vedic  antiqui- 
ties ;   for  it  would   include  all   the  information   that   can   be 
extracted  from  Vedic  literature  on  such  topics  as  agriculture, 
astronomy,  burial,  caste,  clothing,  crime,  diseases,   economic 
conditions,  food  and  drink,  gambling,  kingship,  law  and  justice, 
marriage,  morality,  occupations,  polyandry  and  polygamy,  the 
position  of  women,  usury,  village  communities,  war,  wedding 
ceremonies,  widow  burning,  witchcraft,  and  many  others.     The 
proper  names  would  embrace   not  only  persons,  tribes,  and 
peoples,  but  also  mountains,  rivers,  and  countries.     The  geo- 
graphical distribution  of  the  Vedic  population  would  thus  also 
be  presented. 

From  the  historical  data  amplified  in  this  way  I  proposed, 
however,  to  exclude  matter  belonging  to  the  domain  of  religion, 
which  it  seemed  better  to  relegate  to  a  separate  work.  At  the 
same  time  it  soon  became  clear  that  certain  aspects  of  religious 
activity  inseparably  connected  with  the  social  and  political  life 


viii  PREFACE 

of  the  age  would  have  to  be  admitted,  such  as  the  functions  of 
the  main  priests  and  some  festivals  or  ritual  practices.  Again, 
certain  names  of  perhaps  purely  mythological  figures  might 
have  to  be  mentioned.  The  evidence  is  occasionally  insufficient 
to  show  whether  a  name  represents  an  actual  historical  person- 
age :  a  demon  or  a  mythical  hero  or  priest  may  be  meant.  An 
undoubted  demon  may  even  have  to  be  included,  such  as  the 
one  that  is  supposed  to  cause  eclipses,  because  he  belongs  to 
the  domain  of  primitive  astronomy. 

Chronological  Limits. — The  period  which  the  book  was 
intended  to  embrace  had  been  decided  at  the  outset  as  that 
of  the  Vedas  and  Brahmanas.  The  upper  limit  here  is  the  date 
of  the  oldest  hymns  of  the  Rigveda.  That  date  is  uncertain,  but 
my  conviction  (set  forth  in  my  History  of  Sanskrit  Literature, 
pp.  11-12)  that  it  is  not  much  earlier  than  1200  B.C.  still  remains 
unshaken.  It  does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  in  the  slightest  degree 
invalidated  by  Professor  Hugo  Winckler's  discoveries  at  Bo- 
ghaz-koi,  in  Asia  Minor,  in  the  year  1907.  That  scholar  has 
deciphered,  in  an  inscription  of  about  1400  B.C.  found  there,  the 
names  of  certain  deities  as  mi-it-rat  uru-w-na,  in-da-ra,  and  na- 
ga-at-ti-ia,  which  correspond  to  those  of  the  important  Vedic 
gods  Mitra,  Varuna,  Indra,  and  Nasatya.  Three  inferences  may 
be  drawn  from  the  occurrence  of  these  names.  They  may  have 
been  derived  from  Vedic  India ;  in  that  case  the  Vedic  religion 
must  have  flourished  in  India  considerably  before  1400  B.C., 
even  though  the  hymns  that  have  come  down  to  us  may  not 
have  been  composed  before  that  date.  But  that  these  names 
should  have  travelled  all  the  way  from  India  to  Asia  Minor 
is  a  hypothesis  so  highly  improbable  that  it  may  be  dismissed. 
Secondly,  the  names  may  belong  to  the  early  Iranian  period 
after  the  Iranians  had  separated  from  the  Indians,  but  before 
their  language  had  reached  the  phonetic  stage  of  the  Avesta. 
This  seems  the  most  probable  theory,  both  chronologically  and 
geographically.  It  implies  only  that  the  Indian  branch  had 
separated  from  the  Iranian,  not  that  it  had  already  entered 


PRE  FA  CE  ix 

India.  Lastly,  the  names,  being  common  to  the  Iranian  and 
Indian  languages,  might  be  assigned  to  the  I ndo- Iranian  period 
when  the  two  branches  were  still  one  people  living  in  Iran. 
This  theory  would  still  allow  two  centuries  for  separation, 
migration  to  India,  and  the  commencement  of  Vedic  literature 
in  the  north-west  of  India. 

The  lower  limit  of  the  Vedic  period  is  the  epoch  of  the  rise 
and  spread  of  Buddhism,  or,  roughly,  500  B.C.  The  Brahmana 
literature  to  be  exploited  was  assumed  to  be  undoubtedly 
anterior  to  that  date.  The  boundary  line  would,  however,  to 
some  extent  have  to  be  overstepped  by  drawing  on  the  Sutras 
for  evidence  where  the  Vedas  and  Brahmanas  fail.  But  though 
the  Sutras  are  roughly  contemporaneous  with  the  first  three 
centuries  of  Buddhism,  they  are  practically  an  epitome  of  the 
practices  of  the  Brahmana  period,  and  are  thus  often  of  great 
value  in  illustration  or  corroboration  of  the  facts  of  that  period. 
They  are  also  important  as  representing  the  Brahminical 
evidence  for  those  three  centuries,  especially  as  it  is  somewhat 
uncertain  how  far  even  the  earliest  Buddhist  literary  sources 
go  back  in  an  authentic  form  to  the  three  centuries  following  the 
death  of  Buddha.  Names  and  practices  not  referred  to  before 
the  Sutras  were,  however,  to  be  mentioned  only  incidentally 
if  at  all :  the  few  cases  to  the  contrary  that  actually  occur  are 
not  real  exceptions,  because  they  are  derived  from  Vedic  verses 
quoted  in  Sutras,  or  from  Brahmana  parts  of  Sutras  such  as 
Baudhayana. 

Method  Pursued. — Such  was  the  scope  of  the  work  on  which 
I  finally  decided  before  it  was  begun,  and  the  plan  has  been 
adhered  to  in  its  execution  as  regards  the  contents.  The 
manner  in  which  those  contents  were  to  be  presented  was 
the  next  question  to  be  settled  and  acted  upon.  Though  both 
Dr.  Keith  and  myself  are  familiar  with  the  literature  of  the 
Vedic  period  from  which  the  facts  collected  in  these  two 
volumes  are  drawn,  and  the  mutual  check  exercised  by  two 
workers  sifting  the  same  material  acts  as  a  safeguard,  it  is 


x  PREFACE 

nevertheless  not  always  possible  to  exclude  the  risk  of  error 
or  unconscious  bias  in  estimating  evidence  often  obscure  and 
doubtful.  I  have,  therefore,  throughout  attached  great  im- 
portance to  stating  not  only  the  evidence  of  the  texts  them- 
selves from  a  first-hand  knowledge,  but  also  to  setting  forth 
fully  the  opinions  of  other  authorities  when  the  interpretation 
is  uncertain.  The  Sanskrit  scholar  will  thus  be  enabled  to 
test  without  difficulty  the  correctness  of  the  conclusions  drawn 
directly  from  the  original  sources,  while  others  will  be  protected 
from  having  to  rely  exclusively  on  what  may  possibly  be  one- 
sided views.  Articles  have  often  been  illustrated  by  adducing 
parallels  from  the  institutions  of  cognate  Aryan  nations,  as  that 
on  'Caste'  (treated  under  Varna,  ii.  427-471).  I  have  further 
endeavoured  to  utilize,  chiefly  in  the  notes,  knowledge  gained 
from  a  first-hand  study  of  the  archaeological  remains  and  of 
the  modern  conditions  of  India.  Such  knowledge,  acquired 
during  my  tour  in  1907-08,  I  have  found  to  be  of  great  value 
to  me  both  as  a  student  and  as  a  teacher. 

Arrangement. — The  matter  contained  in  these  volumes  is 
treated  not  in  chapters,  but  in  articles  disposed  in  alphabetical 
order.  That  order  was  practically  necessary  when  proper 
names  only  were  to  be  included;  when  subjects  were  sub- 
sequently added  to  the  plan,  it  still  remained  the  most  con- 
venient method  of  arrangement.  As  all  articles  appear  under 
Sanskrit  words,  the  order  which  the  latter  follow  is  naturally 
that  of  the  Sanskrit  alphabet.  This  arrangement  need,  how- 
ever, occasion  no  inconvenience  to  those  users  of  the  book  who 
are  unfamiliar  with  Sanskrit,  because  all  the  information  they 
want  can  be  found  by  reference  to  the  full  English  Index  at  the 
end  of  Vol.  ii.  The  Sanskrit  Index,  which  contains,  in  addition 
to  the  terms  representing  the  subjects  treated,  all  incidental 
Sanskrit  words  occurring  in  the  articles,  is  of  course  arranged 
in  the  Sanskrit  order.  For  the  purpose  of  obviating  any  possible 
inconvenience,  the  sequence  of  the  Sanskrit  alphabet  is  given 
on  the  last  page  of  this  preface.     With  the  same  end  in  view  I 


PREFACE  xi 

have  given  translations  or  explanations  of  all  Sanskrit  words 
and  expressions,  because  the  latter,  though  generally  clear  to 
Sanskrit  scholars,  would  be  unintelligible  to  others.  Compound 
Sanskrit  words  have  been  divided  into  their  component  parts  by 
the  use  of  hyphens.  In  the  case  of  obscure  or  irregularly  formed 
Sanskrit  words,  I  have  sometimes  added  etymological  explana- 
tions, which  may  be  useful  even  to  the  Sanskrit  scholar. 

I  have  long  had  a  rooted  objection  to  crowding  the  letter- 
press of  a  book  with  parentheses  containing  a  string  of  references 
or  incidental  explanations,  because  these  distract  the  attention 
of  the  reader  and  interfere  with  his  grasping  the  argument 
rapidly.  I  have  accordingly  in  the  present  work  (as  in  several 
previous  ones)  cleared  the  text  of  such  obstructive  matter, 
relegating  references  and  minor  explanations,  illustrations,  or 
discussions,  to  the  notes.  The  sole  exceptions  are  short 
references  consisting  of  figures  only,  and  occurring  in  articles 
of  two  or  three  lines  in  length.  Thus,  in  the  article  *  Kausarava ' 
(i.  194),  the  figures  (viii.  28)  are  added  in  parentheses  at  the 
end  of  the  line.  To  have  made  a  footnote  out  of  these  figures 
alone  would  have  been  a  pedantic  and  an  absurd  application 
of  the  general  principle. 

The  notes  are  placed  in  two  columns,  because  this  arrange- 
ment enables  the  reader  to  find  them  more  rapidly  than  any 
other.  They  come  at  the  end  of,  and  immediately  below,  each 
article.  It  is  only  when  the  article  is  a  long  one  extending 
beyond  the  first  page  that  the  notes  do  not  all  occupy  this 
position.  Those  referring  to  each  page  are  then  placed  at  the 
foot  of  that  page,  and  only  those  referring  to  the  last  page  come 
at  the  end  of  the  article  (cf,9  e.g.,  1.  Aksa). 

The  headlines  are  so  arranged  as  to  help  the  reader  in  finding 
what  he  wants  quickly,  as  well  as  to  convey  the  maximum  of 
information.  A  glance  at  the  inner  corners  at  the  top  will 
show  the  alphabetical  range  of  the  articles  occurring  in  any 
two  pages,  the  one  indicating  the  first  word  on  the  left  page, 
the  other  the  last  word  on  the  right  page.     The  rest  of  the 


xii  PREFACE 

headline  of  each  page  supplies  a  summary  of  the  contents  oi 
that  page.  I  have  never  been  able  to  find  any  rational  ex- 
planation why  the  title  of  the  book  held  in  one's  hand  should 
be  printed  at  the  top  of  at  least  half,  sometimes  of  all,  the 
pages  it  contains.  How  this  practice  can  possibly  assist  the 
reader  is  hard  to  understand. 

Typographical  Details.— Every  Sanskrit  word  used  as  the 
title  of  an  article  is  printed  in  thick  type  for  the  purpose  of 
catching  the  eye  of  the  reader  more  readily.  Every  such  word 
mentioned  in  another  article  is  on  its  first  occurrence  there 
similarly  printed.  This  is  both  a  simpler  and  a  clearer  way  of 
referring  to  a  word  used  in  another  place  than  the  employ- 
ment of  parentheses  and  additional  words  or  abbreviations,  like 
*  see '  or  '  c/.,'  which  tend  to  distract  the  attention  of  the  reader 
(see,  e.g.,  Agastya).  Both  Sanskrit  names  (including  titles  of 
books)  and  ordinary  Sanskrit  terms  used  as  English  words  are 
printed  in  Roman  type,  but  then  always  with  a  capital  (e.g., 
Purohita).  Italic  type  is  employed  for  Sanskrit  words  quoted 
as  such,  for  expressions  from  other  languages  such  as  Latin  or 
French,  for  the  titles  of  all  except  Sanskrit  books  (e.g.,  Olden- 
berg,  Buddha),  and  even  of  Sanskrit  books  when  a  particular 
edition  is  intended  (thus  Roth,  Nirukta,  but  Yaska,  Nirukta). 
English  words  are  italicized  only  when  in  long  articles  the 
titles  of  subdivisions  are  given.  All  these  uses  of  italics  will 
be  found  exemplified  in  the  articles  2.  Aksa  and  3.  Aksa. 

As  regards  numerals,  Roman  figures  are  employed  to  indicate 
the  main  divisions  of  a  work,  the  subordinate  parts  being 
expressed  by  Arabic  figures.  Thus  '  Rigveda,  ii.  3,  5, '  means 
1  book  2,  hymn  3,  verse  5.'  The  volume,  on  the  other  hand, 
is  referred  to  by  an  Arabic  numeral,  the  following  figure 
indicating  the  page.  Thus  *  Max  Miiller,  Rgveda,  2,  135 ' 
means  *  volume  2   of  Max  Muller's  edition  of  the    Rigveda, 

page  135-' 

I  have  avoided  abbreviating  the  titles  of  books  or  journals 
even  when  they  occur  often,  or  are  mentioned  in  the  notes 


PREFACE 

only.  Contracted  titles  are  as  a  rule  intelligible  to  the  general 
reader  only  by  reference  to  an  explanatory  list  appearing  at 
the  beginning  or  the  end  of  a  book.  When  a  work  is  written 
consecutively,  such  an  abbreviation  can  be  looked  up  on  its 
first  occurrence,  and  as  it  is  usually  met  with  again  at  short 
intervals  its  explanation  will  be  remembered.  But  in  a  book 
arranged  in  dictionary  form,  the  occurrence  of  abridged  titles 
becomes  irksome  to  the  reader  because  he  meets  them  at  any 
part  of  the  book  he  opens,  and  often  many  at  the  same  time ; 
he  will  probably  therefore  be  continually  consulting  the  ex- 
planatory list.  Hence  I  have  only  admitted  the  contractions 
1  Rv.'  for  Rigveda  and  '  Av.'  for  Atharvaveda,  as  these  texts  are 
constantly  referred  to,  often  several  times  in  the  same  article. 
In  some  works,  such  as  the  Encyclopedia  of  Indo- Aryan  Research,. 
excessively  contracted  titles,  frequently  assuming  the  appear- 
ance of  algebraic  symbols,  become  necessary  owing  to  the  great 
mass  of  bibliographical  references  required.  In  the  present 
work  such  economy  of  space  was  in  no  way  called  for.  If, 
however,  the  book  had  been  intended  for  the  use  of  Sanskrit 
scholars  only,  I  should  certainly  have  shortened  many  titles 
here  given  in  full,  for  there  are  numerous  formulaic  abbrevia- 
tions that  are  familiar  to  all  specialists. 

Transliteration. — The  system  here  followed  is  that  which 
has  been  adopted  by  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  of  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland,  and  is  generally  employed  elsewhere  also.  The 
chief  difficulties  caused  to  the  non-scholar  by  this  method  of 
reproducing  Sanskrit  words  are  due,  on  the  one  hand,  to  the 
inadequacy  of  the  Roman  alphabet,  which  necessitates  the  use 
of  diacritical  marks,  and,  on  the  other,  to  the  conventional  use 
of  two  consonants  in  English,  in  certain  cases,  to  represent  a 
single  sound,  as  ch,  sh,  ph,  and  th.  The  letter  s  here  is  the 
equivalent  of  sh  in  *  shun ' ;  s  is  somewhat  thinner  in  pro- 
nunciation, like  the  ss  in  '  session ' ;  m  resembles  the  n  in  the 
French  '  bon  ' ;  and  h  the  German  ch  in  *  ach.'  The  palatal  c 
is  to  be  sounded  like  the  initial  ch  in  Churchill;   ch  has  an 


xiv  PREFACE 

aspirate  sound  like  that  of  the  ch  in  the  middle  of  the  same 
word  ;  ph  and  th  are  also  aspirates,  as  in  the  English  *  up-hill  ■ 
and  *  ant-hill '  respectively.  The  vowels  must  all  be  pro- 
nounced as  in  Italian :  short  when  unmarked  (except  e  and  0, 
which  are  always  long),  long  when  they  have  a  horizontal 
stroke  above ;  thus  i  is  sounded  as  in  '  pin,'  1  like  ee  in  '  seen.' 
The  vowel  r  may  be  pronounced  like  ri  in  '  risk.' 

The  Map. — In  order  that  the  reader  may  be  enabled  to 
visualize  in  a  general  way  the  territory  known  to  and  occupied 
by  the  Vedic  tribes,  I  have  prefixed  to  the  first  volume  a  map 
of  Vedic  India.  Here  the  home  of  the  Indo-Aryans  of  the 
earliest  period — that  of  the  Rigveda — is  the  territory  drained 
by  the  Indus  river  system,  lying  between  the  35th  and  28th 
parallel  of  northern  latitude  and  between  yo°  and  780  eastern 
longitude,  and  corresponding  roughly  to  the  North -West 
Frontier  Province  and  the  Panjab  of  the  present  day.  The 
eastern  limit  was  probably  the  Yamuna,  though  the  Ganges 
was  already  known.  In  the  subsequent  Vedic  period — that 
of  the  later  Vedas  and  of  the  Brahmanas — the  Indo-Aryan 
settlers  gradually  occupied  the  whole  of  the  Ganges  Valley 
down  to  the  delta  of  that  river.  But  the  home  of  the  fully 
developed  culture  of  the  Brahmanas  lay  in  the  territory  ex- 
tending in  a  south-easterly  direction  from  longitude  740  to 
850,  between  the  confluence  of  the  Sarasvati  and  Drsadvati 
in  the  west  and  that  of  the  Sadanira  and  Ganges  on  the  east, 
and  embracing  roughly  the  south-eastern  portion  of  the  Panjab 
and  the  United  Provinces  of  to-day.  East  of  longitude  850 
lay,  to  the  north  and  south  of  the  Ganges,  the  imperfectly 
Brahminized  country  corresponding  to  the  modern  Tirhut  and 
Bihar,  where  Buddhism  arose  at  the  end  of  the  Vedic  period. 

I  ought  to  warn  readers  against  placing  too  much  reliance 
on  the  details  of  this  map,  because  it  is  largely  conjectural 
owing  to  the  lack  of  precise  geographical  statement  in  the 
texts.  The  student,  when  using  it,  should  always  refer  to  the 
evidence  furnished  by  the  articles  under  each  name  that  appears 


PREFACE  xv 

on  the  map.  The  identification  of  many  of  the  Vedic  rivers 
with  those  of  modern  India  is  certain ;  but  even  here  the  exact 
channels  in  which  they  flowed  in  ancient  times  is  doubtful. 
Thus  the  Indus,  some  of  the  Panjab  rivers,  and  the  old 
Sarasvati  have  been  shown  by  Raverty,  in  an  article  in  the 
Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal  for  1892,  to  have  changed 
their  courses  considerably,  even  within  historical  times.  It 
must  be  remembered  that  all  the  rivers  of  Vedic  India  traversed 
the  alluvial  plains  of  the  north,  and  were,  therefore,  unlike  the 
rivers  of  the  Deccan,  which  flow  in  rocky  beds,  liable  to  constant 
fluctuations  in  their  channels.  Again,  the  Vedic  tribes  are 
nearly  always  mentioned  so  vaguely  in  the  texts  that  they  can 
only  be  approximately  located  by  the  rivers  with  which  they 
are  connected,  or  by  the  way  in  which  their  names  are  asso- 
ciated or  grouped.  Many  such  names  had  to  be  omitted 
altogether  in  the  map  because  of  the  total  lack  of  evidence 
for  their  localization.  Some  help  may  be  obtained  from  the 
geographical  position  in  the  post- Vedic  period  of  tribes  men- 
tioned in  Vedic  literature.  But  this  evidence  is  apt  to  be 
doubtful,  because  the  Vedic  period  was  largely  one  of  migra- 
tion, and  various  tribes  may  then  have  occupied  localities 
much  farther  north  or  west  than  those  in  which  they  were 
later  permanently  settled.  The  general  evidence  of  the  map, 
however  uncertain  many  of  the  details  may  be,  leaves  no  room 
for  doubt  as  to  the  route  by  which  the  Aryans  entered  India, 
or  as  to  the  direction  of  the  successive  stages  of  the  migration 
by  which  they  eventually  spread  their  civilization  over  the 
whole  of  the  peninsula. 

Conclusion. — The  first  volume  was  ready  for  issue  more  than 
a  year  ago,  but  to  publish  it  without  the  indexes,  which  would 
necessarily  have  to  appear  at  the  end  of  the  second  volume, 
seemed  to  me  to  be  perfectly  useless.  I  therefore  preferred 
to  wait  till  the  whole  book  could  be  brought  out  in  a  complete 
form.  As  both  Dr.  Keith  and  myself  have  each  read  one  proof 
and  nearly  always  two  revises  of  every  sheet  before  it  went  to 


/ 


XVI 


PREFACE 


press,  all  but  trivial  errors  and  misprints  ought  to  have  been 
eliminated.  I  hope,  however,  that  these  two  volumes  will 
prove  to  be  not  only  correct  in  form,  but  also  valuable  in 
matter,  after  our  joint  efforts  to  bring  together  and  present 
their  contents  in  a  convenient  and  trustworthy  manner. 


A.  A.  MACDONELL. 


Oxford, 

July  18,  1912. 


Order  of  the  Sanskrit  Alphabet. 

a   a   i   1   u    u   r   r   1 ;      e  ai   o  au  ;      k  kh  g  gh,  h ;     c  ch 
j  jh  n  ;    t  th  d  dh  n;    t  th  d  dh  n  ;    p  ph  b  bh  m  ;    y  r  1  v; 

£  s  s  h. 


VEDIG  INDEX  OF  NAMES  AND 
SUBJECTS. 


Am6u. — i.  Name  of  a  protege-  of  the  Asvins  in  the  Rigveda.1 
2.  Dhanamjayya,  pupil  of  Amavasya  Sandilyayana,  according 
to  the  Vamsa  Brahmana.2 

1  viii.   5,  26.    Cf.   Ludwig,  Transla-  129,  suggests  that  he  may  be  identical 

tion  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  160  ;  Hopkins,  with  Khela. 

Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  2  Indische  Studien,  4,  373. 
17,  89 ;  Sieg,  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda, 

Amhasas-pati. — This  is  the  name  of  the  intercalary  month  in 
the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita  (vii.  30;  xxii.  31).     See  Masa. 

Akra. — In  several  passages  of  the  Rigveda1  this  word  means, 
according  to  Geldner,2  '  horse.'  Roth3  suggests  that  '  riding 
horse  '  is  the  precise  sense.     Cf.  Asva. 

3  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  48,  118.  Cf.  Max 
Mttller,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32,  414. 


1  i-  143,7;  189.7;  I"-  *,  12;  iv.  6,  3 
x.  77,  2. 

2  Vedische  Studien,  i,  168,  169. 


i.  Aksa,  '  axle,'  is  a  part  of  a  chariot  often  referred  to  in 
the  Rigveda1  and  later.  It  was  apparently2  fastened  to  the 
body  of  the  chariot  (Kosa)  by  straps  (aksd-nah,  lit.  '  tied  to  the 
axle,'  though  this  word  is  also3  rendered  'horse').  The 
heating  of  the  axle  and  the  danger  of  its  breaking  were  known.4 
The  part  of  the  axle  round  which  the  nave  of  the  wheel 
revolved  was  called  Ani,  '  pin.' 


1  i.  30,  14  ;    166,  9  ;   iii.  53,  17  ;   vi. 
24,  3  ;  x.  89,  4,  etc. 

2  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  246. 
VOL.  I. 


3  Rv.  x.  53,  7.    Cf.  Roth,  St.  Peters- 
burg Dictionary,  s.v. 

4  Rv.  i.  164,  13. 

I 


2  DICE:  THE  MATERIAL— THE  NUMBER  [Aksa 

2.  Aksa. — This  word  occurs  frequently,  from  the  Rigveda 
onwards,  both  in  the  singular  and  plural,  meaning  '  die '  and 
'  dice.'  Dicing,  along  with  horse-racing,  was  one  of  the  main 
amusements  of  the  Vedic  Indian  ;  but,  despite  the  frequent 
mention  of  the  game  in  the  literature,  there  is  considerable 
difficulty  in  obtaining  any  clear  picture  of  the  mode  in  which  it 
was  played. 

(i)  The  Material. — The  dice  appear  normally  to  have  been 
made  of  Vibhidaka  nuts.  Such  dice  are  alluded  to  in  both  the 
Rigveda1  and  the  Atharvaveda,2  hence  being  called  'brown' 
(babhru),  and  '  born  on  a  windy  spot.'  3  In  the  ritual  game  of 
dice  at  the  Agnyadheya  and  the  Rajasuya  ceremonies  the 
material  of  the  dice  is  not  specified,  but  it  is  possible  that 
occasionally  gold  imitations  of  Vibhidaka  nuts  were  used.4 
There  is  no  clear  trace  in  the  Vedic  literature  of  the  later  use 
of  cowries  as  dice.5 

(2)  The  Number. — In  the  Rigveda6  the  dicer  is  described  as 
'  leader  of  a  great  horde '  (sendnir  mahato  ganasya),  and  in 
another  passage 7  the  number  is  given  as  tri-paiicdsah,  an  expres- 
sion which  has  been  variously  interpreted.  Ludwig,8  Weber,9 
and  Zimmer10  render  it  as  fifteen,  which  is  grammatically 
hardly  possible.  Roth11  and  Grassmann12  render  it  as  '  con- 
sisting of  fifty-three.'  Liiders13  takes  it  as  'consisting  of  one 
hundred  and  fifty,'  but  he  points  out  that  this  may  be  merely  a 
vague  expression  for  a  large  number.  For  a  small  number 
Zimmer  14  cites  a  reference  in  the  Rigveda 15  to  one  who  fears 
1  him  who  holds  four  '  (caturas  cid  dadamdndt),  but  the  sense  of 
that  passage  is  dependent  on  the  view  taken  of  the  method  of 
playing  the  game. 

(3)  The   Method   of  Play. — In  several  passages  of  the  later 


1  vii.  86,  6  ;  x.  34,  1. 

2  Av.  Paipp.  xx.  4,  6. 

3  Rv.  x.  34,  5  ;  Av.  vii.  114,  7  ; 
Rv.  x.  34,  1. 

4  Sayana  on  Taittiriya  Samhita,  i.  8, 
6,  12  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  4,  4,  6. 

5  Sayana,  loc.  cit.,  and  on  Rv.  i.  41,  9  ; 
Mahidhara  on  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
x.  28. 

*  x.  34,  12. 


8  See  his  translation. 

9  Uber  das  Rajasuya,  72. 

10  Altindisches  Leben,  284. 

11  Following  Sayana  on  Rv.  x.  34,  8 

12  In  his  translation. 

13  Das  Wurfelspiel  im  alien  Indien,  25. 

14  Op.  cit.,  283. 

15  i-  41,  9. 


Aksa  ] 


DICE:  THE  METHOD  OF  PLAY 


Samhitas  and  Brahmanas  lists  are  given  of  expressions  con- 
nected with  dicing.  The  names  are  Krta,  Treta,  Dvapara, 
Askanda,  and  Abhibhu  in  the  Taittirlya  Samhita.16  In  the 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,17  among  the  victims  at  the  Purusamedha, 
the  kitava  is  offered  to  the  Aksaraja,  the  adinava-darsa  to  the 
Krta,  the  hatpin  to  the  Treta,  the  adhi-kalpin  to  the  Dvapara, 
the  sabhd-sthdrm  to  the  Askanda.  The  lists  in  the  parallel 
version  of  the  Taittirlya  Brahmana  are  kitava,  sabhdvin,  adinava- 
darsa,  bahih-sad,  and  sabha-sthdnu,18  and  Aksaraja,  Krta,  Treta, 
Dvapara,  and  Kali.  From  the  Satapatha  Brahmana19  it  appears 
that  another  name  of  Kali  was  Abhibhu,  and  the  parallel  lists 
in  the  Taittirlya  and  Vajasaneyi  Samhitas  suggest  that  Abhibhu 
and  Aksaraja  are  identical,  though  both  appear  in  the  late 
Taittirlya  Brahmana  list.  The  names  of  some  of  these  throws 
go  back  even  to  the  Rigveda  and  the  Atharvaveda.  Kali  occurs 
in  the  latter,20  and  Liiders21  shows  that  in  a  considerable  number 
of  passages  in  the  former  Krta  means  a  '  throw '  (not '  a  stake  '22 
or  '  what  is  won m),  and  this  sense  is  clearly  found  in  the 
Atharvaveda.24  Moreover,  that  there  were  more  throws  (ayah) 
than  one  is  proved  by  a  passage  in  the  Rigveda,25  when 
the  gods  are  compared  to  throws  as  giving  or  destroying 
wealth. 

The  nature  of  the  throws  is  obscure.  The  St.  Petersburg 
Dictionary  conjectures  that  the  names  given  above  were  applied 
either  to  dice  marked  4,  3,  2,  or  I,  or  to  the  sides  of  the  dice  so 
marked,  and  the  latter  interpretation  is  supported  by  some  late 
commentators.26  But  there  is  no  evidence  for  the  former 
interpretation,  and,  as  regards  the  latter,  the  shape  of  the 
Vibhldaka  nuts,27  used  as  dice,  forbids  any  side  being  properly 
on  the  top.    Light  is  thrown  on  the  expressions  by  the  descrip- 


](> 


iv.  3,  3,  : 

XXX. 


2. 


"  xxx.  18. 

18  iii.  4,  1,  16.  These  must  be  persons 
conversant  with  dicing,  but  the  exact 
sense  of  the  names  is  unknown. 

19  v.  4,  4,  6. 

20  vii.  114,  1. 

21  Op.  cit.,  43  et  seq. 

22  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

23  Grassmann's  Dictionary,  s.v. 


24  vii.  52.  See  Rv.  x.  42,  9  (krtam 
vicinoti)  ;  43  ,  5  ;  x.  102,  2  ;  v.  60,  1  ; 
be.  97,  58  ;  i.  132,  I  ;  x.  34,  6  ;  i.  IOO,  9  ; 
viii.  19,  10. 

25  x.  116,  9. 

26  Anandagiri  on  Chandogya  Upani- 
sad,  iv.  1.  4;  Nilakantha  on  Maha- 
bharata,  iv.  50,  24. 

27  Liiders,  op.  cit.,  18. 

I — 2 


DICE :  THE  METHOD  OF  PLA  Y 


[  Aksa 


tion  of  a  ritual  game28  at  the  Agnyadheya  and  at  the  Rajasuya 
ceremonies.  The  details  are  not  certain,29  but  it  is  clear  that 
the  game  consisted  in  securing  even  numbers  of  dice,  usually  a 
number  divisible  by  four,  the  Krta,  the  other  three  throws  then 
being  the  Treta,  when  three  remained  over  after  division  by 
four ;  the  Dvapara,  when  two  was  the  remainder ;  and  the  Kali, 
when  one  remained.  If  five  were  the  dividing  number,  then  the 
throw  which  showed  no  remainder  was  Kali,  the  Krta  was  that 
when  four  was  left,  and  so  on.  The  dice  had  no  numerals 
marked  on  them,  the  only  question  being  what  was  the  total 
number  of  the  dice  themselves. 

There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  game  as  played  in  the 
Rigveda  was  based  on  the  same  principle,  though  the  details 
must  remain  doubtful.  The  number  of  dice  used  was  certainly 
large,30  and  the  reference  to  throwing  fours,31  and  losing  by  one, 
points  to  the  use  of  the  Krta  as  the  winning  throw.  The 
Atharvaveda,32  on  the  other  hand,  possibly  knew  of  the  Kali  as 
the  winning  throw.  In  one  respect  the  ordinary  game  must 
have  differed  from  the  ritual  game.  In  the  latter  the  players 
merely  pick  out  the  number  of  dice  required — no  doubt  to  avoid 
ominous  errors,  such  as  must  have  happened  if  a  real  game  had 
been  played.  In  the  secular  game  the  dice  were  thrown,33 
perhaps  on  the  principle  suggested  by  Luders:34  the  one 
throwing  a  certain  number  on  the  place  of  playing,  and  the  other 
then  throwing  a  number  to  make  up  with  those  already  thrown 
a  multiple  of  four  or  five.  This  theory,  at  any  rate,  accounts  for 
the  later  stress  laid  on  the  power  of  computation  in  a  player, 
as  in  the  Nala. 

No  board  appears  to  have  been  used,  but  a  depression  on  which 

28  Baudhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  ii.  8  ;  9  ; 
Apastamba  Srauta  Sutra,  v.  19,  4  ;  20, 

I,  with  Rudradatta's  note,  for  the 
Agnyadheya.  Apastamba,  xviii.  18,  16 
et  seq.,  describes  the  Rajasuya  game, 
and  cf.  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iv.  4,  6  ; 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  7,  10,  5  ;  §ata- 
patha  Brahmana,  v.  4,  4,  6  ;  Katyayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  7,  5  et  seq.  For  Krta 
as  four,  see  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
xiii.  3,  2,  1 ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  5, 

II,  1. 


29  See  Caland,  Zeitschrift  der  Deut- 
schen  Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft,  62, 
123  et  seq. 

30  Rv.  x.  34,  8. 

31  Rv.  i.  41,  9.  In  x.  34,  2,  the  loss 
is  ascribed  to  aksasya  ekaparasya,  which 
confirms  the  explanation  of  Dvapara 
given  in  Panini,  ii.  1,  10. 

32  vii.  114,  1. 

33  Rv.  x.  34,  1.  8.  9  ;  Av.  iv.  38,  3. 


34  Op.  cit.  56. 


Aksata  ] 


DICE:  THE  METHOD  OF  PLAY 


the  dice  were  thrown  (adhi-devana,  devana35  irina36),  was  made 
in  the  ground.  No  dice  box  was  used,  but  reference  is  made  to 
a  case  for  keeping  dice  in  (aksa-vapana37).  The  throw  was  called 
graha38  or  earlier  grclbha.39  The  stake  is  called  vij.40  Serious 
losses  could  be  made  at  dicing :  in  the  Rigveda  a  dicer  laments 
the  loss  of  all  his  property,  including  his  wife.41  Liiders42  finds 
a  different  form  of  the  game  referred  to  in  the  Chandogya 
Upanisad.43 


35  Adhidevana  in  A  v.  v.  31,  6  ;  vi.  70, 
1 ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  6,  11 ;  iv.  4, 
6,  etc.  ;  devana  in  Rv.  x.  43,  5.  The 
falling  of  the  dice  on  the  ground  is 
referred  to  in  Av.  vii.  114,  2. 

36  Rv.  x.  34,  1. 

37  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  3,  1,  11. 

38  Av.  iv.  38,  1  et  seq.  ;  cf.  vii.  114,  5. 

39  Rv.  viii.  81,  1 ;  ix.  106,  3. 

40  Rv.  i.  92,  10;  ii.  12,  5;  laksa  in 
ii.  12,  4,  and  often  dhana.  So  Liiders, 
op.  cit.,  10,  n.  5;  62,  n.  1.  Roth  and 
Zimmer,  op.  cit.,  286,  render  '  he  makes 
the  dice  secretly  disappear'  (i.  92, 
10). 

41  Rv.   x.   34,  2.      For  cheating  at 


play  cf.  Rv.  v,  85,  8  ;  vii.  86,  6 ;  104 
14  ;  Av.  vi.  118. 

42  Op.  cit.,  61. 

43  iv.  1,  4;  6.  According  to  Nila- 
kantha  on  Harivamsa,  ii.  61,  39,  the 
stake  was  divided  into  ten  parts,  and 
the  Kali  then  took  one,  the  Dvapara 
three,  the  Treta  six,  and  the  Krta  all 
ten.     This  explanation  seems  harsh. 

Cf.  Roth,  Gurupujakaumudi,  1-4  ; 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  283-287 ; 
Liiders,  Das  Wurfelspiel  im  alten  Indien  ; 
Caland,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  62,  123  et  seq.; 
Keith,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society,  1908,  823  et  seq. 


3.  Aksa. — In  the  Chandogya  Upanisad  (vii.  3,  1)  this  word 
seems  to  denote  the  nut  of  the  Vibhidaka  (Terminalia  bellerica). 

Aksata  or  Aksita. — In  one  passage  of  the  Atharvaveda,1 
dealing  with  the  Jayanya,  mention  is  made  of  a  remedy  for 
sores  designated  both  Aksita  and  Suksata,  or,  according  to 
the  reading  of  the  Kausika  Sutra,  Aksata  and  Suksata,  while 
Sayana  has  Aksita  and  Suksita.  Bloomfield2  renders  '  not 
caused  by  cutting '  and  '  caused  by  cutting.'  Formerly3  he 
suggested  'tumour'  or  'boil.'  Whitney4  thinks  that  two 
varieties  of  Jayanya  are  meant.  Ludwig5  reads  with  Sayana 
aksita,  which  he  renders  by  '  not  firmly  established  '  in  the 
invalid.     Zimmer6  finds  in  it  a  disease  Ksata. 


1  vii.  76,  4. 

2  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  17,  562. 

3  Journal    of  the    American    Oriental 
Society,  13,  ex  vii.  et  seq. 


4  Translation   of    the  Atharvaveda, 
442. 

5  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  500. 

6  Altindisches  Leben,  377. 


THE  SAGE  AG  A  STY  A 


[  Ak§avapam 


Aksa-vapana.     See  Aksa. 


Aksu. — The  word  occurs  in  two  passages  of  the  Atharvaveda1 
and  one  of  the  Rigveda.2  Roth3  renders  it  by  'net,'  while 
Bohtlingk4  suggests  '  axle  of  a  car.'  Geldner5  sees  in  it  a  stake 
or  pole  used  with  a  fishermen's  net  (Jala),6  the  pole  of  a  wagon,7 
and  the  pole  of  a  house,  whether  vertical  or  horizontal,  he  leaves 
uncertain  (see  Vamsa).8  Bloomfield9  takes  it  as  a  covering 
of  wickerwork  stretched  across  a  beam  and  sloping  down  to 
both  sides— like  a  thatched  roof,  and  this  best  explains  the 
epithet  *  thousand-eyed '  (i.e.,  with  countless  holes)  ascribed  to 
it.  In  the  other  Atharvaveda  passage10  he  accepts  the  sense 
1  net,'  and  doubts  if  the  word  in  the  Rigveda  is  not  an  adjective 
(a-ksu)  as  it  is  taken  by  Sayana.     See  also  Grha. 


1  viii.  8,  18  (ahsujalabhyam) ;  ix.  3,  il 

2  i.  180,  5. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v, 

4  Dictionary,  s.v. 

5  Vedische  Studien,  1,  136. 

6  Av.  viii.  8,  18. 

7  Av.  i.  180,  5. 


8  ix.  3,  18. 

8  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  598. 
10  Av.  viii.  8,  18. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  153, 
265  ;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  506,  526 ;  Oldenberg, 
Rgveda-Noten,  1,  179. 


Agasti. — This  form  of  Agastya's  name  occurs  once  in  the 
Atharvaveda,1  where  he  appears  as  a  favourite  of  Mitra  and 
Varuna. 

1  iv.  9,  3.     Cf.  Sieg,  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  127,  n.  5. 

Agfastya. — This  is  the  name  of  a  sage,  of  mythical  character, 
who  plays  a  great  part  in  the  later  literature.  He  was  a  Mana,1 
and  therefore  is  called  Manya2  and  son  of  Mana,  and  only  once 
is  there  a  reference3  to  the  legend  prevalent  in  later  times  that 
he  was  a  son  of  Mitra  and  Varuna. 

His  greatest  feat  was  the  reconciliation  of  Indra  and  the 
Maruts  after  Indra  had  been  annoyed  at  his  proposing  to  give 
the  Maruts  an  offering  to  the  exclusion  of  Indra.  This  feat  is 
the  subject  of  three  hymns  of  the  Rigveda,4  and  is  often  referred 


1  Rv.  vii.  33,  10  (Agastya),  13  (Mana). 

2  Rv.  i.  165,  15  =  166,  15  =  167,  n  = 
168,  10 ;  165,  14  ;  177,  5 ;  184, 4  (Manya) ; 
i.  189,  8  ;  117,  11  (Manasya  sunu). 


3  Rv.    vii.    33,    13.      Cf.    Geldner, 
Vedische  Studien,  2,  138  et  seq. 

4  Rv.  i.  165  ;   170  ;  171. 


Agara  ] 


THE  SAGE  AG  A  STY  A 


to  in  the  Brahmanas,5  though  the  exact  details  and  significance 
of  the  legend  are  variously  treated  by  Oldenberg,6  Sieg,7  Hertel,8 
and  von  Schroeder.9 

He  also  appears  in  a  strange  dialogue  with  Lopamudra.  in 
the  Rigveda,10  which  appears  to  show  him  as  an  ascetic  who 
finally  yields  to  temptation.  Von  Schroeder11  regards  it  as 
a  ritual  drama  of  vegetation  magic. 

In  another  passage  of  the  Rigveda12  he  appears  as  helping 
in  the  Asvins'  gift  of  a  leg  to  Vispala.  Sayana  holds  that  he 
was  the  Purohita  of  Khela,  and  Sieg13  accepts  this  view,  while 
Pischel14  thinks  that  Khela  is  a  deity,  Vivasvant. 

Geldner15  shows  from  the  Rigveda16  that  Agastya,  as  brother 
of  Vasistha — both  being  miraculous  sons  of  Mitra  and  Varuna 
— introduces  Vasistha  to  the  Trtsus.  There  are  two  other 
references  to  Agastya  in  the  Rigveda,  the  one17  including  him 
in  a  long  list  of  persons,  the  other  alluding  to  his  sister's  sons 
(nadbhyah),18  apparently  Bandhu,  etc.  In  the  Atharvaveda19 
he  appears  as  connected  with  witchcraft,  and  in  a  long  list  of 
sages.20  In  the  Maitrayani  Samhita21  cows,  with  a  peculiar 
mark  on  their  ears  (vistya-kamyah),  are  associated  with  him. 

5  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  5,  5,  2  ; 
Taittirlya  Brahmana,  ii.  7,  11,  1  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  1,  8  ;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  x.  11 ;  Pancavimsa  Brahmana, 
xxi.  1:4,  5 ;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  v.  16 ; 
Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xxvi.  9. 

6  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  39,  60  et  seq. 

7  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  108-119. 

8  Vienna  Oriental  Journal,  18,  152-154. 

9  Mysterium  und  Mimus  im  Rigveda, 
91  et  seq. 

10  i.  179.  Cf.  Sieg,  op.  cit.,  120-126; 
Oldenberg,  op.  cit.,  66-68. 

11  Op.  cit.,  156-172. 

12  i.  117,  11  ;  cf.  i.  116,  15. 

13  Op.  cit.,  128. 

14  Vedische  Studien,  1,  171 -173. 


15  Vedische  Studien,  2,  138,  143, 

16  Rv;  vii^}3,  10.  13.      •  )fj) 

17  viij  5,  26.  Sieg,  129,  suggests  that 
this  refers  to  the  Khela  legend. 

18  x.  60,  6. 

19  ii.  32,  3  ;  iv.  37,  1.  Perhaps  for 
this  reason  the  Rigveda  Anukramani 
ascribes  to  him  (Rv.  i.  191)  a  magic 
hymn. 

20  xviii.  3,  15. 

21  iv.  2,  9. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the 
Rigveda,  3,  117;  Sieg,  Die  Sagenstoffe 
des  Rgveda,  106-129  ;  Macdonell,  Brhad- 
devata,  2,  136  et  seq.  ;  Oldenberg, 
Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen 
Gesellschaft,  42,  221  ;    Rgveda-Noten,  1, 


Agara. — This  rare  word  is  found  as  'house'  in  the  Kausitaki 
Upanisad.1 


1  ii.  15.     Cf.  agara,   '  chamber  '  (?), 
n  Av.  iv.  36,  3  ;  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of 


the    Atharvaveda,   407.     Agara    occurs 
also  in  Asvalayana  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  7,  21. 


CREMATION  AND  BURIAL 


[  Agnidagdha 


Agni-dagrdha. — This  epithet  ('burnt  with  fire')1  applies  to 
the  dead  who  were  burned  on  the  funeral  pyre.  This  is  one 
of  the  two  normal  methods  of  disposing  of  the  dead,  the  other 
being  burial  (an-agnidagdhdh,  '  not  burnt  with  fire  ').2  The 
Atharvaveda3  adds  two  further  modes  of  disposal  to  those — 
viz.,  casting  out  (paroptcih),  and  the  exposure  of  the  dead 
(uddhitdh).  The  exact  sense  of  these  expressions  is  doubtful. 
Zimmer4  considers  that  the  former  is  a  parallel  to  the  Iranian 
practice  of  casting  out  the  dead  to  be  devoured  by  beasts,  and 
that  the  latter  refers  to  the  old  who  are  exposed  when  helpless.5 
Whitney6  refers  the  latter  expression  to  the  exposure  of  the 
dead  body  on  a  raised  platform  of  some  sort. 

Burial  was  clearly  not  rare  in  the  Rigvedic  period  :  a  whole 
hymn7  describes  the  ritual  attending  it.  The  dead  man  was 
buried  apparently  in  full  attire,  with  his  bow  in  his  hand,  and 
probably  at  one  time  his  wife  was  immolated  to  accompany 
him,  in  accordance  with  a  practice  common  among  savage 
tribes.  But  in  the  Vedic  period  both  customs  appear  in  a 
modified  form :  the  son  takes  the  bow  from  the  hand  of  the 
dead  man,  and  the  widow  is  led  away  from  her  dead  husband 
by  his  brother  or  other  nearest  kinsman.  A  stone  is  set 
between  the  dead  and  the  living  to  separate  them.  In  the 
Atharvaveda,8  but  not  in  the  Rigveda,  a  coffin  (vrksa)  is  alluded 
to.  In  both  Samhitas9  occur  other  allusions  to  the  '  house 
of  earth'  (bhumi-grha).  To  remove  the  apparent  discrepancy 
between  burning  and  burial,  by  assuming  that  the  references  to 
burial  are  to  the  burial  of  the  burned  bones,  as  does  Oldenberg,10 
is  unnecessary  and  improbable,  as  burning  and  burial  subsisted 
side  by  side  in  Greece  for  many  years. 

Burning  was,  however,  equally  usual,  and  it  grew  steadily 
in  frequency,  for  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad11  the  adornment 


1  Rv.    x.    15,    14  ;    Taittiriya   Brah- 
mana,  iii.   1,   1,  7  ;  dagdhah,  Av.  xviii. 

2,  34- 

2  Rv.,  loc.  cit.;   =  nikhatah,  Av.  xviii. 

2,34. 

3  Loc.  cit. 

4  Altindisches  Leben,  402. 

5  Rv.  viii.  51,  2. 


6  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  841. 

7  x.  18.    The  interpretation  of  v.  8  is 
a  famous  crux,  see  Patni. 

8  xviii.  2,  25  ;  3,  70. 

9  Rv.  vii.  89,  1  ;  Av.  v.  30,  14  ;  xviii. 
2,  52. 

10  Religion  des  Veda,  571. 

11  viii.  8,  5. 


\ 


Agnigala  J 


CREMATION 


of  the  body  of  the  dead  with  curd  (Amiksa),  clothes,  and 
ornaments,  in  order  to  win  the  next  world,  is  referred  to  as 
something  erroneous  and  wrong,  and  in  the  funeral  Mantras  of 
the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita12  only  burning  seems  to  be  contemplated ; 
the  verses  which  refer  to  burial  here  really  alluding  to  the  burial 
of  the  ashes  in  the  burying-ground  (smasdna).18  The  body  was 
wrapped  in  fat,14  as  we  learn  from  the  funeral  hymn  in  the 
Rigveda,  a  goat  being  apparently  burned  with  it,15  to  act  as 
a  guide  on  the  way  to  the  next  world.  According  to  the 
Atharvaveda16  a  draft-ox  was  burned  presumably  for  the  dead 
to  ride  with  in  the  next  world.  It  was  expected  that  the  dead 
would  revive  with  his  whole  body  and  all  his  limbs  (sarva-taniih 
sdhgak),17  although  it  is  also  said18  that  the  eye  goes  to  the  sun, 
the  breath  to  the  wind,  and  so  forth. 

Before  burial  or  burning,  the  corpse  was  washed,19  a  clog 
(kudi)  being  tied  to  the  foot  to  prevent  the  deceased  returning 
to  earth.20 


1-3,    as    intended    for 


12  xxxv.  Cf.  also  Kausika  Sutra, 
80  et  seq. ,  which  treats  the  Atharvaveda 
hymns,  xviii. 
burning  only. 

13  Av.  v.  31, 
Samhita,  v.  2, 

14  Rv.  x.  16, 


1,  18  ;  Taittiriya 
ii,3- 


0 ;  x 

8,  5;  4 
x.  10,  7. 

15  Rv.  x.  16,  4.  But  aja  may  mean 
'the  unborn  part,'  as  Weber  prefers 
to  take  it,  Proceedings  of  the  Berlin 
Academy,  1895,  847. 

16  xii.  2,  48. 

17  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iv.  6,  1,  1  ; 
xi.  1,  8,  6  ;  xii.  8,  3,  31.  Cf.  Av.  xi.  3,  32. 
This  fact  probably  explains  the  use  of 
iesah  in  Rv.  x.  16,  5.  The  dead  enjoy 
sexual  pleasures  in  the  next  world ; 
see  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  5,  307,  n.  462. 


18  Rv.  x.  16,  3. 

19  Av.  v.  19,  14. 

20  Av.  v.  19,  12  ;  see  Roth,  Festgruss 
an  Bohtlingk,  98  ;  Bloomfield,  American 
Journal  of  Philology,  12,  416. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  401- 
407  ;  Roth,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  8,  468  et 
seq.  ;  Siebenzig  Lieder ,  150  et  seq.  ;  Olden- 
berg,  Religion  des  Veda,  570  et  seq.  ; 
Caland,  Die  altindischen  Todten-  und 
Bestattungsgebrduche ;  von  Schroeder, 
Indiens  Literatur  und  Cultur,  40-42 ; 
Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythology,  3,  413- 
423  ;  Rituallitteratnr,  87  et  seq.;  Mac- 
donell,  Vedic  Mythology,  165,  166  ;  Pro- 
ceedings of  the  Berlin  Academy,  1895, 
815  et  seq. 


Ag*ni-bhu  KaSyapa  is  mentioned  in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana1 
as  a  pupil  of  Indrabhu  Kasyapa. 

1  Indische  Studien,  4,  374. 

AgTii-£ala. — This  term,  which  designates  part  of  the  sacrificial 


io  CONSTELLATION  AGHA  [Agha 

apparatus,1  is  applied  in  the  Atharvaveda2  to  a  part  of  an 
ordinary  house,  presumably  the  central  hall  where  the  fire- 
place was. 

1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xix.  18.  I      Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharva- 

2  ix.  3,  7.  I   veda,  $g8;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  154. 

Ag\ha. — In  the  wedding  hymn  of  the  Rigveda1  it  is  said  that 
cows  are  slain  in  the  Aghas,  and  the  wedding  takes  place  at  the 
Arjunis  (dual).  The  Atharvaveda2  has  the  ordinary  Magfhas 
instead.  It  is  impossible  to  resist  the  conclusion  that  the  read- 
ing of  the  Rigveda  was  deliberately  altered  because  of  the  con- 
nection of  the  slaughter  of  kine  with  sin  (agha) — possibly,  too, 
with  a  further  desire  to  emphasize  the  contrast  with  aghnya, 
a  name  for  'cow.'  Moreover,  in  the  Taittirlya  Brahmana3 
occurs  the  formula  '  Svaha  to  the  Maghas,  Svaha  to  the 
Anaghas.'     See  also  Naksatra. 


1  x.  85,  13. 

2  xiv.  1,  13. 

3  iii.  1,  4,  8. 

Cf.   Weber,   Naxatra,   2,   364 ;    Pro- 
ceedings of  the  Berlin  Academy,  1894, 


804  ;  Jacobi,  Festgruss  an  Roth,  69  ; 
Winternitz,  Das  altindische  Hochzeits- 
rituell,  32  ;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  742 ;  Thibaut,  Indian 
Antiquary,  24,  95. 


AgfhaSva. — The  name  of  a  serpent  in  the  Atharvaveda.1 

1  x.  4,  io.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  95. 

A-grhnya. — See  Mamsa. 

Anka. — The  Taittirlya  Samhita1  and  Brahmana2  refer  to  two 
Ahkas  and  two  Nyankas  as  parts  of  a  chariot.  The  meaning 
of  these  terms  is  quite  obscure.  The  commentators  refer  them 
to  the  sides  or  wheels.  Zimmer3  compares  the  Greek  avTvyss* 
and  thinks  that  the  Arikau  were  the  upper  border  of  the  body 
of  the  chariot  (ko£a,  vandhura),  and  the  Nyahkau  the  lower  rims 
for  greater  security.  Oldenberg5  confesses  that  the  exact  sense 
is  impossible  to  make  out,  but  considers  that  the  terms  at  once 
refer  to  parts  of  the  chariot  and  to  divinities,  while  Bohtlingk6 
takes  the  term  as  referring  to  divinities  alone. 

4  Iliad,  v.  728.  Cf.  Smith's  Dic- 
tionary of  Antiquities,  I,  578. 

6  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  29,  364,  on 
Paraskara  Grhya  Sutra,  iii.  14,  6. 

6  Dictionary,  s.v. 


1  1.  7,  7,  2. 

2  ii.  7,  8,  1.     Cf.  Paficavimsa  Brah- 
mana, i.  7,  5. 

3  Altindisches  Leben,  251,  252. 


Arigustha  ] 


THE  ANGAS—THE  ANGIRASES 


ii 


Anga. — The  name  occurs  only  once  in  the  Atharvaveda1  in 
connection  with  the  Gandharis,  Mujavants,  and  Magadhas,  as 
distinct  peoples.  They  appear  also  in  the  Gopatha  Brahmana2 
in  the  compound  name  A  nga-magadhdk.  As  in  later  times  they 
were  settled  on  the  Sone  and  Ganges,3  their  earlier  seat  was 
presumably  there  also.     See  also  Vanga. 


1  V.  22,  14. 

2  ii.  9. 

3  Cf  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  35; 
Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
446,  449  ;  Pargiter,  Journal  of  the  Royal 


Asiatic  Society,  1908,  852,  inclines  to 
regard  them  as  a  non-Aryan  people 
that  came  over-sea  to  Eastern  India. 
There  is  nothing  in  the  Vedic  litera- 
ture to  throw  light  on  this  hypothesis. 


Ahg*a  Vairocana. — He  is  included  in  the  list  of  anointed 
kings  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana.1  His  Purohita  was  Udamaya, 
an  Atreya. 

1  viii.  22.  Cf.  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlcindischen  Gesellschaft, 
42,  214. 

Ahgraravaksayana. — A  word  of  doubtful  meaning  found 
in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.1  It  is  rendered  'tongs'  by 
Max  Miiller  and  Bohtlingk  in  their  translations.  The  St. 
Petersburg  Dictionary  explains  it  as  *  a  vessel  in  which  coals 
are  extinguished,'  and  Monier-Williams  as  '  an  instrument  for 
extinguishing  coals.'  The  smaller  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary 
renders  the  word  '  coal-shovel  or  tongs.'  Cf.  Ulmukava- 
ksayana. 

1  iii.  9,  18. 

Ahgiras. — The  Angirases  appear  in  the  Rigveda1  as  semi- 
mythical  beings,  and  no  really  historical  character  can  be 
assigned  even  to  those  passages2  which  recognize  a  father  of 
the  race,  Angiras.  Later,  however,  there  were  definite  families 
of  Angirases,  to  whose  ritual  practices  {ay ana,  dviratra)  references 
are  made.3 


1  Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie, 
ii.  156-169. 

2  Rv.  i.  45,  3;    139,  9  ;    iii.   31,  7, 
etc. ;  Chandogya  Upanisad,  i,  2,  10. 


3  Av.  xviii.  4,  8,  but  this  may  be 
mythical;  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xx. 
11,  1  ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  1,  4,  1. 
Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  142, 143. 


Ahg'ustha. — As  a  measure  of  size  this  word  appears  in  the 
Kathaka  Upanisad  (iv.  12  ;  vi.  17). 


12  GOAT—SCORPION— BOA-CONSTRICTOR  [  Acyut 

A-cyut. — He  acted  as  Pratihartr  at  the  Sattra  celebrated  by 
the  Vibhindukiyas  and  described  in  the  Jaiminiya  Brahmana.1 

1  iii.  233.     See  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  18,  38. 

Aja,  Aja. — This  is  the  ordinary  name  for  goat  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  the  later  literature.  The  goat  is  also  called  Basta,  Chaga, 
Chagfala.  Goats  and  sheep  (ajdvayah)  are  very  frequently 
mentioned  together.2  The  female  goat  is  spoken  of  as  pro- 
ducing two  or  three  kids,3  and  goat's  milk  is  well  known.4 
The  goat  as  representative  of  Pusan  plays  an  important  part 
in  the  ritual  of  burial.5  The  occupation  of  a  goatherd  (ajapdla) 
was  a  recognized  one,  being  distinguished  from  that  of  a  cow- 
herd and  of  a  shepherd.6 

3  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  5,  10,  1. 

4  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  1,  6,  1 ;  v. 
1,  7,  4.  Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische 
Mythologie,  3,  364,  n.  4. 

6  Rv.  x.  16,  4,  etc.     Cf.  p.  9. 
6  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  11 ;  Tait- 
tiriya Brahmana,  iii.  4,  9,  1. 


1  Aja  in  Rv.  x.  16,  4;  i.  162,  2.  4  ; 
Av.  ix.  5,  1 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxi. 
9,  etc. ;  aja  in  Rv.  viii.  70,  15 ;  Av.  vi. 
71,  1  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiii.,  56, 
etc. 

2  Rv.  x.  90,  10  ;  Av.  viii.  7,  25  ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  iii.  43,  etc. 


AJa* — The  Ajas  are  named  in  one  verse  of  the  Rigveda1  as 
having  been  defeated  by  the  Tptsus  under  Sudas.  They  are 
there  mentioned  with  the  Yaksus  and  SigTUS,  and  Zimmer2 
conjectures  that  they  formed  part  of  a  confederacy  under 
Bheda  against  Sudas.  The  name  has  been  regarded  as  a  sign 
of  totemism,3  but  this  is  very  uncertain,  and  it  is  impossible  to 
say  if  they  were  or  were  not  Aryans. 

1  vii.  18,  19. 

2  A  Itindisches  Leben,  127.    Cf.  Ludwig, 
Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  173. 

3  Cf.    Macdonell,     Vedic    Mythology, 


153  ;  Keith,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society,  1907,  929 ;  Aitareya  Aranyaka, 
200,  21  ;  Risley,  Peoples  of  India,  83 
et  seq. 


Ajakava. — This  name  of  a  poisonous  scorpion  occurs  once 
in  the  Rigveda.1 

1  vii.  50,  1.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  99. 

Aja-g*ara  ('goat-swallower ')  occurs  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  in 
the  list  of  animals  at  the  AsSvamedha,2  or  horse  sacrifice,  as  the 

1  xi.  2,  25  ;  xx.  129,  17-  I   Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  19  ;  Vaja- 

2  Taittiriya  Samhita,   v.    5,    14,    1  ;    |   saneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  38. 


Ajnatayaksjma  ] 


NAMES 


13.   1 


4  xxv.   15,  in  the  form  of  Ajagava, 
with  which  cf.  Ajakava. 


name  of  the  boa-constrictor.  Elsewhere3  it  is  called  Vahasa. 
It  denotes  a  person  at  the  snake  feast  in  the  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana.4 

3  Taittiriya   Samhita,    v.    5, 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  34. 

Aja-midha. — The  Ajamldhas,  or  descendants  of  Ajamidha, 
are  referred  to  in  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda.1  Ludwig2  and 
Oldenberg3  deduce  from  the  use  of  this  patronymic  that 
Ajamidha  was  the  seer  of  that  hymn. 

3  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlan- 
dischen  Gescllschaft,  42,  215. 
135-  ' 

Aja-grngi. — This  plant  ('goat's  horn'),  equated  by  the  com- 
mentator with  Visanin  (the  Odina  pinnata),  is  celebrated  as  a 
demon-destroyer  in  the  Atharvaveda.1  Its  other  name  is 
Aratakl.2  Weber3  suggests  that  it  is  the  Prosopis  spicigera  or 
Mimosa  suma. 


1  iv.  44,  6. 

2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  123, 


1  iv.  37. 

2  iv.  37,  6. 

3  Indische     Studien, 


Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 

408,  409  ;    Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben, 

144.      Cf.       68  ;  Caland,  Altindisches Zauberritual,  89. 

Ajata-6atru. — He  is  mentioned  as  a  King  of  KasI  (Kasya)  in 
the  Brhadaranyaka1  and  Kausitaki2  Upanisads,  where  he  in- 
structs the  proud  Brahmana  Balaki  as  to  the  real  nature  of 
the  self.  He  is  not  to  be  identified  with  the  Ajatasattu  of  the 
Buddhist  texts.3 

1  ii.  i,  1.  Hoernle,    Osteology,    106;   Keith,  Zeit- 

2  iv.  1.  schvift    der    Deutschen    Morgenldndischen 

3  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  213  ;       Gesellschaft,  62,  138. 

Ajnata-yaksma,  the  '  unknown  sickness,'  is  mentioned  in 
the  Rigveda,1  Atharvaveda,2  and  Kathaka  Samhita.3  It  is 
referred  to  in  connection  with  Rajayaksma.  Grohmann4  thinks 
that  the  two  are  different  forms  of  disease,  hypertrophy  and 
atrophy,  the  purpose  of  the  spell  in  the  Rigveda  being  thus  the 
removal  of  all  disease.  From  the  Atharvaveda5  he  deduces  its 
identity  with  Balasa.     Zimmer,6  however,  points  out  that  this 


1  x.  161,  i=Av.  iii.  11,  I, 

2  vi.  127,  3. 

3  xiii.  16. 

4  Indische  Studien,  9,  400. 
8  vi.  127,  3. 


6  Altindisches  Leben,  377,  378. 

Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 342 ;  Atharvaveda,  60  ;  Jolly, 
Medicin  (in  Biihler's  Encyclopaedia), 
89. 


14 


GOAT-SKIN— NAMES 


[  Ajina 


conclusion  is  unjustified,  leaving  the  disease  unidentified,  which 
seems  to  accord  with  its  name. 


Ajina. — This  word  denotes  generally  the  skin  of  an  animal 
—e.g.,  a  gazelle,1  as  well  as  that  of  a  goat  (Aja).2  The  use 
of  skins  as  clothing  is  shown  by  the  adjective  *  clothed  in  skins  - 
(ajina-vasin)  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,3  and  the  furrier's  trade 
is  mentioned  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.4  The  Maruts  also 
wear  deer-skins,5  and  the  wild  ascetics  (muni)  of  a  late  Rigveda 
hymn 6  seem  to  be  clad  in  skins  (Mala). 

(ajina 


24 


1  Av.  v.  21,  7. 

a  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  2,  i,  21. 

3  iii.  9,  1,  12. 

4  xxx.    15   (ajina-samdha) ;   Taittiriya 


13, 


Brahmana,     lit. 
samdhaya). 

8  Rv.  i.  166,  10. 

6  x.  136,  2.    Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches 
Leben,  262. 


Ajira. — He  was  Subrahmanya  priest  at  the  snake  festival 
of  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.1 

1  xxv.  15.     See  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  35. 

Ajigrarta  Sauyavasa. — This  is  the  name  given  to  the  father 
of  Sunahgepa  in  the  famous  legend  of  the  Aitareya  Brahmana,1 
perhaps  invented  for  the  occasion,  as  Weber2  suggests. 


1  vn.  15  ;  17- 
Sutra,  xv.  19. 


Cf.  Sankhayana  Srauta 


2  Indische  Studien,  1,  460;  Roth,  St. 
Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


A-jyeyata.     See  Brahmana. 

Anlcin  Mauna. — He  is  mentioned  as  an  authority  on  ritual, 
and  contemporary  with  Jabala  and  Citra  Gaugrayani  or  Gau6ra, 
in  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana.1 

1  xxiii.  5. 

Anu. — This  is  the  designation  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita1  and 
the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad2  of  a  cultivated  grain,  apparently 
the  Panicum  miliaceum. 

1  xviii.  12.  2  vi.  3,  13  (Kanva),  where  see  Dviveda's  note. 

Atithi  (' guest'). — A  hymn  of  the  Atharvaveda1  celebrates  in 
detail  the  merits  of  hospitality.    The  guest  should  be  fed  before 

1  ix.  6. 


Atidhanvan  Saunaka  ]    HO  SPIT  A  LITY—A  TITHIG  VA 


i5 


the  host  eats,  water  should  be  offered  to  him,  and  so  forth. 
The  Taittirlya  Upanisad2  also  lays  stress  on  hospitality,  using 
the  expression  '  one  whose  deity  is  his  guest '  (atithi-deva).  In 
the  Aitareya  Aranyaka3  it  is  said  that  only  the  good  are  deemed 
worthy  of  receiving  hospitality.  The  guest-offering  forms  a 
regular  part  of  the  ritual,4  and  cows  were  regularly  slain  in 
honour  of  guests.5 

2  i.  11,  2.  5  Cf,  Bloomfield,  American  Journal  of 

3  i.  1,  1.  Philology,  17,426;  Hillebrandt,  Ritual- 

4  Satapatha  Brahmana,  vii.  3,  2,  1.  litteratur,  79. 


Atithi-gra. — This  name  occurs  frequently  in  the  Rigveda, 
apparently  applying,  in  nearly  all  cases,  to  the  same  king, 
otherwise  called  Divodasa.  The  identity  of  the  two  persons 
has  been  denied  by  Bergaigne,1  but  is  certainly  proved  by  a 
number  of  passages,  when  the  two  names  occur  together,2  in 
connection  with  the  defeat  of  Sambara.  In  other  passages3 
Atithigva  is  said  to  have  assisted  Indra  in  slaying  Parnaya  and 
Karanja.  Sometimes  he  is  only  vaguely  referred  to,  while  once5  he 
is  mentioned  as  an  enemy  of  Turvasa  and  Yadu.  Again  6  Atithigva 
is  coupled  with  Ayu  and  Kutsa  as  defeated  by  Turvayana. 

A  different  Atithigva  appears  to  be  referred  to  in  a  Danastuti 7 
('  Praise  of  Gifts '),  where  his  son,  Indrota,  is  mentioned. 

Roth8  distinguishes  three  Atithigvas — the  Atithigva  Divodasa, 
the  enemy  of  Parnaya  and  Karanja,  and  the  enemy  of  Turvayana. 
But  the  various  passages  can  be  reconciled,  especially  if  it  is 
admitted  that  Atithigva  Divodasa  was  already  an  ancient  hero 
in  the  earliest  hymns,  and  was  becoming  almost  mythical. 


14;  130,  7 


1  Religion  Vedique,  2,  342  et  seq. 

2  Rv.   i.    51,    6 ;    ii2, 
iv.  26,  3  ;  vi.  47,  22. 

3  Rv.  i.  53,  8  ;  x.  48,  8. 

4  Rv.  vi.  26,  3. 

5  Rv.  vii.  19,  8.  There  is  no  ground 
for  assuming  the  reference  here  to  be 
to  a  later  Atithigva. 


6  Rv.  i.  53,  10  ;  ii.  14,  7  ;  vi.  18,  13  ; 
viii.  53,  2. 

7  Rv.  viii.  68,  16.  17. 

8  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the 
Rigveda,  3,  123  ;  Bloomfield,  American 
Journal  of  Philology,  17, 426,  who  renders 
the  name  '  presenting  cows  to  guests.' 


Ati-dhanvan  Saunaka. — He  is  mentioned  as  a  teacher  in  the 
Chandogya  Upanisad  x  and  the  Vamsa  Brahmana.2 


1.  9-  3- 


2  Indische  Studien,  4,  384. 


1 6  A  TKA  —NA  ME  S  [  Atrnada 

A-trnada. — This  term  ('  not  eating  grass  ')  was  applied,  ac- 
cording to  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  to  a  newborn  calf.1 

1  i.  5,  2.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  268. 

i.  Atka. — This  word  occurs  frequently  in  the  Rigveda,  but  its 
sense  is  doubtful.  Roth,  Grassmann,  Ludwig,  Zimmer,1  and 
others  render  it  as  *  garment '  in  several  passages,2  when  the 
expressions  '  put  on  '  (vyci  or  prati  munc)  or  *  put  off'  (munc)  are 
used  of  it,  and  when  it  is  said  to  be  '  woven  '  (vyuta) 3  or  '  well- 
fitting  '  (surabhi).*  On  the  other  hand,  Pischel5  denies  that  this 
sense  occurs,  and  otherwise  explains  the  passages.  He  takes 
the  term  to  mean  '  axe  '  in  four  places.6 


1  Altindisches  Leben,  262.   ■ 

2  i.  95,  7 1  "•  35-  J4  >  iv-  l8»  5  • 
v.  55.  6;  74,  5;  vi.  29,  3  ;  viii.  41,  7; 
ix.  101,  14;  107,  13;  Samaveda, 
ii.  1193. 


3  Rv.  i.  122,  2. 

4  Rv.  vi.  29,  3  ;  x.  123,  7. 

5  Vedische  Studien,  2,  193-204. 

6  Rv.  v.  55,  6 ;  vi.  33,  3  ;  x.  49,  3  ;  99, 9. 
Cf.  Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  94,  n.  1. 


2.  Atka.  —  In  two  passages  of  the  Rigveda1  this  word  is 
regarded  as  a  proper  name  by  Roth,  Grassmann,  and  Ludwig. 
But  Zimmer2  explains  it  in  these  passages  as  the  *  armour  of  a 
warrior  as  a  whole,'  and  Pischel8  thinks  that  in  both  cases  an 
'  axe  '  is  meant. 

1  x.  49,  3  ;  99,  9.  3  Vedische  Studien,  2,  195. 

2  Altindisches  Leben,  262,  297. 

Aty-amhas  Aruni. — According  to  the  Taittirlya  Brahmana 
(iii.  10,  9,  3-5),  this  teacher  sent  a  pupil  to  question  Plaksa 
Dayyampati  as  to  the  Savitra  (a  form  of  Agni).  For  this 
impertinence  his  pupil  was  severely  rebuked. 

Aty-arati  Janam-tapi^ though  not  a  prince,  was  taught  the 
Rajasuya  by  Vasistha  Satyahavya,  and  thereupon  conquered 
the  earth.  When  Vasistha  reminded  him  of  his  indebtedness, 
and  claimed  a  great  reward,  the  warrior  replied  irascibly  that 
he  intended  to  conquer  the  Uttara  Kurus,  and  that  Vasistha 
would  then  become  King  of  the  Earth,  Atyarati  himself  being 
his  general  (send-pati).  Vasistha  replied  that  as  no  mortal  man 
could  conquer  the  Uttara  Kurus  he  was  cheated  of  his  reward. 


Atharvan]  THE  ATRIS  17 

He  consequently  procured  Atyarati's  defeat  and  death  at  the 
hands  of  Amitratapana  Susmina  Saibya.1 

1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  23.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  214. 

Atri. — Neither  Atri  himself  nor  the  Atris  can  claim  any 
historical  reality,1  beyond  the  fact  that  Mandala  V.  of  the  Rigveda 
is  attributed,  no  doubt  correctly,  to  the  family  of  the  Atris.2 
The  Atris  as  a  family  probably  stood  in  close  relations  with  the 
Priyamedhas3  and  Kanvas,4  perhaps  also  with  the  Gotamas5 
and  Kaksivatas.6  The  mention  of  both  the  Parusni  and  the 
Yamuna  in  one  hymn7  of  the  fifth  Mandala  seems  to  justify  the 
presumption  that  the  family  was  spread  over  a  wide  extent  of 
territory. 

1  For  Atri  in  the  Rigveda,  see  Mac-  4  Cf.  Rv.  i.  118,  7;  v.  41,  4; 
donell,  Vedic  Mythology,  145.     Cf.  also   '    x.  150,  5. 

Av.  ii.  32,  3  ;  iv.  29,  3;  Mantra  Bran-  5  Cf.  Rv.  i.  183,  5. 

mana,  ii.    7,    1  ;   Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  6  Cf.  Rv.  x.  143,  1. 

iv.  36,  etc.  ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  7  Rv.    v.    52,    9.    17.       Cf.    Ludwig, 

ii.  2,  4.  Translation   of  the   Rigveda,    3,    128, 

2  Cf  Rv.  v.  39,  5  ;  67,  5 ;  Kausitaki  142  ;  Bergaigne,  Religion  Vedique,  2, 
Brahmana,  xxiv.  3  ;  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  ;  469  ;  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutsche ,1 
ii.  2,  1.  (   Morgenlandischen    Gesellschaft,   42,    212- 

3  Cf.  Rv.  i.  45,  3  ;  139,  9-;  viii.  5,  1  215  ;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie, 
25;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  22.  3,  310. 

Athari. — This  word  occurs  only  in  the  Rigveda,1  and  the 
sense  is  doubtful.  Roth,2  followed  by  most  interpreters, 
renders  it  '  point  of  a  lance,1  but  Pischel3  thinks  that  it  means 
'an  elephant.' 

1  iv.  6,  8.  3  Vedische  Studien,  1,  99. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

Atharvan. — The  name  in  the  singular  denotes  the  head  of  a 
semi-divine  family  of  mythical  priests,1  of  whom  nothing  his- 
torical can  be  said.  In  the  plural  the  family  as  a  whole  is 
meant.  In  a  few  places  an  actual  family  seems  to  be  referred 
to.  Thus,  for  instance,  they  are  mentioned  as  recipients  of 
gifts  in    the    Danastuti2   ('  Praise    of    Gifts '),  of   ASvattha's 


1  See  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology, 
141.  In  the  Vamsa  of  the  Brhad- 
aranyaka Upanisad,  ii.  6,  3,  Atharvan 

VOL.  I. 


Daiva  is  characteristically  the  pupil  of 
Mrtyu. 

2  Rv.  vi.  47,  24. 


i8 


NAMES  OF  THE  ATHARVAVEDA       \  Atharvanalj. 


generosity ;  their  use  of  milk  mingled  with  honey  in  the  ritual 
is  referred  to  ;3  and  a  cow  that  miscarries  (ava-tokd)  from  accident 
is  dedicated  to  the  Atharvans,  according  to  the  Taittirlya 
Brahmana.4 

vaveda,  xxxv.  et  seq.,  who  (p.  xxxviii) 
takes  avatoka  as  a  woman,  and  the 
Atharvans  as  the  hymns  ;  Hillebrandt, 
Vedische  Mythologie,  2,  174  et  seq. 


Rv.  ix.  11.  2. 


Cf.  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 


*  111.  4,  11,  1. 
hita,  xxx.  15. 

Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 


Atharvanah. — This  expression1  is  used  with  Angirasah,  to 
denote  the  Atharvaveda.  The  compound  Atharvangirasah  is 
employed  in  the  same  sense. 

1  Taittirlya  Brahmana,  iii.  12,  9,  1  ;  j  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  4,  3,  5 
Paiicavimsa   Brahmana,   xvi.    10,    10 ;    \  et  seq. 

Atharvangirasah. — This  is  the  collective  name  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda in  several  passages1  of  the  later  Brahmanas.  It  occurs 
once  in  the  Atharvaveda  itself,2  while  the  term  Atharvaveda 
is  not  found  before  the  Sutra  period.3  The  compound  seems, 
according  to  Bloomfield,4  to  denote  the  two  elements  which 
make  up  the  Atharvaveda.  The  former  part  refers  to  the  aus- 
picious practices  of  the  Veda  (bhesajdni)  ;5  the  latter  to  its  hostile 
witchcraft,  the  ydtu6  or  abhi-cdra.7  This  theory  is  supported  by 
the  names  of  the  two  mythic  personages  Ghora  Angirasa  and 
Bhisaj  Atharvana,  as  well  as  by  the  connection  of  Atharvanah 
and  Atharvanani  with  healing  (bhesaja)  in  the  Pancavim^a 
Brahmana.8  Moreover,  the  term  bhesaja  ('remedies')  designates 
in  the  Atharvaveda9  that  Veda  itself,  while  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana10  ydtu  ('  sorcery  ')  conveys  the  same  meaning.  The 
evidence,  however,  being  by  no  means  convincing,  it  remains 
probable  that  there  existed  no  clear  differentiation  between  the 
two  sages  as  responsible  for  the  Atharvaveda  as  a  whole. 

Hymns  of  the 


1  Taittirlya  Brahmana,  iii.  12,  8,  2  ; 
Taittirlya  Aranyaka,  ii.  9  ;  10  ;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  xi.  5,  6,  7  ;  Brhad- 
aranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  4,  10  ;  iv.  1,  2  ; 
5,11;  Chandogya  Upanisad,  iii.  4,  1.2; 
Taittirlya  Upanisad,  ii.  3,  1. 

2  x.  7,  20. 

3  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  2,  9, 
etc. 

4  Journal    of    the    A  merican    Oriental 


Society,   11,  387  et  seq. 
Atharvaveda,  xviii.  et  seq. 

5  Av.  xi.  6,  14. 

6  Satapatha  Brahmana,  x.  5,  2,  20. 

7  Kausika  Sutra,  3,  19. 

8  xii.  9,  10 ;  xvi.  io,  10. 

9  x.  6,  14. 

10  x.  5,  2,  20. 

Cf.  Hillebrandt,    Vedische  Mythologie, 
2,  177. 


Adhiraja  ]        VERMIN-DICE-BOARD— OVERLORD  19 

A-drsta. — '  The  unseen '  is  a  term  used  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  the  Atharvaveda2  to  designate  a  species  of  vermin.  The 
sun  is  also  described  as  '  the  slayer  of  the  unseen  '  (adrsta-han) ,3 
and  as  a  counterpart  a  '  seen  '  (drsta)  is  mentioned.4  In  one 
passage5  the  epithets  'seen'  and  'unseen'  are  applied  to  the 
worm  (Krmi),  their  use  being  no  doubt  due  to  the  widespread 
theory  of  diseases  being  due  to  worms,  whether  discernable  by 
examination  or  not.6 


1  Rv.  i.  191,  4  =  Av.  vi.  52,  2. 

2  vi.  52,  3. 

3  Rv.    i.     191,    9  =  Av.    vi.    52, 
Av.  v.  23,  6. 

4  Av.  ii.  31,  2  ;  viii.  8,  15. 


5  Av.  v.  23,  6.  7. 

6  Kuhn,  Zeitschrift  fiir  vergleichende 
Sprachforschung,  13,  l^etseq.;  Bloom- 
field,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  313- 
315;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  98. 


Adma-sad. — This  expression  {lit.  '  sitting  at  the  meal '),  found 
several  times  in  the  Rigveda,1  is  usually  rendered  '  guest  at  the 
feast,'  but  Geldner2  adduces  reasons  to  show  that  it  means  '  a 
fly,'  so  called  because  of  its  settling  on  food. 

1  i.  124,  4;  vi.  30,  3;  vii.  83,  7;  I  2  Vedische  Studien,  2,  179,  180;  but 
viii.  44,  29  ;  adma-sadvan,  vi.  4,  4.  |   cf.  Oldenberg,  Vedaforschung,  90. 

Adri. — Zimmer1  deduces  from  the  use  of  this  word  ('  rock,' 
'  stone ')  in  a  passage  of  the  Rigveda,2  that  sling-stones  were 
used  in  Vedic  fighting.  But  the  passage  is  mythical,  referring 
to  Indra's  aid,  and  cannot  be  used  with  any  certainty  as 
evidence  for  human  war.  More  probably  it  merely  denotes 
Indra's  bolt.     See  also  A£ani. 

1  Altindisches  Leben,  301.     Cf.  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

2  i-  51,  3- 

Adhi-devana. — The  place  where  the  dice  were  thrown  is  thus 
designated  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,2 
according  to  Liiders.3  Roth,4  followed  by  Whitney,  takes  it  to 
mean  '  gambling-board.'     See  Aksa. 

1  v.  31,  6;  vi.  70,  1.  3  Das  Wilrfelspiel  im  alten  Indien,  11- 13. 

2  v.  4,  4,  20.  22,  23.  I       4  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

Adhi-raja. — The  word  occurs  fairly  often  throughout  the 
early  literature,1  denoting  '  overlord '  among  kings  or  princes. 

1  Rv.  x.  128,  9  ;  Av.  vi.  98,  1 ;  ix.  10,  Samhita,  viii.  17 ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana, 
24;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  4,  14,  2;  iii.  1,  2,  9  (adhirajan)  ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
Maitrayanl  Samhita,  iv.  12,  3  ;  Kathaka       mana,  v.  4,  2,  2  ;  Nirukta,  viii.  2. 


20 


SOMA  PRESS— UPPER  GARMENT      [  Adhi§avana 


In  no  passage  is  it  clear  that  a  real  over-king  is  meant,  as 
the  word  raj  an  may  mean  king  or  merely  prince,  a  person  of 
royal  blood.  On  the  whole  it  seems  most  probable  that  the 
word  connotes  no  more  than  '  king '  as  opposed  to  \  prince.' 


Adhi-savana. — The  two  Adhisavanas1  are  usually  understood, 
as  by  Roth2  and  Zimmer,3  to  designate  the  two  boards  between 
which  the  Soma  was  pressed.  Hillebrandt,4  however,  shows 
from  the  ritual  that  the  boards  were  not  placed  one  over  the 
other,  but  were  placed  one  behind  the  other,  the  two  serving 
as  a  foundation  upon  which  the  Soma  was  pressed  by  a  stone. 
This  theory  seems  to  account  best  for  the  etymological  sense 
of  the  name  '  over-press,'  as  well  as  for  the  use  of  the  word  as 
an  adjective  ('  used  for  pressing  upon  ').  But  according  to  the 
procedure  as  witnessed  by  Haug5  in  the  Deccan,  the  shoots  of 
the  plant  are  first  placed  on  the  skin,  one  of  the  boards  being 
then  laid  over  them  and  pounded  with  a  stone.  The  shoots 
are  then  taken  out  and  placed  upon  the  board,  the  second 
board  being  then  laid  over  them. 


1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xviii.  21  ; 
Av.  v.  20,  10  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
iii.  9,  4,  1  ;  5,  3,  22  {adhisavane 
phalahe);  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  32 
{adhisavaiiam  carma,  'the  skin  upon 
which  the  pressing  takes  place ' ; 
adhisavane    phalahe,    '  the    boards    on 


which     the     pressing     takes     place,' 
etc.). 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Altindisches  Leben,  277. 

4  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  148  et  seq. 

5  See  Haug,  Aitareya  Brahmana,  2, 
p.  488,  n.  10. 


Adhi-vasa. — This  word1  denotes  the  'upper  garment'  of 
the  Vedic  Indian.  Its  exact  nature  is  not  described,  but  as 
the  king  in  the  ritual  set  forth  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana2 
puts  on  first  an  undergarment,  then  a  garment,  and  finally  an 
upper  garment,  it  presumably  denotes  some  sort  of  cloak  or 
mantle. 


1  Rv.  i.  140,  9;  162,  16;  x.  5,  4; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  3,  5,  22  (prati- 
muiic,  '  put  on  ') ;  4,  4,  3  {a-str,  '  spread 
out  '),  etc. 


Cf. 

268. 


3,  5,  19  et  seq. 
Zimmer,     Altindisches      Leben, 


Adhyanda. — This  is  a  plant  mentioned  with  many  others  in 
the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (xiii.  8,  1,  16). 


Anas]  DRAFT  OX— WAGON  21 

Adhri-gn. — This  is  the  name  of  a  man  twice  referred  to  in 
the  Rigveda1  as  a  protege  of  the  Asvins  and  of  Indra  respectively. 

1  i.  112,  20  ;  viii.  12,  2.  Cf.  Hopkins,  Journal  of the  American  Oriental  Society ,  17,  90. 
ftt.x&.io  fci&o        f  j  ,  1  1 1  -  r  /  it    ■  n 

Adhvaryu. — In  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda1  Hillebrandt2 
thinks  that  the  five  Adhvaryus  who  are  mentioned  do  not 
designate  actual  priests,  but  refer  to  the  five  planets  which 
move  about  in  the  heavens  like  the  Adhvaryu  priests  on  the 
sacrificial  ground.     See  also  Graha. 

1  iii.  7,  7.  2  Vedische  Mythologie,  3,  423. 

An-ag-ni-dagdha,  '  not  burnt  with  fire.'  See  Agni-dagrdha, 
1  burnt  with  fire.' 

Anad-vah  (lit.  *  cart-drawer'). — This  is  the  common1  name  of 
oxen  as  employed  for  drawing  carts  (Anas).  Such  oxen  were 
normally  castrated,2  though  not  always.  Female  draft  cattle 
were  also  used  (anaduhi),  but  rarely.3     See  also  Go. 


Rv.  x.  59,  10;  85,  10;  iii.  53,  18;  3  Av.  iv.  11  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 


Av.  iii.  11,  5  ;  iv.  11,  1,  etc.  ;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  i.  14  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
ii.  1,  4,  17,  etc. 

2  Cf.  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  1,       226. 
5  (anadvan  sanclah). 


v.  3.4,  II.  13. 

Cf.     Weber,     Indiscke    Stitdien,     13, 
151,    n.  ;    Zimmer,   Altindisches  Leben, 


Anas. — This  is  the  term1  used  to  designate  the  draft  wagon, 
as  opposed  to  the  chariot  (ratha)  for  war  or  sport,  with  which 
it  is  sometimes  expressly  contrasted,2  though  Indra  is  once  said 
to  be  '  seated  in  a  wagon '  (anar-viS)3  instead  of  on  a  chariot. 
Though  Usas,  Goddess  of  Dawn,  sometimes  rides  on  a  chariot 
{ratha),  the  wagon  is  her  characteristic  vehicle.4  Of  its  con- 
struction we  know  little.  The  bridal  wagon  on  which  Surya, 
the  daughter  of  the  Sun,  was  borne  in  the  marriage  hymn  in  the 
Rigveda  had  a  covering  (Chadis).6     The  axle-box  (Kha)  is  also 

1  Rv.   iv.    30,    10  ;    x.    85,    10  ;    86,  I       2  Rv.  iii.  33,  9. 
18,  etc.  ;    Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.    1,           3  Rv.  i.  121,  7. 

2,  5,  etc.  ;   Chandogya  Upanisad,  vii.  |       4  Rv.  ii.  15,  6  ;  iv.  30,  11  ;  viii.  91, 

15,    1;    Kausitaki    Upanisad,    iii.    8,  |  7 ;  x.  73,  6 ;  138,5- 

etc.  I       5  Rv.  x.  85,  10. 


22 


THE  ANU  TRIBE  [Anas 


9  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  47. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  246 
Geldner,  Vedische  Studien,  2,  4. 


mentioned.6  In  the  Atharvaveda7  Vipatha  appears  to  denote  a 
rough  vehicle  used  for  bad  tracks.  The  wagon  was  usually 
drawn  by  oxen  (Anadvah),  as  in  wedding  processions.8  The 
wagon  of  Dawn  is  described  as  drawn  by  ruddy  cows  or  bulls.9 

6  Rv.  viii.  91,  7;  Jaiminiya  Upanisad 
Brahmana,  i.  3. 

7  xv.  2,  1. 

8  Rv.  x.  85,  11. 

Anas.     See  Dasyu. 

Anitabha  in  the  Rigveda1  is  taken  by  Max  M  tiller2  to 
denote  some  river. 

1  v.  53,  9.  2  Sacred  Boohs  of  the  East,  32,  323  ;  but  cf.  Rasa. 

Ami,  Anava. — Grassmann  and  Roth1  see  in  these  words 
designations  of  people  foreign  to  the  Aryans.  But  it  is  clear2 
that  they  denote  a  special  people,  the  Anus,  who  are  mentioned 
with  the  Yadus,  Turvasas,  Druhyus,  and  Purus,3  with  the 
Druhyus,4  and  with  the  Turvasas,  Yadus,  and  Druhyus.5  It 
is  also  a  fair  conclusion  from  their  mention  in  a  passage  of  the 
Rigveda6  that  they  dwelt  on  the  Parusni.  The  inference  that 
the  Bhrgus  were  connected  with  this  tribe  is  much  more 
doubtful,7  for  it  rests  solely  on  the  fact  that  in  one  place8  the 
Bhrgus  and  Druhyus  are  mentioned  together,  and  not  Anus  and 
Druhyus.  Anava  is  used  as  an  epithet  of  Agni,9  but  also  in  the 
sense  of '  Anu  prince,'10  in  one  case  in  conjunction  with  Turvasa.11 


1  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary. 

2  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  125. 

3  Rv.  i.  108,  8. 

4  Rv.  vii.  18,  14. 

5  viii.  io,  5. 

6  Rv.   viii.    74,    15,   compared   with 
vii.  18,  14. 

7  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  42, 221,  n.i. 

8  Rv.  vii.  18,  4. 


9  Rv.  viii.  74,  4.  Cf.  Rv.  v.  31,  4, 
where  the  Anus  prepare  the  chariot  of 
the  Asvins. 

10  Rv.  vii.  18,  13. 

11  viii.  4,  1.  Apparently  as  prince 
also  in  vi.  62,  9.     Cf.  Kurunga. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the 
Rigveda,  3,  205  ;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische 
Mythologie,  3,  153  ;  Macdonell,  Sanskrit 
Literature,  154. 


Anu-ksattr. — This  word  occurs  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the 
Purusamedha,1  and  means,  according  to  Mahldhara,2  '  an 
attendant  on  the  door-keeper,'  and,  according  to  Say  ana,  'an 
attendant  on  the  charioteer '  (sdrathi).     See  also  Ksattr. 

1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  1 1  ;  73  ;    I       a  On  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  loc.  cit. 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  hi.  4,  9,  1.  |       *  On  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  loc.  cit. 


Ldhra  ] 


NAMES— BRAHMIN  PUPIL 


23 


Anu-cara. — This  is  a  general  expression1  for  an  '  attendant 
(the  feminine  being  Anucarl),2  but  it  is  not  often  used. 


27  (apparently  slave  girls  are  meant, 
400  being  enumerated). 


1  Vajasaneyi  Sambita,  xxx.  13  ;  Tait- 
tiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  7,  I. 

2  Satapatha    Brahmana,    xiii.   5,   4, 

Anu-mati.     See  Masa. 
Anu-radha.     See  Naksatra. 

Anu-vaktr  Satya  Satya-klrta  is  mentioned  as  a  teacher  in 
the  Jaiminlya  Brahmana  Upanisad  (i.  5,  4). 

Anuvya-khyana  is  a  species  of  writing  referred  to  in  the 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.1  Sankara  interprets  it  as  '  explana- 
tion of  the  Mantras.'  As  the  term,  in  the  plural,  follows 
Sutras,  this  interpretation  is  reasonable.  Sieg,2  however, 
equates  the  word  with  Anvakhyana,  '  supplementary  narrative.' 

1  ii.  4,  10  ;  iv.  1,  2  ;  5,  11.  2  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  34. 

Anu-sasana  in  the  plural  denotes  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana 
(xi.  5,  6,  8)  some  form  of  literature ;  according  to  Sayana,  the 
Vedangas. 

Anu-£ikha  is  the  name  of  the  Potr  at  the  snake  festival  in  the 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana.1 

1  xxv.  15.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  35. 

Ante-vasin,  'dwelling  near,'  is  the  epithet  of  the  Brahma- 
carin  who  lives  in  the  house  of  his  teacher.  The  expression 
does  not  occur  before  the  late  Brahmana  period.1  Secrecy  is 
often  enjoined  on  others  than  Antevasins.2 

1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  1,  5,  17; 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  3,  7 ; 
Chandogya   Upanisad,  iii.    n,  5  ;   iv. 


10,  1  ;   Taittirlya  Upanisad,   i.  3,   3  ; 

11,  1. 
2  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  iii.  2,  6 ;  Sahkh- 

ayana  Aranyaka,  viii.  1 1 . 


Andhra  is  the  name  of  a  people,  and  is  mentioned  with  the 
Pundras,  Sabaras,  Pulindas,  and  Mutibas,  as  being  the  outcasts 
resulting  from  the  refusal  of  the  fifty  eldest  sons  of  Visvamitra 
to  accept  his  adoption  of  Sunahsepa.1    It  may  fairly  be  deduced 

1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  18;  Sankh-  thern '),  but  the  former  is  obviously 

ayana    Srauta    Sutra,    xv.    26,    where  correct.     The  Sankhayana  omits  fhe 

instead     of    uddntyah     ('  beyond     the  Pulindas,  and  has  Mucipas. 
borders  ')  the  reading  is  udaiicah  ('  nor- 


24 


CUCKOO— SCROFULA 


[  Anyatafcplak§a 


from  this  statement  that  these  people  were  recognized  as  non- 
Aryan,  as  the  Andhras  certainly  seem  to  have  been.2 

2  Vincent  Smith,  Zeitschrift  der  Deut- 
schen  Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  56, 
657  et  seq. ,  who  places  them  originally 
in  Eastern  India  between  the  Krsna 


and  Godavari  rivers  ;  cf.  Rapson, 
Catalogue  of  Indian  Coins,  xv.,  xvi.  ; 
Bhandarkar,  Bombay  Gazetteer,  I.  ii. 
138. 


Anyatah-plaksa  ('with  wave -leafed  fig-trees  on   one  side 
only ')  is  the  name  of  a  lake  in  Kuruksetra  according  to  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana,1  where  it  occurs  in  the  story  of  Puru- 
ravas  and  Urva£l.     Pischel2  places  it  somewhere  in  Sirmor. 
1  xi.  5,  i,  4.  2  Vedische  Studien,  2,  217. 

Anya-vapa  ('sowing  for  others'). — The  cuckoo  is  so  called1 
from  its  habit  of  depositing  its  eggs  in  the  nests  of  other  birds. 

1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  37 ;  Maitrayani  Sarphita,  iii.  14,  18. 

Anva-khyana. — From  the  literal  translation  ('after-story')  the 
meaning  of  '  supplementary  narrative '  seems  to  follow.  In  two1 
of  its  three  occurrences  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  this  sense 
is  hardly  felt,  the  expression  being  used  to  indicate  a  subse- 
quent portion  of  the  book  itself.  But  in  the  third2  passage  it 
is  distinguished  from  the  Itihasa  ('  story ')  proper,  and  there 
must  mean  '  supplementary  narrative.'     Cf.  Anuvyakhyana. 

1  vi.  5,  2,  22  ;  6,  4,  7  (the  reference    I       2  xi.  1,  6,  9. 
is  to  vi.  6,  4,  8).  I       Cf.  Sieg,  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  34. 

Apa-cit. — This  word  occurs  several  times  in  the  Atharvaveda.1 
It  is  held  by  Roth,2  Zimmer,3  and  others  to  denote  an  insect 
whose  sting  produced  swellings,  etc.  (glau).  But  Bloomfield4 
shows  that  the  disease,  scrofulous  swellings,  is  what  is  really 
meant,  as  is  shown  by  the  rendering  (ganda-mald,  '  inflammation 
of  the  glands  of  the  neck ')  of  Kesava  and  Sayana,  and  by  the 
parallelism  of  the  later  disease,  apacl,  the  derivation  being  from 
apa  and  ci,  '.to  pick  off.' 


1  vi.  25,  1  ;  83,  1  ;  vii.  75,  1  ;  77,  1. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Altindisches    Leben,    97.       So    also 
Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda, 

,  342,  500. 


4  American  Journal  of  Philology,  11, 
320  et  seq.;  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
503,  504.  Cf.  Jolly,  Medicin,  89  ; 
Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 343. 


ipamarga  ] 
Apa-Sraya. 


>LANT 


See  UpaSraya. 


Apa-skambha. — The  word  occurs  only  in  one  passage  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  where  the  tip  of  it  is  mentioned  as  poisoned. 
Roth1  suggests  that  the  fastening  of  the  arrow-point  to  the 
shaft  is  meant.  Whitney2  inclines  to  this  version,  but  suggests 
corruption  of  text.  Zimmer3  follows  Roth.  Ludwig4  renders 
the  word  by  'barb.'  Bloomfield5  thinks  it  means  'tearing 
(arrow),'  a  sense  deduced  from  the  etymology. 


1  St.     Petersburg     Dictionary,    s.v. 
The  passage  is  Av.  iv.  6,  4. 

2  Translation  of    the  Atharvaveda, 
*53> 


3  Altindisches  Leben,  300. 

4  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  512. 

5  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  375. 


Apacyas. — The  kings  of  the  '  Westerners '  are  referred  to  in 
the  Aitareya  Brahmana  (viii.  14)  in  connection  with  those  of 
the  Nicyas. 


Apana. — The  word  appears  repeatedly  in  the  Atharvaveda,1 
and  later  as  one  of  the  vital  breaths  (Prana),  usually  with 
Prana,  and  often  with  one  or  more  of  the  other  three.  Its 
original  sense2  appears  to  have  been  'inspiration.'  Its  con- 
nection with  the  lower  part  of  the  body  (nabhi,  'navel'),  which 
is  found  already  in  the  Aitareya  Upanisad,3  is  not  unnatural. 


1  Av.  ii.  28,  3  ;  v.  30,  12,  etc.  ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xiii.  19  ;  24,  etc. 

2  See  Caland,  Zeitschrift  der  Deut- 
schen  Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  lv. 
261  ;   56,   556-558,  correcting   Ewing, 


Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
22,  249  et  seq. 

3  Aitareya  Upanisad,  i.  4,  etc. 

Cf.  Deussen,  Philosophy  of  the  U pant- 
shads,  263  et  seq. 


Apa-marga. — A  plant  {A  chyranthes  aspera)  used  frequently1  in 
witchcraft  practices,  and  for  medical  purposes,  especially  against 
Ksetriya.  It  is  described  in  the  Atharvaveda2  as  '  revertive ' 
(punah-sara),  either,  as  Roth3  and  Zimmer4  think,  because  of 
its  having  reverted  leaves  (a  view  also  accepted  by  Whitney5), 


1  Atharvaveda,  iv.  17,  6 ;  18,  7  ; 
19,  4  ;  vii.  65,  2  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xxxv.  11  ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  7, 
1,8;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  2,  4,  14 ; 
xiii.  8,  4,  4. 


2  iv.  17,  2. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

4  Altindisches  Leben,  67. 

5  Translation  of    the   Atharvaveda, 
180. 


26  BRAKE— BARB— CAKE  [  Apalamba 

or    because,   as   Bloomfield6   holds,    it   wards   off  a   spell   by 
causing  it  to  recoil  on  its  user. 

6  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  394.     Cf.    I   Oriental  Society,  15,  160,   161;  Weber, 
Bloomfield,   Journal    of   the    American   I  Indische  Studien,  18,  94. 

Apa-lamba. — By  this  word1  is  denoted  a  brake  or  drag,  let 
down  (from  lamb,  '  hang  down ')  to  check  the  speed  of  a 
wagon. 

1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii.  3,  4,  13.  I  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. ; 
Cf.  Caland  and  Henry,  L'Agnistoma,  50 ;    |    Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  26, 79. 

Apastha. — This  word  occurs  twice  in  the  Atharvaveda,1 
denoting  the  barb  of  an  arrow. 

1  iv.  6,  5  ;  v.  18,  7  (satdpastha,  '  hun-  ]  Leben,  300;  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the 
dred-barbed').   Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  \    Atharvaveda,  375. 

Api-garvara.     See  Ahan. 

Api. — Ludwig1  finds  an  Api  whose  sons  are  described  as 
not  performing  sacrifice  (a-yajna-sdc)  and  as  breakers  of  the 
law  of  Mitra-Varuna  in  the  Rigveda.2  Roth3  and  Grassmann 
take  the  expression  used  (apyah  putrah)  as  referring  to  the  sons 
of  the  waters. 

1  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  158,  I       2  vi.  67,  9. 
159.  3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.,  apya. 

Apupa  is  the  general  word  from  the  Rigveda1  onwards  for  a 
cake,  which  might  be  mixed  with  ghee  (ghrtavant),2  or  be 
made  of  rice  (vrihi),s  or  of  barley  (yava).4  In  the  Chandogya 
Upanisad5  there  is  a  difference  of  interpretation.  Max  Miiller 
renders  it  as  '  hive,'  Bohtlingk  as  '  honeycomb,'  Little6  as 
'  cake.' 


2  Rv.  x.  45,  9. 

3  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  2,  3, 12.  13. 


4  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iv.  2,  5,  19 

5  iii.  1,  1. 

6  Grammatical  Index,  s.v. 


Apnavana  appears  only  twice  in  the  Rigveda1  as  an  ancient 
sage,  coupled  with  the  Bhrgus,  to  whose  family  Ludwig2  con 
jectures  him  to  have  belonged. 

1  iv.  7,  1  ;  viii.#l,  4.  2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  128. 


: 


Abhipratarin  Kaksaseni  ]    INTERNAL  DISEASE  27 

A-prati-ratha  ('  he  who  has  no  match  in  fight ')  is  the  name 
of  an  obviously  invented  Rsi,  to  whom  is  ascribed  by  the 
Aitareya  Brahmana1  and  Satapatha  Brahmana2  the  composition 
of  a  Rigveda  hymn  3  celebrating  Indra  as  the  invincible  warrior. 

1  viii.  10.  2  ix.  2,  3,  1.  5.  3  x.  103. 

Apva. — A  disease  affecting  the  stomach,1  possibly  dysentery, 
as  suggested  by  Zimmer,2  on  the  ground  that  the  disease  is 
invoked  to  confound  the  enemy.3  Weber4  considers  that  it  is 
diarrhoea  induced  by  fear,  as  often  in  the  Epic.5  This  view  is 
supported  by  Bloomfield,6  and  was  apparently  that  of  Yaska.7 


1  Av.  ix.  8,  9. 

2  Altindisches  Leben,  389. 

3  Rv.  x.  103,  i2  =  Av.  iii.  2,  5  = 
Samaveda,  ii.  i2ii=Vajasaneyi  Sam- 
hita,  xvii.  44. 

4  Indische  Studien,  9,  482  ;  17,  184. 


5  Indische  Studien,  17,  184. 

6  Hymns  of  the  A  tharvaveda,  327. 

7  Nirukta,  ix.  33. 

Cf.    Whitney,    Translation    of    the 
Atharvaveda,  86,  87. 


Apsas. — This  word  usually  refers  to  the  body,  meaning 
'front  part.'1  In  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda,2  however,  the 
adjective  '  with  a  long  front  part '  (dirghdpsas)  is  applied  to  the 
chariot  (Ratha). 

1  See  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  1,  I  2  i.  122,  15.  Cf.  Roth,  St.  Peters- 
308-313  ;  2,  245>  246.  I    burg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

Abhi-krosaka  designates  one  of  the  victims  in  the  Purusa- 
medha,  meaning,  perhaps,  'herald.'  The  commentator  Mahi- 
dhara1  renders  it  as  '  reviler  '  (nindaka). 

1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  20.  Cf  Anukrosaka,  Taittiriya  Brahmana, 
iii.  4,  15,  1. 

Abhi-jit.     See  Naksatra. 

Abhi-pitva.     See  Ahan. 

Abhi-pratarin  Kaksa-seni  is  mentioned  in  the  Jaiminlya 
Upanisad  Brahmana,1  the  Chandogya  Upanisad,2  and  the 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana,3  as  engaged  in  discussions  on  philo- 
sophy. The  Jaiminlya  Brahmana4  further  reports  that  his 
sons  divided  the  property  amongst  themselves  while  he  was 
yet  alive.     He  was  a  Kuru  and  a  prince. 

1  i.  59,  1  ;  iii.  1,  21  ;  2,  2.  13.  4  iii.    156  (Journal    of  the    American 

2  iv.  3,  5.  Oriental  Society,  26,  61). 

3  x.  5,  7  ;  xiv.  1,  12.  15. 


28  ROYAL  CONSECRATION  [  AbhipraSnin 

Abhi-praSnin. — This  term  occurs  after  Pragnin,  and  followed 
by  PraSnavivaka  in  the  list  of  victims  for  the  Purusamedha 
given  in  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana1  and  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.2 
The  commentators,  Sayana  and  Mahldhara,  see  in  it  merely  a 
reference  to  an  inquisitive  man.  But  there  can  be  little  doubt 
that  the  term  must  have  had  a  legal  reference  of  some  sort — 
perhaps  indicating  the  defendant  as  opposed  to  plaintiff  and 
judge. 

1  iii.  4,  6,  i.  xxx.  io. 

Abhi-sri  (*  admixture  '). — This  word1  designates  the  milk  used 
to  mingle  with  the  Soma  juice  before  it  was  offered. 

1  Rv.  ix.  79,  5;  86,  27.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  227;  Hillebrandt, 
Vedische  Mythologie,  i.  211. 

Abhi-savani.  —  Zimmer1  renders  the  expression  in  the 
Atharvaveda2  as  a  pressing  instrument,  but  it  appears  to  be 
merely  an  adjective,  (waters)  *  used  in  pressing.'3 

1  Altindisches  Leben,  277.  3  Cf.  Whitney's  Translation  of  Av. 

2  ix.  6,  16.  I  ix.  6,  16. 

Abhi-seka  ('besprinkling'). — The  Vedic  king  was  conse- 
crated after  his  election  with  an  elaborate  ritual,  which  is  fully 
described  in  the  Taittiriya,1  Pancavimsa,2  Satapatha,3  and 
Aitareya  Brahmanas,4  and  for  which  the  Mantras  are  given  in 
the  Samhitas.6  The  consecration  took  place  by  sprinkling  with 
water  (abhisecaniya  dpah).6  Only  kings  could  be  consecrated, 
the  people  not  being  worthy  of  it  (anabhisecaniyah).7  The 
sprinkler  (abhisektr)  is  mentioned  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the 
Purusamedha.8  The  Abhiseka  is  an  essential  part  of  the 
Rajasuya,  or  sacrifice  of  royal  inauguration,  being  the  second 
of  its  component  members. 

7  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  4,  2,  17. 

8  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  12  ; 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  8,  1. 

9  Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Rituallitteratur , 
143-147  ;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the 
East,  41,  xxvi  ;  Weber,  tjber  den 
Rajasuya. 


1  i-  7.  5. 

2  xviii.  8  et  seq. 

3  v.  3,  3  et  seq. 

4  viii.  5  et  seq. 

5  Taittiriya  Samhita,  i.  8,  11 ; 

Kath- 

aka  Samhita,  xv.  6  ;  Maitrayani 

Sam- 

hita,  ii.  6  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 

x.  1-4. 

6  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  3,  5, 

10-15, 

Abhyavartin  Cayamana  ]    REINS— NAMES 


29 


Abhisu  is  a  common  Vedic  word1  denoting  the   'reins'  or 
bridle  '  of  the  chariot  horses.     The  use  of  the  plural  is  due  to 
the  fact  that  two  or  four  horses,  possibly  five  (dasabhTsu  '  ten- 
bridled'),2  were  yoked  to  the  car. 

1  Rv.  i.  38,  12  ;  v.  44,  4;    vi.  75,  6;       patha  Brahmana,  v.  4,  3,  14  (where  it 


vni.  33,  11  ;  Av.  vi.  137,  2  ;  vm.  8,  22; 
Vajasaneyi  Saiphita,    xxxiv.   6 ;    Sata- 


=  rastnayah,  '  rems  ),  etc. 
2  Rv.  x.  94,  7. 


Abhy-agni  Aitasayana. — This  man  was,  according  to  the 
Aitareya  Brahmana,1  unfortunate  enough  to  quarrel  with  his 
father,  Aitasa.  The  result  was  that  he  and  his  progeny  were 
called  the  worst  of  the  Aurvas.  In  the  version  of  the  Kausitaki 
Brahmana,2  the  Aitasayana  Ajaneyas  take  the  place  of  the 
Abhyagnis  and  the  BhrgfUS  of  the  Aurvas,  the  latter  being 
probably  a  branch  of  the  former  family. 

1  vi.  33.  2  xxx.  5.     Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  2,  173. 

Abhya-vartin  Cayamana  appears  in  a  Danastuti  ('  Praise  of 
Gifts  ')  in  the  Rigveda,1  and  as  conqueror  of  the  Vrcivants 
under  the  leader  Varasikha.  It  is  probable,  though  not  abso- 
lutely certain,  that  he  is  identical  with  the  Srnjaya  Daivavata, 
mentioned  in  the  same  hymn2  as  having  the  TurvaSas  and 
Vrcivants  defeated  for  him  by  Indra.  In  this  case  he  would 
be  prince  (samrdj)  of  the  Synjayas.  Daivavata  is  mentioned 
elsewhere3  as  a  worshipper  of  Agni. 

Abhyavartin  is  also  referred  to  as  a  Parthava.  Ludwig4  and 
Hillebrandt5  maintained  that  he  is  thus  a  Parthian,  the  latter 
using  the  evidence  of  the  two  places  mentioned  in  the  descrip- 
tion6 of  Daivavata' s  victories,  Hariyuplya  and  Yavyavati,  as 
proofs  for  the  western  position  of  Abhyavartin's  people  in 
Arachosia,  in  Iran.  But  Zimmer7  is  probably  right  in  holding 
that  the  name  Parthava  merely  means  '  a  descendant  of  Prthu,' 
and  that  its  similarity  to  the  Iranian  Parthians  is  only  on  a  par 
with  the  numerous  other  points  of  identity  between  the  Indian 
and  Iranian  cultures. 

1  vi.  27,  8.  5.  n.  1.     Cf.  Grierson,  Journal  of  the  Royal 

2  vi.  27,  7.  Asiatic  Society,  1908,  604  et  seq. 

3  iv.  15,  4.  6  Rv.  vi.  27,  5.  6. 

4  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  198  7  Altindisches  Leben,  133  et  seq.,  433  ; 
et  seq.  Bergaigne,  Religion  Vedique,  2,  362. 

5  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  105  ;  3,  268, 


3o     BROTHERLESS  GIRLS— SPADE— OLD  MAIDS    [  AbhrataraljL 


A-bhratarah  ('  brotherless  ')• — The  lot  of  girls  without  brothers 
is  referred  to  in  the  Rigveda1  as  unsatisfactory — apparently 
they  became  prostitutes.  The  Nirukta2  expressly  forbids 
marriage  with  a  brotherless  maiden,  probably  because  of  the 
risk  of  her  being  made  a  putrikd  ('  adoptive  daughter  ')  by  her 
father — that  is,  any  son  of  hers  being  counted  as  belonging  to 
her  father's,  instead  of  to  her  husband's,  family.     See  Ayogu. 

Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda,  259  ;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben, 
328. 


1  i.     124,    7  ;     iv.    5,    5.      Cf.    Av. 
i.  17,  1. 

2  iii.  5  (abhrdtrl). 


Abhri  ('  spade  ')  is  a  Vedic  word  x  of  frequent  occurrence. 
Various  possible  materials  and  forms  are  enumerated  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana.2  It  may  be  made  of  bamboo  or  of  the  wood 
of  Vikankata  or  Udumbara.  It  may  be  a  span  or  a  cubit  in  size. 
It  is  hollow,  and  either  one  or  both  edges  are  sharp.  From 
this  it  would  appear  that  the  handle  was  made  of  some  wood, 
but  the  head  of  some  metal. 


1  Av.  iv 
out     with 


7,  5.  6  (abhri-khdte  is  '  dug 
a  spade,'  not  'prepared 
ground '  with  Roth,  St.  Petersburg 
Dictionary,  s.v.)  ;  x.  4,  14  ;  hiranya- 
yibhir  abhribhih,  '  with  golden  spades ') ; 


Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  v.  22 ;  xi.  10 ; 
xxxvii.  1 ;  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xvi. 
6 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  3,  2,  15, 
etc. 

2  vi.  3,  1,  30  et  seq. 


Amatra  was  a  vessel  into  which  the  Soma,  after  being 
pressed,  was  poured,1  and  out  of  which  the  libation  to  the  god 
was  made.2 


1  Rv.  ii.  14,  1  ;  v.  51,  4  ;  vi.  42,  2,  etc. 

2  Rv.  x.  29,  7. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  278; 
Oldenberg,  Rgveda  Noten,  1,  61. 


Amala. — This  plant 1  is  probably  the  Emblica  officinalis,  or 
Myrobalan  tree ;  also  called  Amalaka,  or  Amalaka.2 


1  Jaiminiya     Upanisad     Brahmana, 
i.  38,  6. 
■  The  reading  in  Chandogya  Upani- 


sad, vii.  3,  1, 
give  a°  or  a°. 


is  vamalake,  which  may 


Ama-jur  is  an  epithet1  denoting  maidens  'who  grow  old  at 
home '  without  finding  husbands,  or,  as  they  are  elsewhere 
called,  '  who  sit  with  their  father '  (pitr-sad).  A  well-known 
example  of  such  was  Ghosa.2 

1  Rv.     ii.     17,     7;     viii.     21,     15;   I       2  Rv.  i.  117,  7.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altin- 
x  37,  3.  I   disches  Leben,  305. 


Ayas]  IRON,  BRONZE  AND  COPPER  31 

Ama-vasya  Sandilyayana  is  mentioned  in  the  Vamsa 
Brahmana1  as  the  teacher  of  Amsu  Dhanamjayya. 

1  Indische  Studien,  iv.  373. 

Amitra  -  tapana  Susmina  Saibya  is  the  name  of  him 
who  killed  Atyarati  Janamtapi,  according  to  the  Aitareya 
Brahmana  (viii.  23). 

A-mula  ('without  root ')  is  the  name  in  the  Atharvaveda1  of 
a  plant  (Methonica  superba),  which  was  used  for  poisoning 
arrows.     Bloomfield,2  however,  renders  it  as  'movable  property.' 

1  v.  31  4.  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  |  Atharvaveda,  279,  accepts  'rootless 
18,  286 ;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the    |   (plant).' 

2  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  457. 

Ambarisa  is  mentioned  as  a  Varsagira  in  the  Rigveda  1  along 
with  Rjraiva,  Sahadeva,  Suradhas,  and  Bhayamana. 

1  i.  100.  17.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  140. 


Ambastha.     See  Ambasthya. 

Aya.     See  Aksa. 

Ayas. — The  exact  metal  denoted  by  this  word  when  used  by 
itself,  as  always  in  the  Rigveda,1  is  uncertain.  As  favouring  the 
sense  of  *  bronze '  rather  than  that  of  '  iron  '  may  perhaps  be 
cited  with  Zimmer  2  the  fact  that  Agni  is  called  ayo-damstra, 
1  with  teeth  of  Ayas,'3  with  reference  to  the  colour  of  his  flames, 
and  that  the  car-seat  of  Mitra  and  Varuna  is  called  ayah-sthilna* 
*  with  pillars  of  Ayas '  at  the  setting  of  the  sun.5  Moreover, 
in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,6  Ayas  is  enumerated  in  a  list  of  six 
metals :  gold  (hiranya),  Ayas,  Syama,  Loha,  lead  (sisa),  tin 
(trapu).  Here  $yama  ('  swarthy  ')  and  loha  ('  red  ')  must  mean 
'  iron  '  and  '  copper  '  respectively ;  ayas  would  therefore  seem  to 
mean   'bronze.'     In  many  passages  in  the  Atharvaveda7  and 


1  Rv.  i.    57,  3  ;  163,   9  ; 

iv. 

2,   17; 

the  same  verse   it   is   said   to  be  '  of 

vi.  3.  5- 

golden    appearance    at    the    flush    of 

2  Altindisches  Leben,  52. 

dawn.' 

3  Rv.  i.  88,  5  ;  x.  87,  2. 

6  xviii.  13. 

4  Rv.  v.  62,  8  {cf.  7). 

7  xi.  3,    1.  7  ;   MaitrayanI  Samhita, 

5  But  this  is  not  convincing 

as  in 

iv.  2,  9. 

32 


IRON,  BRONZE  AND  COPPER 


[  Ayastlmna 


other  books,  the  Ayas  is  divided  into  two  species — the  sydma 
('  iron  ')  and  the  lohita  ('  copper'  or  '  bronze  ').  In  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana8  a  distinction  is  drawn  between  Ayas  and  lohayasa, 
which  may  either  be  a  distinction  between  iron  and  copper  as 
understood  by  Eggeling,9  or  between  copper  and  bronze  as  held 
by  Schrader.10  In  one  passage  of  the  Atharvaveda,11  the  sense  of 
iron  seems  certain.  Possibly,  too,  the  arrow  of  the  Rigveda,12 
which  had  a  tip  of  Ayas  (yasyd  ayo  mukham),  was  pointed 
with  iron.  Copper,  however,  is  conceivable,  and  bronze  quite 
likely. 

Iron  is  called  fydma  ayas  or  sydma  alone.13  See  also 
Karsnayasa.     Copper  is  Lohayasa  or  Lohitayasa. 

The  smelting  (dhmd  '  to  blow ')  of  the  metal  is  frequently 
referred  to.  The  Satapatha  Brahmana u  states  that  if  '  well 
smelted '  (bahu-dhmdtam)  it  is  like  gold,  referring  evidently  to 
bronze.  A  heater  of  Ayas  is  mentioned  in  the  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,15  and  bowls  of  Ayas  are  also  spoken  of.16 


8  v.  4,  I,  2. 

9  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  41,  90. 

10  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  189. 

11  v.  28,  1. 

12  vi.  75,  15. 

13  Av.  ix.  5,  4. 


14  vi.  1,  3,  5.    Cf.  vi.  i,  1,  13  ;  v.  1, 
14  ;  xii.  7,  1,  7  ;  2,  10,  etc. 

15  xxx.  14 ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4, 
10,  1. 

16  Av.  viii.   10,  22  ;  MaitrayanI  Sam- 
hita, iv.  2,  13. 


Aya-sthuna. — He  was  Grhapati  ('  householder,'  the  sacrificer 
at  sacrificial  sessions)  of  those  whose  Adhvaryu  was  Saulva- 
yana,  and  taught  the  latter  the  proper  mode  of  using  certain 


spoons. 


Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  4,  2,  17  et  seq. 


Ayasya  Angirasa. — This  sage  appears  to  be  mentioned  in 
two  passages  of  the  Rigveda,1  and  the  AnukramanI  ascribes  to 
him  several  hymns  of  the  Rigveda  (ix.  44-46;  x.  67;  68).  In 
the  Brahmana  tradition  he  was  Udga.tr  at  the  Rajasuya  or 
Royal  Inauguration  Sacrifice,  at  which  Sunahsepa  was  to  have 
been  slain,  and  his  Udgitha  (Samaveda  chant)  is  referred  to 
elsewhere.3     He  is  also  referred  to  several  times  as  a  ritual 


1  x.  67,  1 ;  108,  8.  Perhaps  x.  92, 
15  also  refers  to  him,  but  not  i.  62,  7; 
x.  138,  4. 

2  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  16. 


3  Jaiminlya  Upanisad  Brahmana, 
ii.  7,  2.  6 ;  8.  3.  Cf.  Chandogya 
Upanisad,  i.  2,  12. 


Aranya  ] 


UNCULTIVATED  LAND 


33 


authority.4     In  the  Vamsas,  or  Genealogies  of  the  Brhadaran- 
yaka  Upanisad,5  he  is  named  as  the  pupil  of  Abhuti  Tvastra. 

4  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xiv.  3,  22  ;  Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 


xvi.    12,  4;   xi.   8,    10;  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad,   i.   3,   8.    19.  24 ;    Kausltaki 
Brahmana,  xxx.  6. 
5  ii.  6,  3  ;  iv.  6, 3  (in  both  recensions). 


veda,    3,    136  ;    Hillebrandt,  Vedische 

Mythologies    2,    159 ;    Weber,  Indische 

Studien,   1,  255,  n.  ;    Pischel,  Vedische 
Studien,  3,  204. 


Ayogu  is  a  word  of  quite  doubtful  meaning,  found  in  the  list 
of  victims  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.1  It  may,  like  the  late 
dyogava,  denote  a  member  of  a  mixed  caste  (theoretically  a 
descendant  of  a  Sudra  by  a  Vaisya  wife).2  Weber3  rendered  it 
as  '  unchaste  woman.'4  Zimmer  thinks  it  denotes  a  brotherless 
maiden  who  is  exposed  to  the  dangers  of  prostitution  (cf. 
dyogava). 

1  xxx.  5  ;  Taithriya  Brahmana,  hi.  4, 
1,  1. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Indische  Streifen,  1,  76,  n.  b.  In  the 
Zeitschvift  der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen 
Gesellschaft,  18,  277,  he  thought  it  re- 


ferred to  dicing  (ayas).     Risley,  Peoples 
of  India,   250,    regards    the  Ayogavas 
as   a  functional    caste    of    carpenters 
(cf.  Manu,  x.  48). 
4  Altindisches  Leben,  328. 


Ara.     See  Ratha. 

Aratu. — A   plant1    (Colosanthes  Indica)   from    the   wood    of 
which  the  axle  of  a  chariot  was  sometimes  made.2 

1  Av.  xx.  131,  17.  Cf.    Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,   62, 


2  Rv.  viii.  46,  27. 


247. 


Aranya. — This  term  denotes  the  uncultivated  land — not 
necessarily  forest  land — beyond  the  village.  It  is  contrasted 
with  home  (amcl),1  and  with  the  plough  land  (krsi),2  being  spoken 
of  as  apart  (tiras)  from  men.3  It  is  also  contrasted  with  the 
Grama,4  and  it  is  the  place  where  thieves  live.5  The  character 
of  the  forest  is  described  in  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda6  to  the 
forest  spirit  (Aranyani).  The  dead  are  carried  there  for  burial,7 
and  hermits  live  there.8     Forest  fires  were  common.9 


1  Rv.  vi.  24,  10. 

2  Av.  ii.  4,  5. 

3  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  6,  2,  20. 

4  Av.    xii.    1,    56;    Rv.    i.    163,    11  ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  iii.  45  ;  xx.  17. 

5  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  2,  3,  5  ; 
xiii.  2,  4,  4. 

VOL.  I. 


6  x.  146. 

7  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  v.  11. 

8  Chandogya  Upanisad,  viii.  5,  3. 

9  Rv.  i.  65,  4  ;  94,  10.  11 ;  ii.  14,  2  ; 
x.  92,  1 ;  142,  4  ;  Av.  vii.  50,  etc. 

Cf.   Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  48, 
142. 

3 


34 


CUBIT— OAR 


[  Aratni 


Aratni. — This  word,  which  primarily  means  '  elbow,'  occurs 
frequently  from  the  Rigveda1  onwards  as  denoting  a  measure  of 
length  ('  ell '  or  '  cubit '),  the  distance  from  the  elbow  to  the  tip 
of  the  hand.  The  exact  length  nowhere  appears  from  the  early 
texts. 


1  Rv.   viii.    80,  8;  Av.    xix.   57,  6;    I   Brahmana,    vi.    3,    1,    33,    etc. 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  5  ;  Satapatha    |  Rv.  viii.  80,  8,  see  also  Aji. 


For 


A-rajanah,  *  not  princes,'  is  a  term  used  to  describe  persons 
in  two  passages  of  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,1  and  in  the 
Aitareya  Brahmana.2  Weber3  also  finds  them  mentioned  in  the 
Atharvaveda,4  and  thinks  that  they — Sutas  ('  charioteers  ')  and 
Gramanis  ('  troop-leaders  ')  there  referred  to — were  called  thus 
because,  while  not  themselves  princes,  they  assisted  in  the  con- 
secration of  princes. 


1  111.  4,  1,  7.  8  ;  xin.  4,  2,  17. 

2  viii.  23. 

3  Indische  Studien,  17,  199. 

4  iii.  5,  7,  where  he  emends  rajanah 


to  a-rajanah  (see  Whitney's  note  on  the 
passage).  Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  333;  Weber,  Uber  den 
Rajasuya,  22  et  seq. 


Arataki  is  a  plant  mentioned  once  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  and 
apparently  identical  with  the  AjaSrhgi.     Cf.  also  Aratu. 


1  iv.  37,  6. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  68; 


Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
408. 


Arada  Datreya  Saunaka. — He  is  mentioned  in  the  Vamsa 
Brahmana1  as  the  pupil  of  Drti  Aindrota  Saunaka. 


1  Indische  Studien,  4,  384. 


Aritra  denotes  the  '  oar '  by  which  boats  were  propelled. 
The  Rigveda1  and  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita2  speak  of  a  vessel 
with  a  hundred  oars,  and  a  boat  (nau)  is  said  to  be  '  propelled 
by  oars'  (aritra-para?ia).s  In  two  passages  of  the  Rigveda4  the 
term,  according  to  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  denotes  a  part 
of  a  chariot.     The  rower  of  a  boat  is  called  aritr.5     See  Nau. 


1  i.  116,  5. 

2  xxi.  7. 

8  Rv.  x.  101,  2.    Cf.  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, iv.  2,  5,  10. 


4  i.  46,  8 ;  dasaritra,  ii.  18,  1. 

5  Rv.  ii.  42,  1  ;  ix.  95,  2. 
Cf.      Zimmer,      A  Itindisches 

256. 


Leben, 


Arundhatl  ] 


MEDICINAL  PLANT 


35 


Arim-dama  Sana-sruta  is  mentioned  as  a  Maharaja  in  the 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  34. 

Arim-ejaya  is  mentioned  as  one  who  served  as  Adhvaryu  at 
the  snake  feast  celebrated  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.1 

1  xxv.  15.     See  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1.  35. 

Aruna  Ata  was  Achavaka  at  the  snake  feast  in  the  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana  (xxv.  15). 


Aruna  Aupave§i  Gautama  is  the  full  style1  of  a  teacher,  who 
is  repeatedly  referred  to  in  the  later  Samhitas2  and  Brahmanas,3 
and  whose  son  was  the  famous  Uddalaka  Aruni.  He  was  a 
pupil  of  Upavesa,4  and  a  contemporary  of  the  prince  A§vapati, 
by  whom  he  was  instructed.     Cf.  Aruna. 


3  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  5,  3 
(in  both  recensions). 

4  Satapatha  Brahmana,  x.  6,    1,   2. 
Cf.  Geldner,    Vedische  Studien,  3,    146, 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  1,  9,  2; 
4,  5,  1 ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  4,  10 ; 
iii.  6,  4.  6 ;  7,  4 ;  8,  6  ;  10,  5  ;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  xxvi.  10. 

2  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  ii.  1,  5,  11  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  2,  2,  20; 
xi.  4,  1,  4^3,2.^^  u   A 

i.  Arundhatl  is  the  name  of  a  plant  celebrated  in  several 
passages  of  the  Atharvaveda1  as  possessing  healing  properties  in 
case  of  wounds,  as  a  febrifuge,  and  as  inducing  cows  to  give 
milk.  The  plant  was  a  climber  which  attached  itself  to  trees 
like  the  Plaksa,  ASvattha,  Nyagrodha,  and  Parna.2  It  was 
of  golden  colour  (hirariya-varna),  and  had  a  hairy  stem  {lomasa- 
vaksana).8  It  was  also  called  Silaci,  and  the  Laksa  appears  to 
have  been  a  product  of  it.4 


1  iv.  12,  1  ;  v.  5,  5.  9  ;  vi.  59,  1.  2  ; 
viii.  7,  6;  xix.  38,  1. 

2  Av.  v.  5,  5. 

3  Av.    v.    5,    7  ;    Pischel,     Vedische 
Studien,  1,  174 ;  Bloomfield,  Zeitschrift 


der    Deutschen    Morgenldndischen    Gesell- 
schaft,  48,  574. 

4  Cf.  Whitney's  note  on  Av.  iv.  12 ; 
Bloomfield,  Atharvaveda,  61. 


2.  Arundhatl,  as  the  name  of  a  star,  is  often  referred  to  in 
the  Sutra  literature,  but  only  once  in  a  late  Aranyaka.1 

1  Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  iii.  9,  2. 

3—2 


36  THE  SEER  ARCANANAS  [  Arka 

Arka,  as  the  name  of  the  tree  Colotropis  gigantea,  is  perhaps 
found  in  one  obscure  passage  of  the  Atharvaveda.1 

1  vi.  72,  1,  where  see  Whitney's  note.     Cf.  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

Argala.  —  The  word  which  is  usual  later  to  denote  the 
wooden  pin  of  a  door  is  found  in  the  Sankhayana  Aranyaka 
(ii.  16)  in  the  compound  argalesike  to  denote  the  pin  and  bar 
of  the  door  of  a  cow-pen.     Cf.  Isika. 

Argala  Kahodi  is  mentioned  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita  (xxv.  7) 
as  a  teacher.  The  name  may,  however,  be  Aryala,  as  suggested 
in  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.,  and  as  read  by 
v.  Schroeder  in  his  edition.  The  Kapisthala  (xxxix.  5)  has 
Ayala.     See  below. 

Areant  is  possibly,  as  Ludwig1  thinks,  the  name  of  the  author 
of  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda2;  but  the  word  may  be  merely  the 
ordinary  participle  '  praising.' 

1  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  133. 

Arcananas. — In  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda1  the  gods  Mitra- 
Varuna  are  besought  to  protect  Arcananas.  He  is  also  in- 
voked with  Syavasva  and  several  other  ancestors  enumerated 
in  the  Atharvaveda.2  He  appears  as  father  of  Syavasva  in  the 
Paricavim^a  Brahmana.3  The  later  tradition  makes  him  play  a 
part  in  the  legend  of  his  son's  wedding,  which  Sieg4  endeavours 
to  show  is  known  to  the  Rigveda. 


1  v.  64,  7. 

2  xviii.  3,  15. 

3  viii.  5,  9. 

Area.    See  Brahmana. 


4  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  50  et  seq. 
Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda, 
3,  127;  Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  354. 


Arjuni  is,  in  the  Rigveda,1  the  name  of  the  Naksatra 
('  lunar  mansion  '),  elsewhere2  called  Phalgunl.  It  occurs  in 
the  marriage  hymn,  with  Agha  for  Magna,  and,  like  that  word, 
is  apparently  a  deliberate  modification. 

1  x.  85,  13.  2  Av.  xiv.  1,  13.     Cf.  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  1,  11,  2. 


Aryamnab.  Pantha  ] 


37 


Arbuda  is  mentioned  as  Gravastut  priest  at  the  snake 
festival  described  in  the  Paficavimsa  Brahmana.1  He  is  ob- 
viously the  same  mythical  figure  as  Arbuda  Kadraveya,  a  seer 
spoken  of  in  the  Aitareya2  and  Kausitaki  Brahmanas3  as  a  maker 
of  Mantras. 


1  xxv.  15. 


6    XXIX.    I. 

xiii.  4,  3,  9. 


Cf.  Satapatha  Brahmana, 


Arya. — This  word  is  not  common  in  the  older  literature,  in 
places  where  the  quantity  of  the  first  vowel  is  fixed  as  short,  except 
in  a  mere  adjectival  sense.  Geldner,1  indeed,  contends  that  no 
other  sense  is  anywhere  needed  ;  but  Roth2  and  Zimmer3  agree 
in  thinking  that  in  several  passages  of  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita4 
the  word  has  the  same  sense  as  Arya,  and  this  appears  probable. 
Whether  it  is  necessary  to  ascribe  this  sense  to  the  word  in  the 
compound  arya-patnl5  applied  to  the  waters  set  free  by  Indra, 
is  more  doubtful.  The  commentator,  Mahidhara,6  suggests 
that  the  word  means  a  VaiSya,  not  an  Arya  generally.  This 
view  is  supported  by  the  explanation  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana7 
of  one  of  the  passages  of  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.8  But  though 
the  use  of  Arya  to  denote  a  Vaisya  became  common  later,  it  is 
not  clear  that  it  was  original. 


1  Vedische  Studien,  3,  96. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Altindisches  Leben,  214,  215. 

4  xiv.  30  ;  xx.  17  ;  xxiii.  21  ;  xxvi.  2. 
Cf.  also  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxxviii.  5 ; 
Taittirlya  Samhita,  vii.  4,  19,  3.  In 
Atharvaveda,  xix.  32,  8,  an  analogous 
form  occurs,  as  contrasted  with  brah- 
mana, raj  any  a,  and  indra;  but  even 
there  Whitney  renders  it  as  'Aryan.' 
Cf.  xix.  62,  1  ;  Rv.  viii.  94,  3  ;  Pischel, 
Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlandischen 
Gesellschaft,  40,  125. 


5  Rv.  vii.  6,  5  ;  x.  43,  8. 

6  On  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiii. 
30. 

7  xiii.  2,  9,  8.  Contrast  Sankhayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  4,  4  et  seq.,  where 
Arya  appears  to  be  taken  in  the  wider 
sense. 

8  xxiii.  30.  Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation 
of  the  Rigveda,  3,  212  ;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  x.  6  ;  Oldenberg,  Rgveda- 
Noten,  1,  126,  363. 


Aryamnah  Pantha,  '  Aryaman's  Way,'  an  expression  which 
occurs  in  the  Brahmanas,1  denotes,  according  to  Weber,2  '  the 
milky  way,'  but,  according  to  Hillebrandt,3  '  the  ecliptic' 


1  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  7,  6,  6; 
Paucavimsa  Brahmana,  xxv.  12,  3 ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  3,  1,  2. 


2  Uber  den  Rajasuya,  48,  2. 

3  Vedische  Mythologie,  3,  79,  80. 


38  DISEASES— BOTTLE-GOURD  [  Aryala 

Aryala. — Those  at  whose  snake  feast  the  Grhapati  was  Aryala, 
and  the  Hotr  was  Aruni  are  mentioned  in  the  Paficavimsa 
Brahmana  (xxiii.  i,  5).     See  also  Argala. 

Arvant.     See  ASva. 

Arsas  is  the  name  of  a  disease  mentioned  in  the  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita1  with  consumption  and  other  ailments.  It  appears  to 
designate  '  haemorrhoids,'  as  in  the  later  medical  literature. 

1  xii.  98.  I   398  ;     Roth,     St.      Petersburg     Dic- 

Cf      Zimmer,      Altindisches      Leben,   I   tionary,  s.v. 

Alaja  designates  some  kind  of  bird — one  of  the  victims  in 
che  Asvamedha,1  or  Horse  Sacrifice. 

1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  4,  n,  1;  I  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxi.  4;  Vajasaneyi 
5,  20,  1 ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14, 18 ;    |    Samhita,  xxiv.  34. 

Alaji  is  the  name  of  a  disease  in  the  Atharvaveda.1  The  later 
alajl  denotes  an  eye-disease — a  discharge  at  the  junction  of  the 
cornea  and  the  sclerotica. 

1  ix.  8,  20.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  390;  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

Alamma  Parijanata  is  mentioned  in  the  Paricavimsa  Brah- 
mana (xiii.  4,  11 ;  10,  8)  as  a  sage. 

Alasala. — This  word  occurring  only  in  one  passage  of  the 
Atharvaveda  (vi.  16,  4)  is  said  to  denote  a  grain-creeper. 

Alandu. — This  is  the  reading  in  the  text  of  the  Atharvaveda1 
of  the  name  of  a  species  of  worm.  Bloomfield2  shows  reason 
to  adopt  the  reading  Algandu  as  the  correct  form  of  the  word. 

1  ii.  31,  2.  2  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  315. 

Alabu.  —  The  bottle-gourd  {Lagenaria  vulgaris).  Vessels 
made  of  it  are  referred  to  in  the  Atharvaveda.1 

1  viii.  10,  29.  30;  xx.  132,  1.  2.     Cf.  alapu  in  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iv.  2,  13. 

Alayya  is  a  word  occurring  in  an  obscure  verse  of  the  Rigveda,1 
and  appearing  to  be  a  proper  name.  Hillebrandt,2  however, 
amends  the  text  so  as  to  remove  the  name.  The  St.  Petersburg 
Dictionary  suggests  that  it  refers  to  Indra.     Pischel3  holds  that 

3  Zeitschrift    der    Deutschen    M  or  gen- 


1  ix.  67,  20. 

2  Zeitschrift    der    Deutschen    Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  48,  418. 


landischen  Gesellschaft,  48,  701. 


Avata  ] 


A  LIN  A   TRIBE— A  VARA  PLANT— WELL 


39 


it  is  the  name  of  a  person  whose  axe  was  stolen,  and  for  whom 
the  hymn  was  written  as  a  spell  for  the  recovery  of  the  axe. 

Aliklava  is  a  kind  of  carrion  bird  mentioned  in  the  Athar- 
vaveda.1 

1  xi.  2,  2 ;  9,  9.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  88. 


Alina  is  the  name  of  a  people  mentioned  once  only  in  the 
Rigveda.1  Roth2  thought  that  the  Alinas  were  allies — possibly 
a  subdivision — of  the  Trtsus.  Ludwig3  more  probably  thinks 
that  they  were  defeated  by  Sudas,  together  with  the  Pakthas, 
Bhalanas,  Sivas,  and  Visanins,  with  whom  they  are  mentioned, 
at  the  Parusni ;  and  Zimmer4  suggests  that  they  lived  to  the 
north-east  of  Kafiristan. 


1  vii.  18,  7. 

2  Zur  Litter atur  und  Geschichte  des 
Weda,  95  ;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben, 
126. 


3  Translation    of    the    Rigveda,    3, 
207. 

4  Op.   cit.,   431.     The  land  is  men- 
tioned by  Hiouen  Thsang. 


Alikayu  Vacas-patya  is  twice  mentioned  as  an  authority  in 
the  Kausltaki  Brahmana  (xxvi.  5 ;  xxviii.  4). 

Alpa-gayu  is  a  kind  of  insect  mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda.1 


1  iv.  36,  9. 

Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 


vaveda, 408 ;  "Whitney,  Translation  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  210. 


Avaka  is  an  aquatic  plant  (Blyxa  octandra)  frequently  re- 
ferred to  in  the  Atharvaveda  as  well  as  in  the  later  Samhitas2 
and  Brahmanas.3  The  Gandharvas  are  said  to  eat  it.4  Its  later 
name  is  saivala,  and  it  is  identical  with  the  Sipala. 


1  viii.  7,  9  ;  37,  8-10. 

2  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  6,  1,  1 ;  v.  4, 

2,  1  ;  4,  3  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvii.  4  ; 
xxv.  1 ;  MaitrayanI  Samhita,  ii.  10,  1. 

3  Satapatha  Brahmana,  vii.  5,  1,  11  ; 
vm-  3.  2,  5  ;  ix.   1,  2,  20.  22  ;  xiii.  8, 

3,  13. 


4  Av.  iv.  37,  8. 

5  With  which  it  is  glossed  in  AsVal- 
ayana  Grhya  Sutra,  ii.  8  ;  iv.  4.  Cf. 
Bloomfield,  Proceedings  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  October,  1890,  xli.-xliii.; 
American  Journal  of  Philology,  11,  349  ; 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  71. 


Avata,  a  word  occurring  several  times  in  the  Rigveda,1  denotes 
a  well,  artificially  made  (khan  '  to  dig ')  in  contrast  with  a  spring 


1  i-   55,  8;  85,   10.   11 ;   116,   9.   22; 
130,  2;  iv.  17,  16;  50,  3;  viii.  49,  6; 


62,    6;    72,    10.    12  ;    x.    25, 
5.  7.     Cf.  Nirukta,  v.  26. 


4 ;  IOI> 


40  WELLS— SHEEP  [  Avatsara 

(utsa),  though  the  latter  expression  is  also  applied  to  an  artificial 
well.  Such  wells  were  covered  by  the  makers,2  and  are  described 
as  unfailing  (a-ksita)  and  full  of  water.3  The  water  was  raised 
by  a  wheel  (cakra)  of  stone,  to  which  was  fastened  a  strap 
(varatra),  with  a  pail  (kosa)*  attached  to  it.  When  raised  it  was 
poured  {sine)  into  buckets  (ahava)  of  wood.5  Sometimes  those 
wells  appear  to  have  been  used  for  irrigation  purposes,  the  water 
being  led  off  into  broad  channels  (sdrrni  susird).6 

2  Rv.  i.  55,  8.                                            I  ku-cakra  in  Rv.  x.  102,  11,  is  another 

3  Rv.  x.  101,  6,  etc.                                 j  name  for  the  wheel,  but  cf.  St.  Peters- 

4  Amsatra-kosam,  Rv.  x.  101,  7,  is  best  j  burg  Dictionary,  s.v . 
thus  rendered.     For  the  stone  wheel   j  5  Rv.  x.  101,  6.  7. 

{aimacakra)  which  was  above  (ucca-  j  6  Rv.  viii.  69,  12.  Cf.  Zimmer, 
cakra),  seeRv.x.  101,  7 ;  viii.  72, 10.  For  |  Altindisches  Leben,  156,  157;  Geldner, 
the  varatra,  see  Rv.  x.  101,  6.    Perhaps   j    Vedische  Studien,  2,  14. 

Avatsara  is  mentioned  as  a  seer  in  the  Rigveda,1  as  a  priest 
in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana,2  and  as  Prasravana  (or  Prasravana), 
son  of  Prasravana,  in  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana.3  A  hymn  of 
the  Rigveda4  is  incorrectly  ascribed  to  him  in  the  Anukramani. 


1  v.  44,  10. 

2  ii.  24. 
8  xiii.  3. 
4  ix.  58.    Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of 

A-vadhyata.    See  Brahmana. 


the  Rigveda,  3,  138 ;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  1,  188  ;  2,  315  ;  Sieg,  Die 
Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  62  et  seq. 


Avasa  in  the  adjective  an-avasa  in  the  Rigveda1  may  mean 
<  drag.' 

1  vi.  66,  7.     Cf.  Max  Miiller,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32,  372. 

Ava-skava. — A  kind  of  worm,  mentioned  along  with  others 
in  the  Atharvaveda.1 

1  ii.  31,  4.  Cf.  Whitney,  ad  loc.  ;  I  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  90;  Bloom- 
Weber,     Indische     Studien,     13,     201;    |   field,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  316. 

Avata.     See  Vata. 

Avi. — '  Sheep  '  are  repeatedly  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda,  and 
later,  often  in  conjunction  with  goats  (aja).  The  wolf  (vrka) 
was  their  great  enemy,1  and  they  were  tended  by  shepherds.2 

1  Av.  v.  8,  4;  Rv.  viii.  34,  3  ;  66,  8.     I  h;    Satapatha  Brahmana,  iv.  1,  5,  2  ; 

2  Avi-pala,  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.    I  avipa,  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  9,  1. 


ASmagandha  ]  SHEEP  41 

Sheep  as  well  as  kine  were  captured  from  the  enemy.3  The 
Soma  sieve  was  made  of  sheep's  wool,  and  is  repeatedly 
referred  to  (avi,  mesl,  avya,  avyaya).4  Considerable  herds 
mast  have  existed,  as  Rjrasva  is  said5  to  have  slain  one 
hundred  rams,  and  in  a  Danastuti  ('  Praise  of  Gifts  ')  6  a  hundred 
sheep  are  mentioned  as  a  gift.  The  (mesa,7  vrmi8)  ram  was 
sometimes  castrated  (petva).9  The  main  use  of  sheep  was  their 
wool;  hence  the  expression  'woolly'  (tlrnavatl)10  is  employed  to 
designate  a  sheep.  In  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita11  the  ram  is 
described  as  '  woolly,'  and  as  '  the  skin  of  beasts,  quadruped  and 
biped,'  with  reference  to  the  use  of  its  wool  as  clothing  for  men 
and  shelter  for  animals.  Pusan  is  said12  to  weave  raiment  from 
the  wool  of  sheep.  Normally  the  sheep  stayed  out  at  pasture ; 
in  an  obscure  passage  of  the  Rigveda13  reference  appears  to  be 
made  to  rams  in  stall.  Gandhara14  ewes  were  famous  for  their 
wool.  Pischel15  considers  that  the  Parusnl16  was  named  from 
its  richness  in  sheep,  pants l7  denoting  the  '  flocks  '  of  wool. 

10  Rv.  viii.  67,  3.     Cf.  x.  75,  8;  so 
ura,  x.  95,  3. 


3  Rv.  viii.  86,  2. 

4  Rv.  ix.  iog,  16  ;  36,  4,  etc.  See 
Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  1, 
203. 

5  Rv.  i.  116,  17. 

6  Rv.  viii.  67,  3. 

7  Rv.  i.  43,  6  ;  116,  16,  etc. 

8  Taittirlya  Samhita,  ii.  3,  7,  4,  etc. 

9  Rv.  vii.  18,  17 ;  Av.  iv.  4,  8 ; 
Taittirlya  Samhita,  v.  5,  22,  1  ;  Vaja- 
saneyi Samhita,  xxix.  58  ;  59. 


11  xm.  50. 

12  Rv.  x.  26,  6. 

13  x.  106,  5. 

14  Rv.  i.  126,  7. 

15  Vedische  Studien,  2,  210. 

16  Rv.  iv.  22,  2  ;  v.  52,  9. 

17  Rv.  ix.  15,  6;  parvan,  iv.  22,  2. 
Cf  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  229, 
230  ;  Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  348. 


Agani. — Zimmer1  cites  this  word  from  the  Rigveda2  as 
denoting  a  sling  stone,  and  compares  a  similar  use  of  AdrL3 
In  either  case,  however,  the  weapons  are  mythical,  being  used 
in  descriptions  of  Indra's  deeds.  Schrader4  also  cites  asan  in  this 
sense,  but  no  Vedic  passage  requires  this  sense. 

1  Altindisches  Leben,  301.  I       3  i.  51,  3. 

2  vi.  6,  5.     Cf.  1,  121,  9.  4  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  221. 

Agma-gandha  ('  rock  -  smell ')  is  a  plant  mentioned  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana,1  probably  identical  with  the  late  asva- 
gandhd,  'horse-smell'  (Physalis flexuosa). 

1  xiii.  8,  1,  16,  with  Eggeling's  note  in  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  44,  427. 


42 


HORSE 


[  A£va 

Vedic 
),'the 
inner ' 


Asva  is  the  commonest  word  for  'horse'  in  the  Vedic 
literature.  The  horse  is  also  called  'the  runner'  (atya),  'the 
swift'  (arvant),  'the  strong,'  for  pulling  (vdjin),  'the  runner' 
(sapti),  and  '  the  speeding '  (haya).  The  mare  is  termed  asva, 
atya,  arvati,  vadava,  etc.  Horses  of  various  colour  were  known, 
dun  (harita,  hari),  ruddy  (aruna,  arusa,  pisaiiga,  rohita),  dark 
brown  (syava),  white  (sveta),  etc.  A  white  horse  with  black 
ears  is  mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda  as  of  special  value.1 
Horses  were  highly  prized,2  and  were  not  rare,  as  Roth3 
thought,  for  as  many  as  four  hundred  mares  are  mentioned  in 
one  Danastuti  ('  Praise  of  Gifts  ').4  They  were  on  occasion 
ornamented  with  pearls  and  gold.5 

Mares  were  preferred  for  drawing  chariots  because  of  their 
swiftness  and  sureness.6  They  were  also  used  for  drawing 
carts,  but  were  not  ordinarily  so  employed.7  No  mention  is 
made  of  riding  in  battle,  but  for  other  purposes  it  was  not 
unknown.8 

Horses  were  often  kept  in  stalls,9  and  fed  there.10  But  they 
were  also  allowed  to  go  out  to  grass,11  and  were  then  hobbled.12 
They  were  watered  to  cool  them  after  racing.13    Their  attendants 


1  Av.  v.  17,  15. 

2  Rv.  i.  83,  1  ;  iv.  32,  17  ;  v.  4,  11  ; 
viii.  78,  2,  etc. 

3  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  35,  686. 

4  Rv.  viii.  55,  3.  Cf.  v.  33,  8  ;  vi.  47, 
22-24;  63,  10;  viii.  6,  47;  46,  22,  and 
Hopkins,  American  Journal  of  Philology, 
15,  157. 

5  Rv.  x.  68,  11. 

6  Pischel,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  35,  712- 
714 ;  Vedische  Studien,  1 ,  10,  305.  Cf 
ratho  vadhuman,  Rv.  i.  126,  3  ;  vii.  18, 
22,  vajinivan,  vii.  69,  1. 

7  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  5,  4,  35. 

8  The  Asvins  ride,  Rv.  v.  61,  1-3. 
An  aiva-sada  is  referred  to  in  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxx.  13  ;  Taittinya  Brahmana, 
iii.  4,  7,  1  ;  and  riding  is  meant  in  Rv. 
i.  162,  17;  163,  9.  Av.  xi.  10,  24,  is 
doubtful.     Cf.  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  I 


American  Oriental  Society,  13,  262  ;  Lud- 
wig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  221. 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  230,  denies 
the  use;  but  see  p.  295,  where  it  is 
admitted  for  ordinary  purposes. 

9  Cf.  the  epithet  of  richness,  '  filling 
the  stalls  with  horses'  (asva-pastya),  in 
Rv.  ix.  86,  41,  and  see  A  v.  vi.  77,  1  ; 
xix.  55,  1. 

10  Av.  loc.  cit. 

11  Zimmer,  op.  cit.,  232,  denies  this, 
but  it  is  the  natural  sense  of  the 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xv.  41. 

12  The  expression  for  this  is  padbisa, 
Rv.  i.  162,  14.  16  ;  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad,  vi.  2,  13  ;  Chandogya  Upani- 
sad,  v.  1,  12  ;  Sankhayana  Aranyaka, 
ix.  7.  Cf.  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  1, 
234-236. 

ia  Rv.  ii.  13,  5  ;  34,  3  ;  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  i.  11,  6;  Pischel,  op.  cit.,  1, 
189,  190. 


A6vattha  ] 


MULE— RELIGIOUS  FIG-TREE 


43 


are  frequently  referred  to  (asva-pdla,u  asva-pa,15  asva-pati).1Q 
Stallions  were  frequently  castrated  (vadhri).17 

Besides  reins  (rasmayah),  reference  is  made  to  halters 
(asvdbhidhdnl),18  and  whips  (asvdjani).19     See  also  Ratha. 

Horses  from  the  Indus  were  of  special  value,20  as  also  horses 
from  the  Sarasvati. 


14  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  4, 5. 

15  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  11  ;  Tait- 
tiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  9,  1. 

16  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  24 ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xvii.  13. 

17  Rv.  viii.  46,  30. 

18  Av.  iv.  36,  10;  v.  14,  6;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  vi.  35  ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, vi.  3,  1,  26;  xiii.  1,  2,  1. 


19  Rv.  v.  62,  7 ;  vi.  75,  13 ;  Vaja- 
saneyi Samhita,  xxix.  50. 

20  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  2, 13; 
Sankhayana  Aranyaka,  ix.  7  ;  vdjinivatJ 
as  epithet  of  Sindhu,  Rv.  x.  75,  8,  of 
Sarasvati,  i.  3,  10  ;  ii.  41,  18  ;  vi.  61, 
3.  4;  vii.  96,  3;  Pischel,  op.  cit.,  i.  10. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  op.  cit.,  230-232. 


Asva-tara,  Asva-tari  are  respectively  the  masculine  and 
feminine  name  of  *  mule.'  These  animals  are  mentioned 
frequently  from  the  Atharvaveda1  onwards.  They  were  known 
not  to  be  fruitful,2  and  were  probably  considered  inferior  to 
horses,3  but  a  mule-car  was  quite  common.4 


1  iv.  4,  8 ;  viii.  8,  22  ;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  iii.  47  ;  iv.  9  ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  xii.  4,  1,  10,  etc,  ;  Jaiminiya 
Upanisad  Brahmana,  i.  4,  4. 

2  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  1,  1,  2.  3. 
Cf.  Adbhuta  Brahmana  in  Indische 
Studien,  1,  40. 

3  As  were  asses,  Taittiriya  Samhita, 


v.  1,  2,  2  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  vi.  4, 

4.  7- 

4  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iv.  9 ;  Chan- 
dogya  Upanisad,  iv.  2,  1  (in  both  pas- 
sages asvatari-ratha).  Cf.  Oertel,  Trans- 
actions of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts 
and  Sciences,  15,  175. 


i.  Asva-ttha  ('  horse-stand  ')  is  one  of  India's  greatest  trees, 
the  Ficus  religiosa,  later  called  pippala1  (now  Peepal).  Vessels 
made  of  the  wood  of  the  Asvattha  are  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda,2 
and  the  tree  itself  is  constantly  referred  to  later.3  Its  hard 
wood  formed  the  upper  of  the  two  pieces  of  wood  used  for 
kindling  fire,  the  lower  being  of  Sami.4  It  planted  its  roots  in 
shoots  of  other  trees,  especially  the  Khadira,  and  destroyed 
them  ;5  hence  it  is  called  '  the  destroyer  '  (yaibddha).    Its  berries 


1  The  word  pippala  as  a  neuter  occurs 
once  in  the  Rv.  (i.  164,  20)  designating 
the  berry  of  the  Peepal-tree. 

2  i-  135,  8;  x.  97,  5. 


3  Atharvaveda,  iii.  6,  1  ;  iv.  37,  4,  etc. 

4  Av.  vi.  11, 1  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
xi.  5,  1,  13. 

5  Av.  iii.  6. 


44  NAMES  OF  PRINCES— REED  [  Asvattha 

are  referred  to  as  sweet,  and  as  eaten  by  birds.6  The  gods  are 
said  to  sit  under  it  in  the  third  heaven.7  It  and  Nyagrodha 
are  styled  the  '  crested  ones  '  (sikha?idin)  .8 


6  Rv.  i.  164,  20.  22. 

7  Av.  v.  4,  3.    Cf.  Chandogya  Upani- 
sad, viii.  5,  3  ;  Kausitaki  Upanisad,  i.  3. 


8  Av.  iv.  37,  4.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altin- 
disches  Leben,  57,  58. 


2.  A£va-ttha. — This  prince  is  celebrated  in  a  Danastuti 1  as 
having  given  gifts  to  Payu.  He  is  identified  with  Divodasa 
by  Griffith,2  but  it  is  impossible  to  be  certain  of  this  identifica- 
tion. 


1  Rv.  vi.  47,  24. 

2  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  1,  611.     The 
name  is  spelt  Asvatha  in  the  text,  but 


that   is   merely   the   usual    shortened 
spelling  of  the  group  tth. 


Asva-davan. — Ludwig1  finds  a  prince  of  this  name  in  a  passage 
of  the  Rigveda,2  where  a  gift  of  fifty  horses  is  mentioned,  but 
the  word  appears  to  be  an  epithet  of  Indra  ('  bestower  of 
horses '). 

1  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  274.  2  v.  18,  3. 

ASva-pati  ('  lord  of  horses  ')  is  a  name  of  a  prince  of  the 
Kekayas,  who  instructed  Pracinagala  and  other  Brahmins.1 

1  Chandogya  Upanisad,  v.  11,  4  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  x.  6,  1,  2. 

ASva-medha  ('  offering  a  horse-sacrifice ')  is  a  prince  men- 
tioned in  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda,1  which  contains  a  Danastuti 
('  Praise  of  Gifts  ')  of  Tryaruna,  and  to  which  three  verses  have 
been  added  in  praise  of  Asvamedha.     See  also  ASvamedha. 

1  v.  27,  4-6.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  275. 

ASva-yujau.     See  Naksatra. 

ASvala,  the  Hotr  priest  of  Janaka,  King  of  Videha,  appears 
as  an  authority  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  (iii.  1,  2.  10). 

A&va-vara,  A£va-vala  ('  hair  of  a  horse's  tail '). — The  former 
form   occurs   in   the  Maitrayani    Samhita,1   the  latter   in   the 

1  iii.  7,  9- 


Astakarni]  NAMES  OF  MEN  45 

Kathaka  2  and  Kapisthala  Samhitas 3  and  Satapatha  Brahmana,4 
denoting  a  species  of  reed  (Saccharum  spontaneum). 

edition  of  the  Maitrayani  Samhita,  i., 
p.  xv. 


"    XXIV.  0. 

3  xxxviii.  1. 

4  iii.  4,  1,  7.     Cf.  Von  Schroeder's 


A£va-sukti  is  the  name  of  a  seer  to  whom  the  Rigveda 
AnukramanI  ascribes  two  hymns  of  the  Rigveda.1  The  Panca- 
vimsa  Brahmana 2  knows  a  Saman  of  Asvasukti. 

1  viii.  14  ;  15.  I  schrift    der    Deutschen    Morgenlandischen 

2  xix.  4,   10.     Cf.    Oldenberg,   Zeit-    \  Gesellschaft,  42,  230,  n.  4. 

Asvini.     See  Naksatra. 

Asadha  Kai3in  is  the  name  of  a  man  referred  to  in  a  corrupt 
and  obscure  passage  of  the  Kathaka  Samhita1  as  connected  with 
the  defeat  of  the  Pancalas  by  the  Kuntis. 

1  xxvi.  9  ;  Kapisthala,  xli.  7.     See  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  3,  471. 

Asadha  Uttara  Paraiarya  is  mentioned  as  a  teacher  in  a 
Vamsa  or  Genealogy  in  the  Jaiminlya  Upanisad  Brahmana 
(iii.  41,  1). 

Asadha.    See  Naksatra. 

Asadhi  Saus>omateya  was  a  man  who  is  stated  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana  (vi.  2,  1,  37)  to  have  died  because  the 
heads  for  the  sacrifice  in  connection  with  the  laying  of  the 
bricks  of  the  fire-altar  had  been  obtained  in  an  improper 
manner. 

Astaka  is  mentioned  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana l  as  one  of  the 
sons  of  Visvamitra. 

1  vii.  17.    Also  in  the  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  26. 

Astaka.     See  Masa. 

Asta-karni  is  an  expression  which  occurs  in  one  passage  of 
the  Rigveda,1  and  which  Roth  2  was  at  first  inclined  to  interpret 

1  x.  62,  7.  2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.  v% 


46  EAR-MARKED  COW— GOAD     [  A§tadam§tra  Vairupa 

as  a  proper  name.  There  can,  however,  be  no  doubt  that 
it  means  a  cow,  not  a  man,  as  suggested  by  Grassmann.  The 
exact  reason  why  a  cow  should  be  so  described  is  uncertain. 
Roth3  was  later  inclined  to  see  in  it  the  sense  '  having  pierced 
ears,'  similar  epithets  being  at  a  later  period  known  to  Panini  4 
(bhinna-karna,  chitrna  - karna) .  Grassmann's  more  obvious 
rendering, '  having  the  sign  for  (the  number)  8  marked  on  the  ear,' 
is  supported  by  the  similar  epithets, '  having  the  mark  of  a  lute  on 
the  ear  '  (karkari-karnyah), '  having  the  mark  of  a  sickle  on  the  ear' 
(ddtra-karnyah),  '  having  the  mark  of  a  stake  on  the  ear '  (sthund- 
kaniyah),  '  having  the  ears  bored '  (chidva-karnyah),  and  vistya- 
karnyah,  given  in  the  MaitrayanI  Samhita.5  The  simple  mean- 
ing, '  with  marked  ears,'  is,  however,  supported  by  the  same 
passage  of  the  MaitrayanI,  where  the  verb  aks  occurs  in  the 
sense  '  to  mark.'  In  the  Atharvaveda  the  mark  used  is  the 
Mithuna,  no  doubt  as  a  magical  device  to  secure  fertility. 

The  marking  of  ears  was  apparently  a  regular  practice.  It  is 
twice  referred  to  in  the  Atharvaveda.6  The  mark  is  termed 
laksman,7  and  was  made  with  a  copper-knife 8  (lohita).  The 
MaitrayanI  Samhita9  forbids  the  use  of  an  arrow-shaft  (tejana), 
or  of  iron,  but  permits  that  of  a  stem  of  sugar-cane  (iksu-kdnda) 
or  copper. 


3  Cf.  Bohtlingk,  Dictionary,  s.v. 

4  vi.  3,  115- 

5  iv.  2,  9. 

6  vi.  141,  1.  2  ;  xii.  4,  6. 

7  Av.  vi.  141, 2  ;  MaitrayanI  Samhita, 
loc.  cit. 

8  Av.,  loc.  cit. 


9  Loc.  cit. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  234, 
348 ;  Delbriick,  Gurupujakaumudi,  48, 
49;  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  13,  466; 
Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, 387. 


Asta-damstra  Vairupa.— To  him  the  Paficavimsa  Brahmana 
(viii.  9,  21)  ascribes  two  Samans. 

Astra  is  the   plougher's  *  goad,'  the  badge  of  agriculture. 
It  is  mentioned  several  times  in  the  Rigveda.1 


1  iv.  57,  4;  vi.  53,  9;  58,  2;  astra-vin 
occurs  in  x.  102,  8.  See  also  Kauslka 
Sutra,   80.     Cf.    Roscher,   Archiv  fur 


Religionswissenschaft,      1,     63;      Hille- 
brandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  3,  364,  n.  8. 


Asamati  Ratha-praustha. — The  story  of  the  quarrel  between 
Asamati,  the  Iksvaku  prince  of  the  Rathaprostha  family,  and 


Asita]         KING  A  SAM  ATI— KNIFE— RIVER  ASIKNI 


47 


his  priests,  the  Gaupayanas,  is  found  only  in  the  later 
Brahmanas.1  It  appears  to  be  based  on  a  misreading  of  the 
Rigveda,2  where  asamdti  is  merely  an  adjective.  The  later 
story  is  that  the  king  was  induced  to  abandon  his  family  priests 
by  two  Asuras,  Kirata  and  Akuli,  who  by  their  magic  com- 
passed the  death  of  Subandhu,  one  of  the  brother  priests,  and 
that  the  others  revived  him  by  the  use  of  the  hymns  (Rigveda, 
x.  57-60). 

2  x.  60, 2.  5  ;  Av.  vi.  79, 1 .  Cf.  Bloom- 
field,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  499; 
Max  Miiller,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society,  1866,  426-465;  Bohtlingk's 
Dictionary,  s.v.  ;  Hopkins,  Transactions 
of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and 
Sciences,  15,  48,  n.  1. 


1  Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  iii.  167 
(Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
18,  41  et  seq.);  Satyayanaka,  cited  in 
Sayana  on  Rv.  x.  57,  1  ;  60,  7  ;  Brhad- 
devata,  vii.  83  et  seq.,  with  Macdonell's 
notes ;  Paricavimsa  Brahmana,  xiii. 
12,5. 


Asi  usually  denotes  the  sacrificial  knife,1  but  occasionally 
appears  to  mean  a  knife  used  in  war.2  Mention  is  made  of 
a  sheath  (vavri)3  to  which  a  belt  (vala)*  was  attached.  The 
word  asi-dhdrd5  also  denotes  'sheath.' 


1  Rv.  i.  162,  20;  x.  79,  6;  86,  18; 
Av.  ix.  3,  9  ;  x.  1,  20,  etc. 

2Av.xi.9,i.  The  use  of  the  ' sword  ' 
increases  in  the  Epic  period.  See  Hop- 
kins, Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  13,  284. 


3  Kathaka  Samhita,  xv.  4. 

4  Ibid.  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  6,  5. 

5  Jaiminiya    Upanisad     Brahmana, 
iii.  139. 


Asikni  ('black')  is  the  name  in  the  Rigveda1  of  the  river 
known  later  as  Candra-bhaga,  and  to  the  Greeks  as  Akesines, 
now  the  Chenab  in  the  Punjab. 

1  viii.  20,  25  ;  x.  75,  5  ;  Nirukta,  ix.  26.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leken,  12. 

i.  Asita  is  a  name  of  the  '  black  snake,'  referred  to  in  the 
later  Samhitas.1 


1  Av.  iii.  27,  1  ;  v.  13,  5.  6 ;  vi.  56,  2, 
etc.  ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  10,  1  : 


Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  18 ;  perhaps 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  37. 


2.  Asita. — (a)  A  mythical  sage  of  this  name  figures  as  a 
magician  in  the  Atharvaveda  in  conjunction  with  Gaya1  or 
with  Jamadagrii.2    In  the  Satapatha  Brahmana3  he  appears  as 


1  Av.  i.  14,  4. 


Av.  vi.  137,  1. 


xm.  4,  3,  11. 


"-> 


48 


MA GIC— ARCHER— DA  Y       [  Asita  Varsjagans 


Asita  Dhanva,4  and  as  Daivala  or  Devala  in  the  Paiicavims; 
Brahmana5  and  Kathaka  Samhita.6 


4  Dhanvana     in     the     Sankhayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  2,  19. 

6  xiv.  11,  18.  19,     Cf.  xv.  5,  27. 


6  xxii.  11.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translatior 
of  the  Rigveda,  3,  132. 


(b)  Asita  Varsa-gana  is  a  pupil  of  Harita  Kasyapa  according 
to  the  Vamsa  or  Genealogy  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.1 

1  vi-  5 1  3  (Kanva  =  vi.  4,  33,  Madhyandina). 


Asita-mrga  is  the  designation  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana1 
of  a  family  of  the  Ka£yapas  who  were  excluded  from  a  sacrifice 
by  Janamejaya,  but  who  took  away  the  conduct  of  the  offering 
from  the  Bhutaviras,  whom  the  king  employed.  In  the 
Jaiminiya  Brahmana2  and  the  Sadvimsa  Brahmana3  the  Asita- 
mrgas  are  called  '  sons  of  the  Kasyapas,'  and  one  is  mentioned 
as  Kusurubindu4  Auddalaki. 


1  vii.  27.     Cf.  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books 
of  the  East,  43,  345. 

2  i.  75- 


-1.4. 

4  Variously     read     as     Asurbinda, 
Kusurbinda,  Kusurubinda. 


Asura-vidya,  '  the  science  of  the  Asuras,'  the  term  used  in 
the  Sankhayana  and  Asvalayana1  Srauta  Sutras  as  the  equiva- 
lent of  the  term  mdyd  employed  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,2 
clearly  means '  magic,'  as  it  is  rendered  by  Professor  Eggeling.3 


1  x.  7. 

2  xiii.    4,    3,    11.     Cf    Sankhayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  x.  61,  2.  21. 


3  Sacred    Books    of    the    East,     44, 
368. 


Astr,  'shooter,'  is  a  term  frequently  used  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  Atharvaveda2  for  the  archer  who  fought  from  the  chariot. 

1  i.  8,  4  ;  64,  10 ;  ii.  42,  2,  etc. 

2  vi.  93,  1.  2  ;  xi.  2,  7.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  296. 


Ahan,  'day.'  Like  other  peoples,  the  Indians  used  night 
as  a  general  expression  of  time  as  well  as  day,  but  by  no  means 
predominantly.1     Night   is   also   termed   the   dark   (krsna),  as 

1  Rv.  iv.  16,  19 ;  viii.  26,  3  ;  i.  70,  4.     Cf.  Av.  x.  7,  42. 


Ahan  ] 


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  DAY 


49 


opposed  to  the  light  (arjuna),  day.2     Aho-ratra3  is  a  regular 
term  for  '  day  and  night '  combined. 

The  day  itself  is  variously  divided.  In  the  Atharvaveda4 
a  division  into  '  the  rising  sun '  (udyan  siiryah),  '  the  coming 
together  of  the  cows'  (sam-gava),  'midday'  (madhyam-dina), 
'afternoon'  (aparahna),  and  'sunset'  (astam-yan)  is  found. 
In  the  Taittirlya  Brahmana5  the  same  series  appears  with 
'early'  (pratar)  and  'evening'  (sayahna)  substituted  for  the 
first  and  last  members,  while  a  shorter  list  gives  pratar, 
samgava,  say  am.  In  the  MaitrayanI  Samhita6  there  is  the 
series  '  dawn '  (usas),  samgava,  madhyamdina,  and  aparahna. 

The  morning  is  also,  according  to  Zimmer,  called  api-sarvara,7 
as  the  time  when  the  dark  is  just  past.  It  is  named  svasara,8 
as  the  time  when  the  cows  are  feeding,  before  the  first  milking 
at  the  samgava,  or  when  the  birds  are  awakening.9  It  is  also 
called  pra-pitva,10  according  to  Zimmer.11  But  Geldner12  points 
out  that  that  term  refers  to  the  late  midday,  which  also  is 
called  api-sarvara,  as  bordering  on  the  coming  night,  being  the 
time  when  day  is  hastening  to  its  close,  as  in  a  race.  From 
another  point  of  view,  evening  is  called  abhi-pitva,13  the  time 
when  all  come  to  rest.  Or  again,  morning  and  evening  are 
denoted  as  the  dawning  of  the  sun  (udita  suryasya),  or  its 
setting  (ni-mruc).  The  midday  is  regularly  madhyam  ahndm,14 
madhye,15  or  madhyamdina.  Samgava16  is  the  forenoon,  between 
the  early  morning  (pratar)  and  midday  (madhyamdina). 

The  divisions  of  time  less  than  the  day  are  seldom  precisely 
given.     In  the    Satapatha    Brahmana,17   however,  a   day   and 


2  Rv.  vi.  9,  i. 

3  Rv.  x.  190,  2  ;  Av.  xiii.  3,  8,  etc.  ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiii.  41,  etc. 

4  ix.  6,  45. 

5  i-  5,  3,  1 ;  4,  9,  2.  6  iv.  2,  11. 

7  Rv.  iii.  9,  7  ;  cf.  Oldenberg,  Rgveda- 
Noten,  1,  230. 

8  Rv.  ii.  34,  8  ;  ix.  94,  2. 

9  Rv-  ii-  19,  2  ;  34,  5. 

10  Rv.  vii.  41,  4;  viii.  1,  29.  Sieg, 
Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  127  et  seq., 
interprets  paritakmyayam  (Rv.  i.  116,  15) 
similarly. 

11  Altindisches  Leben,  362. 
VOL.  I. 


12  Vedische  Studien,  2,  155-179. 

13  Rv.  i.  126,  3 ;  iv.  34,  5. 

14  Rv.  vii.  41,  4. 

15  Rv.  viii.  27,  20. 

16  Cf.  Rv.  v.  76,  3  (samgave,  pratar 
ahno,  madhyamdine)  ;  Taittirlya  Brah- 
mana, ii.  1,  1,  3  ;  Jaiminiya  Upanisad 
Brahmana,  i.  12,  4 ;  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana, iii.  18,  14  ;  Geldner,  Vedische 
Studien,  3,  112,  113.  Zimmer,  op.  cit., 
362,  places  it  too  early — before  the 
cows  are  driven  out. 

17  xii.  3,  2,  5.  Cf.  Taittirlya  Brah- 
mana, iii.  10,  1,  1  et  seq. 


5o 


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  DAY        [  Ahalya  Maitreyl 


night  make  up  30  muhurtas ;  1  muhurta=i$  ksipra ;  1  ksipra  = 
15  etarhi ;  1  etarhi=i$  idani ;  1  iddni  =  i^  breathings;  1  breath- 
ing =1  spiration;  1  spiration  =  i  twinkling  (nimesa),  etc.  In 
the  Sankhayana  Aranyaka18  the  series  is  dhvamsayo,  nimesah, 
kdsthdh,  kaldh,  ksana,  muhurtd,  ahordtrdh.  A  thirtyfold  division 
of  day  as  well  as  of  night  is  seen  in  one  passage  of  the 
Rigveda19  by  Zimmer,  who  compares  the  Babylonian  sixty- 
fold  division  of  the  day  and  night.  But  the  expression  used — 
thirty  Yojanas — is  too  vague  and  obscure — Bergaigne20  refers 
it  to  the  firmament — to  build  any  theory  upon  with  safety. 

The  longer  divisions  of  time  are  regularly  '  half  month ' 
(ardha-mdsa) ,  '  month  '  (rnasa),  '  season  '  (rtu),  and  '  year  ' 
(samvatsara),  which  often21  occur  in  this  sequence  after 
ahordtrdni  (*  days  and  nights  '). 


18  vii.  20.  Cf.  Sankhayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  xiv.  78  et  seq.  ;  Weber,  Indische 
Streifen,  i,  92-95. 

19  Rv.  i.  123,  8. 

20  Religion  Vedique,  3,  283  et  seq. 
Cf.  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v.  kratu. 


21  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  1,  15 ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  12,  7  ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xxii.  28  ;  Sankhayana 
Aranyaka,  vii.  20  ;  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad,  iii.  8,  9,  etc.  Cf.  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  361-363. 


Ahalya  Maitreyl  is  practically  a  mythical  name,  the  exist- 
ence of  the  lady  whose  story  is  alluded  to  in  several  Brahmanas1 
being  derived  from  the  epithet  of  Indra,  '  lover  of  Ahalya  ' 
(ahalyayai  jar  a). 

1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii.  3,  4,  18  ;  Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  ii.  79 ;  Sadvimsa 
Brahmana,  i.  1. 


Ahi. — This  word  occurs  frequently  from  the  Rigveda1 
onwards  to  denote  *  snake.'  Reference  is  several  times2  made 
to  its  casting  its  slough.  Mention  is  also  made  of  the  serpent's 
peculiar  movement,3  which  earns  for  it  the  designation4  of 
1  the  toothed  rope '  {datvati  rajjuh).     The  poisonous  character 


1  vii.  104,  7,  etc.  The  word  sarpa, 
which  is  usual  in  the  Atharvaveda, 
occurs  only  once  (x.  16,  6)  in  the  Rv. 

2  Rv.  ix.  86,  44;  Av.  i.  27;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  xi.  2,  6,  13;  Brhadaranyaka 


Upanisad,  iv.  4,  10 ;  Jaiminiya  Brah- 
mana, i.  9  ;  ii.  139  ;  Kathaka  Upanisad, 
ii.  6;  17. 

3  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  v.  1,  4. 

4  Av.  iv.  3,  2. 


Akramana  ] 


SNAKE 


5i 


of  its  bite  is  spoken  of,5  as  well  as  the  torpidity  of  the  reptile 
in  winter,  when  it  creeps  into  the  earth.6  The  cast  skin  is 
used  as  an  amulet  against  highwaymen.7  Mention  is  made  of 
a  mythical  horse,  Paidva,  which  the  Asvins  gave  to  Pedu  as 
a  protection  against  snakes,8  and  which  is  invoked  as  a 
destroyer  of  serpents.9  The  ichneumon  (nakula)  is  regarded 
as  their  deadly  enemy,  and  as  immune  against  their  poison 
through  the  use  of  a  healing  plant,10  while  men  kill  them  with 
sticks11  or  strike  off  their  heads.12 

Many  species  of  snakes  are  mentioned :  see  Agliasva, 
Ajagrara,  Asita,  Kahkaparvan,  Karikrata,  Kalmasagrlva, 
Kasarnila,  Kumbhinasa,  Tirascaraji,  Taimata,  Darvi,  Da£o- 
nasi,  Puskarasada,  Prdaku,  Lohitahi,  Sarkota,  Svitra,  Sarpa. 


5  Rv.  vii.  104,  7;  Av.  x.  4,  4  et  seq. 
6,  56. 

(i  Av.  xii.  1,  46. 

7  Av.  i.  27. 

8  Rv.  i.  117-119. 


9  Av.  x.  4,  6.  10. 

10  Av.  vi.  139,  5;  viii.  7,  23. 

11  Av.  x.  4,  9. 

12  Av.  vi.  67,  2.     See  Zimmer,  Altin- 
disches  Leben,  94,  95. 


Ahma  Asvatthya  was  a  sage  {muni)  who  achieved  immor- 
tality by  knowledge  of  a  certain  rite  {sdvitram)} 


1  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  io,  9,  10. 
The  form  of  the  first  name  is  remark- 


able.    The  second  may  be  compared 
with  Asvattha. 


Akuli. — This  mythical  priest  plays,  together  with  Kirata, 
a  part  in  the  later  tale  of  Asamati  and  the  Gaupayanas. 

Aktaksya  is  mentioned  as  a  teacher  who  had  peculiar  views 
on  the  fire  ritual  (agni-citi),  which  are  rejected  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana.1 

1  vi.  i,  2,  24.     Cf.  Levi,  La  Doctrine  du  Sacrifice,  140. 


A-kramana. — In  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana1  (i.  3) 
this  word  is  used  with  the  specific  sense  of  *  steps  to  climb 
trees.' 

4—2 


52 


RAT— TALES 


[  Akhu 


Akhu. — The  exact  sense  of  this  word  is  uncertain.  Zimmer1 
renders  it  'mole,'  while  Roth2  prefers  'mouse'  or  'rat.'  It  is 
frequently  mentioned  in  the  later  Samhitas,3  and  is  known  to 
the  Rigveda,4  where,  however,  the  word  is  regarded  by  Pischel5 
as  having  acquired  the  secondary  sense  of  '  thief.'  This  is 
denied  by  Hillebrandt.6 


1  Altindisches  Leben,  84,  85,  followed 
by  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda,  142. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v., 
followed  by  Whitney, -Translation  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  317,  318. 

3  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  14,  1 ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  7 ;  Vaja- 


saneyi  Samhita,  iii.  57  ;  xxiv.  26 ;  28  ; 
Av.  vi.  50,  1. 

4  ix.  67,  30. 

5  Vedische  Studien,  2,  246 ;  Zeitschrift 
der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesell- 
schaft,  48,  701. 

6  Zeitschrift,  48,  418 ;  Vedainterpreta- 
tion,  7. 


A-khyana. — In  the  Aitareya  Brahmana1  we  hear  of  the 
Saunahsepa  Akhyana,  'the  story  of  Sunahgepa,'  which  is  told 
by  the  Hotr  priest  at  the  Rajasuya  ('  royal  inauguration  ').  The 
series  of  stories2  used  at  the  Asvamedha  ('horse  sacrifice') 
during  the  year  while  the  sacrificial  horse  is  allowed  to  wander 
at  its  will  is  called  the  'cyclic'  (pari-plavam).  The  Aitareya 
Brahmana3  mentions  also  Akhyana-vids  ('men  versed  in 
tales '),  who  tell  the  Sauparna  legend,  elsewhere4  known  as  a 
Vyakhyana.  Yaska,  in  the  Nirukta,5  frequently  uses  the  term, 
sometimes  in  a  pregnant  sense  as  denoting  the  doctrine  of  the 
Aitihasikas  or  traditional  interpreters  of  the  Rigveda.6 


1  vii.  18,  10.    Cf.  ^ankhayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  xv.  27. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  4,  3,  2. 

15- 

3  iii.  25,  1. 


4  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii.  6,  2,  7. 

5  v.  21 ;  vii.  7. 

6  xi.  19;  25. 

Cf.  Sieg,  Die  Sagenstojfe  des  Rgveda,, 
16  et  seq. 


A-khyayika. — This  word  occurs  apparently  but  once  in  the 
Vedic  literature,  in  the  late  Taittiriya  Aranyaka,1  where  its 
significance  is  doubtful. 

1  i.  6,  3.     Cf.  Sieg,  Die  Sagenstojfe  des  Rgveda,  20,  n.  1. 

Agastya  appears  as  a  teacher  in  the  Aitareya  (iii.  i,  i)  and 
Sarikhayana  (vii.  2)  Aranyakas. 


. 


Aji  ]  NAMES— CYMBAL— GOAD  53 

Agrii-veSi  Satri. — A  prince  of  this  name  appears  to  be 
referred  to  in  a  Danastuti  ('  Praise  of  Gifts ')  in  the  Rigveda.1 

1  v-  34.  9-     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  155. 

AgTli-vesya. — Several  teachers  of  this  name  are  mentioned 
in  the  Vamsas  or  Genealogies  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad. 
In  the  Madhyandina  recension1  Agnivesya  is  a  pupil  of 
Saitava.  In  the  Kanva  recension  he  is  a  pupil  of  Sandilya 
and  Anabhimlata  in  one  Vamsa,2  and  of  Garg'ya  in  the  second 
Vamsa.3 

1  ii.  5,  21 ;  iv.  5,  27.  2  ii.  6,  2.  3  iv.  6,  2. 

A-ghati  is  a  musical  instrument,  the  '  cymbal,'  used  to 
accompany  dancing.  It  is  known  to  the  Rigveda1  and 
Atharvaveda.2 

1  x.  146,  2.  2  iv.  37,  4  (agitata).     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  289. 

Ahgirasa  is  a  title  denoting  a  claim  to  be  of  the  family  of 
Angiras,  borne  by  many  sages  and  teachers,  like  Krsna, 
Ajigfarti,  Cyavana,  Ayasya,  Samvarta,  Sudhanvan,  etc. 

Aja-ke£in  is  the  name  of  a  family  in  which,  according  to 
the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana  (i.  9,  3),  Baka  used  violence 
against  Indra. 

Ajani. — This  word  is  used  to  denote  a  'goad'  in  the 
Atharvaveda  (iii.  25,  5). 

Ajata-satrava.     See  Bhadrasena. 

Aji  is  constantly  used  in  the  Rigveda1  and  the  later 
literature  to  express  the  sense  of  'a  race,'  and  only  seldom 
denotes  'a  battle.'  Horse-racing  was  one  of  the  favourite 
amusements   of    the  Vedic    Indian,2  the   other   being   dicing 

1  v- 37.  7;  vi.  24,  6,  etc.  I   Geldner,    Vedische  Studien,    1,    120;    2, 

2  Zimmer,    Altindisches    Leben,    291 ;    |   1  et  seq. 


54 


RACING 


[Aji 


(Aksa).  The  racecourse,  called  Kastha3  or  Aji4  itself,  appears 
from  the  Atharvaveda5  to  have  been  a  quasi-circular  one  to 
a  mark  (karsman6)  and  back  again.  In  the  Rigveda  the 
course  is  described  as  broad  (urvi),  and  the  distance  as 
measured  out  (apdvrktd  aratnayah).7  Prizes  (dhana)  were 
offered  (dhd),8  and  eagerly  competed  for.  Other  words  for 
victory  and  the  prize  are  kdra9  and  bhara;10  and  to  'run  a 
race '  is  described  by  the  expressions  djim  aj,  i,  dhdv,  sr.11 
The  person  who  instituted  a  race  is  referred  to  as  dji-srt,12,  and 
Indra  is  called  dji-krt13  ('race-maker'),  and  dji-patiu  ('lord 
of  the  race'). 

The  swift  steeds  (vdjin,  atya)  used  for  the  races  were  often 
washed  and  adorned.15  According  to  Pischel16  the  name  of 
one  swift  mare  is  preserved — viz.,  Vispala,17  whose  broken  leg 
was  replaced  by  the  Asvins  in  a  race ;  but  the  interpretation 
is  very  doubtful.  Geldner18  has  also  found  a  comic  picture  of 
a  horse-chariot  race  in  the  Mudgala  hymn  in  the  Rigveda, 
but  Bloomfield19  has  shown  that  that  interpretation  is  un- 
sound. Pischel20  also  seeks  to  show  that  races  were  run  in 
honour  cf  gods,  but  the  evidence  for  the  theory  is  inadequate.21 


3  Rv.  viii.  80,  8  ;  Av.  ii.  14,  6. 

4  Rv.  iv.  24,  8 ;  Av.  xiii.  2,  4. 

5  ii.  14,  6;  xiii.  2   4. 

6  Rv.  ix.  36,  1 ;  74,  8. 

7  The  sense  is  doubtful  in  Rv.  viii. 
8o,  8.  Zimmer  suggests  that  it  may 
mean  '  the  course  is  straight,'  without 
twistings,  for  which  idea  cf.  Geldner, 
Vedische  Studien,  2,  160,  quoting  the 
comparison  of  the  courser's  race  with 
a  bowstring  (Rv.  iii.  53,  24).  It  is  also 
rendered  '  the  barriers  are  removed.' 

8  Rv.  i.  81,  3;  116,  15;  vi.  45, 
1  et  seq. ;  viii.  80,  8  ;  ix.  53,  2  ;  109,  10. 
According  to  Geldner,  Vedische  Studien, 
1,  120,  n.  2,  dhana  is  from  dhan,  '  start.' 
Cf.  Pischel,  ibid.,  171.  Cf.  dhanasa,  Rv. 
i.  112,  7.  10;  ii.  10,  6;  viii.  3,  15,  etc. 

9  Rv.  v.  29,  8 ;  ix.  14,  1. 

10  Rv.  v.  29,  8 ;  ix.  16,  5,  etc. 

11  Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  25  ;  iv.  27  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  4,  3,  4 ;  v.  1, 
1,  3  ;  4,  1 ;  vi.  1,  2,  12 ;  vii.  1,  2,  1,  etc. 


12  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  1,  5,  10. 
28 ;  xi.  1,  2,  13. 

13  Rv.  viii.  53,  6. 

14  Ibid.,  14. 

15  Rv.  ii.  34,  3  ;  ix.  109,  10 ;  x.  68,  11. 

16  Vedische  Studien,  1,  171 -173.  Cf. 
Sieg,  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  127 
et  seq. 

17  Rv.  i.  116,  15.  Pischel  finds  here 
a  race  in  honour  of  Vivasvant,  but  his 
equation  of  Khela  and  Vivasvant  is 
denied  even  by  Sieg,  who  accepts  his 
theory  of  Vispala. 

18  Vedische  Studien,  2,  1  et  seq. 

19  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  48,  541  et  seq. 
Von  Schroeder,  Mysterium  und  Mimus  im 
Rigveda,  346  et  seq.,  follows  Geldner. 
Cf.  Winternitz,  Vienna  Oriental  Journal, 

23,  137- 

20  Vedische  Studien,  1,  172. 

21  Sieg,  op.  cit.,  128. 


Adambara  ] 


SALVE— DRUM 


55 


A  formal  race,  however,  is  a  feature  of  the  ritual  of  the  Rajasuya 
or  royal  consecration.22 

Satapatha   Brahmana, 


22  Taittiriya  Samhita,  i.  8,  15;  Tait- 
tiriya  Brahmana,  i.  7,  9 ;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  xv.  8 ;   Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 


x.    19  et  seq. 
v.  4.  2;  3. 

Cf.  Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  43. 


Ajigfarti. — See  Sunah£epa,  who  bears  this  patronymic  in  the 
Aitareya  Brahmana.1  He  is  called  an  Angirasa  in  the  Kathaka 
Samhita.2 

1  vii.  17.     Cf.  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  11,  2.  2  xix.  11. 

Ajya.     See  Ghrta. 


Aiijana. — A  salve  frequently  referred  to  in  the  Atharvaveda,1 
wrhich  came  from  Mount  Trikakubh2  in  the  Himalaya,  and  was 
used  to  anoint  the  eyes.3  The  region  of  the  Yamuna4  is  also 
given  as  a  possible  place  of  origin,  and  the  ointment  is  declared 
as  potent  to  remove  jaundice,  Yaksma,  Jayanya,  and  other 
diseases.5  A  female  ointment-maker  is  mentioned  in  the  list  of 
victims  of  the  Purusamedha  ('human  sacrifice').6 


1  iv.  9 ;  vi.  102,  3 ;  ix.  6,  11 ;  xix.  44. 

2  Av.  iv.  9,  9.  10 ;  xix.  44,  6. 

3  Cf.  Av.  iv.  9,  1  (aksyam) ;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  i.  3.  Hence  the  legend  in 
the  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  1,  1,  5; 
cf.  i.  2,  1,  2  ;  MaitrayanI  Samhita, 
iii.  6,  3  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii.  1, 
3,15;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  iv.  3. 

4  Av.  iv.  9,  10. 


5  Av.  xix.  44,  1  et  seq. 

6  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  14  {ah- 
jarii-kari) ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii. 
4,  10,  1. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  5,  69  ; 
Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda 
381  et  seq. ;  American  Journal  of  Philology, 
17,  405,  406 ;  Whitney,  Translation  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  159. 


Atiki  is  the  name  of  the  wife  of  Usasti  in  the  Chandogya 
Upanisad  (i.  10,  1). 

Atnara. — Patronymic  of  Para. 

Adambara  was  a  kind  of  '  drum.'  A  '  drummer '  {adambara- 
ghata)  is  mentioned  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the  Purusa-medha 
('  human  sacrifice  ')  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.1 


1  xxx.  19.     Cf.  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiv.  4,  8,  1. 


56 


A  XLE-PIN—DOOR-FRA  ME—S  WA  N 


[  Ani 


Ani. — This  word,  which  is  found  in  the  Rigveda,1  but  rarely 
later,2  appears  to  be  best  taken  with  Roth3  and  Zimmer4  as 
denoting  the  part  of  the  axle  of  the  chariot  which  is  inserted 
into  the  nave  of  the  wheel.  Sayana  renders  it  as  lynch-pin, 
and  this  sense  is  accepted  by  Leumann,5  being  apparently  also 
found  in  the  Nirukta.6  In  one  place  in  the  Rigveda7  the 
word  appears  by  synecdoche  to  denote  the  whole  chariot,  but 
the  passage  is,  according  to  Geldner,8  completely  obscure. 


1  i.  35,  6 ;  v.  43,  8. 

2  In  a  Mantra  in  the  Aitareya  Aran- 
yaka,  ii.  7.  See  Keith's  edition,  pp.  266, 
267,  and  Vani. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

4  Altindisches  Leben,  247. 


5  Etymologisches  Worterbuch,  30. 

6  vi.  32. 

7  i.    63,  fil  Cf.    Pischel,     Vedische 


Studien,  1,  96. 
8  Geldner,  ibid. 


141,  n.  3. 


Andika  ('  bearing  eggs ')  is  a  term  found  in  the  Atharvaveda1 
denoting  an  edible  plant,  apparently  with  fruit  or  leaves  of  egg 
shape  (cinda),  akin  to  the  lotus. 


1  iv.  34,  5 ;  v.  17,  16.  In  the  first 
passage  the  Paippalada  version  has 
paimdarlka    in    its    place  ;     Whitney, 


Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  207. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  70 ; 
Weber,  Indische  Studien,  18,  138. 


Ata. — The  framework  of  the  door  of  a  house  appears  to  be 
denoted  by  the  plural  of  this  word  in  the  Rigveda1  (though  in 
all  passages  there  it  is  used  only  by  synecdoche  of  the  doors  of 
the  sky),  and  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.2  Zimmer3  compares 
the  Latin  antae,  to  which  the  word  etymologically  corresponds.4 


1  i.  56,  5;  113,  14;  iii.  43,  6;  ix.  5,  5 
(ataih). 

2  xxix.     5    (ataih).      Cf.    atabhih    in 
Durga  on  Nirukta,  iv.  18. 


3  Altindisches  Leben,  154. 

4  Brugmann,    Grundriss,    1,    209 
214. 


Ati,  an  aquatic  bird.  The  Apsarases  in  the  legend  of 
Pururavas  and  Urvasi  appear  to  him  like  Atis,  probably  swans.1 
The  birds  appear  also  in  the  list  of  animals  in  the  Asvamedha 
('horse  sacrifice'),2  where  Mahidhara3   renders   them  as  the 


1  Rv.  x.  95,  9.    Cf.  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana,  xi.  5,  1,  4. 
a  Taittiriya    Samhita,   v.    5,    13,    1 ; 


Maltrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  18 ;  Vaja- 
saneyi Samhita,  xxiv.  34. 
3  On  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  loc.  cit. 


Atharvana  ] 


NAMES 


57 


later  Adi    (Turdus  ginginianus),    and   Sayana4   quotes   a  view, 
according  to  which  the  Ati  was  the  Casa,  or  blue  jay  (Coracias 

indica). 

4  On  Taittiriya  Samhita,  loc.  cit.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  89. 


Atithi-g-va.— Patronymic  of  Indrota. 


Atreya  is  the  patronymic  of  a  pupil  of  Manti  in  the 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.1  An  Atreya  appears  as  a  Purohita 
of  Anga  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana.2  An  Atreya  was  regularly 
the  priest  in  certain  rites,3  and  an  Atreyi  occurs  in  an  obscure 
passage  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.4 


1  ii.    6,    3 

iv.   6,    3   (in   both   ver- 

iv.  3,  4,  21  ;  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra 

sions). 

x.  2,  21  (sadasah  purastat). 

2  viii.  22. 

4  i.  4,  5,  13.     Cf.  Roth,  St.  Peters- 

3 Ibid.,  vii. 

7 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 

burg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

Atreyi-putra  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Gautamiputra  in  a 

Vamsa,  or  Genealogy,  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  (vi.  5,  2, 
in  both  versions). 


Atharvana,  a  patronymic  formed  from  the  name  of  the 
mythic  Atharvan,  is  found  normally  in  the  plural  neuter  as  a 
designation  of  the  hymns  of  the  Atharvans.  This  use  appears 
in  the  late  nineteenth  book  of  the  Atharvaveda,1  and  in  the 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana.2  In  the  singular  the  expression 
Atharvana  (Veda),  though  not  occurring  till  the  Chandogya 
Upanisad,3  is  earlier  than  the  term  '  Atharvaveda,'  which  is 
first  found  in  the  Sutras.4  In  the  Nidana  Sutra5  Atharvanikas, 
or  '  followers  of  the  Atharvaveda,'  appear. 

Specific  but  mainly  mythical  Atharvanas  are  Kabandha, 
Brhaddiva,  Bhisaj,  Dadhyahc,  and  Vicarin. 


1  xix.  23,  1.  *  xii.  9,  10. 

3  yii.  1,  2.  4  ;  2,  1 ;  7,  1. 

4  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  2, 
10,  etc. 


Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, xxv.  ;  Atharvaveda,  8  et  seq. 


58  MIRROR— A  PAY  A  RIVER  [  AdarSa 

A-darga,  'mirror,'  is  a  term  found  only  in  the  Upanisads1 
and  Aranyakas.2 

1  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  i,  9;   I       2  AitareyaAranyaka,  iii.  2,  4;  Sankh- 
iii.  g,  15  ;  Chandogya  Upanisad,  viii.  7,    j   ayana  Aranyaka,  viii.  7. 
4;  Kausitaki  Upanisad,  iv.  2 ;  11.  I 

Adara  was  a  kind  of  plant  which  was  prescribed  as  a 
substitute  for  Soma.1  It  is  identified  in  the  Satapatha  Brah- 
man a2  with  Putika. 

1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iv.  5,  10,  4.     I   hita,  xxiv.  3 ;  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra, 

2  xiv.  1,  2,  12.     Cf.  Kathaka  Sam-   I   xxv.  12,  19. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  276. 

Ananda-ja  Candhanayana  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Samba 
in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana.1 

1  Indischc  Studien,  4,  372. 

Anabhi-mlata  is  mentioned  in  a  Vamsa,  or  Genealogy,  in  the 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad1  as  a  pupil  of  Anabhimlata. 

1  ii.  6,  2  (not  in  the  Madhyandina  version). 

Anava.     See  Aim. 

Anuka. — Geldner1  thinks  that  in  its  solitary  occurrence  in 
the  Rigveda2  this  word  means  an  ornament.  Roth3  takes  it 
adverbially,  and  so  do  Ludwig  and  Oldenberg. 

1  Vedische  Studien,  3,  94.  2  v.  33,  9.  3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

Apaya  is  the  name  of  a  river  mentioned  once  only  in  the 
Rigveda,1  when  it  occurs  between  the  Drsadvati  and  the 
Sarasvati.  Ludwig2  was  inclined  to  identify  it  with  the 
Apaga  as  a  name  for  the  Ganges,  but  Zimmer3  correctly  places 
it  near  the  Sarasvati,  either  as  the  small  tributary  which  flows 
past  Thanesar  or  the  modern  Indramati  farther  west,  while 
Pischel4  assigns  it  to  Kuruksetra,  of  which  the  Apaya  is 
mentioned  as  a  famous  river  in  the  Mahabharata.5 


1  m.  23,  4. 

2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  200. 
But  cf.  ibid.,  4,  304. 


3  Altindisches  Leben,  18. 

4  Vedische  Studien,  2,  218. 

5  Mahabharata,  iii.  83,  68. 


Ambasthya  ]  MYROBALAN  FRUIT— CURDS 


59 


Abayu  is  apparently  the  name  of  a  plant  in  the  Atharvaveda  j1 
the  mustard  plant2  may  have  been  meant,  but  the  sense  is 
quite  uncertain.3 


1  vi.  16,  i. 

2  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, 465,  following  the  indication  of  the 
use  of  the  hymn  in  the  Kausika  Sutra. 


3  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 292 ;  Zimmer,  A  Itindisches  Leben, 
72. 


Abhi-pratarina.— Patronymic  of  Vrddhadyumna. 

A  bhuti  Tvastra  is  mentioned  in  two  Vamsas,  or  Genealogies, 
of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad1  as  a  pupil  of  Vigvarupa 
Tvastra,  both  teachers  being  no  doubt  equally  mythical. 

1  ii.  6,  3  ;  iv.  6,  3  (in  both  recensions). 

Amalaka  (neuter),  a  common  word  later,  is  found  in  the 
Chandogya  Upanisad  (vii.  3,  1),  denoting  the  Myrobalan  fruit. 
Cf.  Amala. 


Amiksa  designates  a  mess  of  clotted  curds.  It  is  not  known 
to  the  Rigveda,  but  occurs  in  all  the  later  Samhitas,1  Brah- 
manas,2  etc.,  and  is  associated  with  the  Vaisya  in  the  Taittiriya 
Aranyaka.3 


1  Av.  x.  9,  13 ;  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
ii.  5.  5.  4;  m-  3-  9.  2;  vi-  2,  5,  3; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  1,  9;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xix.  21  ;  23,  etc. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  8,  1,  7.  9; 
iii.  3,  3,  2,  etc.  ;  Taittiriya  Aranyaka, 


ii.  8,  8 ;  Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  ii.  438 
(Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
19,  99,  101) ;  Chandogya  Upanisad, 
viii.  8,  5,  etc. 

3  Loc.  cit.     Cf.  Manava  Srauta  Sutra, 
ii.  2,  40. 


Amba  denotes  in  the  Taittiriya1  and  Kathaka2  Samhitas  a 
grain,  called  Namba  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.3 


1  i.  8,  10,  1. 


xv.  5. 


v.  3.  3. 


Ambasthya  is  mentioned  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana  (viii.  21) 
as  a  king,  whose  priest  for  the  Rajasuya,  or  royal  inauguration, 
was  Narada.     Presumably  the  name  is  local,  meaning  '  King  of 


6o 


AYU— WEAPONS 


[  Ayatana 


the  Ambasthas,'  as  interpreted  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary. 
Later  the  term  Ambastha  denotes  '  a  man  of  mingled  Brahmana 
and  Vaisya  parentage  by  father  and  mother '  respectively. 

A-yatana. — The  general  sense  of  '  abode  '  or  '  home  '  appears 
to  be  limited  in  one  passage  of  the  Chandogya  Upanisad 
(vii.  24,  2)  to  the  sense  of  '  holy  place,'  '  sanctuary,'  which  is 
found  in  the  epic. 

Ayavasa  is  mentioned  apparently  as  a  king  in  a  corrupt  and 
unintelligible  verse  of  the  Rigveda.1 

1  i.  122,  15.  Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  206;  Roth, 
St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

Ayu  appears  in  the  Rigveda1  with  Kutsa  and  Atithigva  as 
having  been  defeated,  with  Indra's  aid,  by  Turvayana,  who  is 
believed  by  Pischel2  to  have  been  King  of  the  Pakthas.  Possibly 
he  is  elsewhere3  referred  to  as  victorious,  by  Indra's  aid,  over 
VeSa.     Elsewhere  he  is  quite  mythical.4 

3  Rv.    x.    49,    5 ;    but    the   word    is 
possibly  not  a  proper  name. 

4  Cf  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  100, 


1  i.  53,  10;  ii.  14,  7;  vi.  18,13 
viii.  53,  2;  Bergaigne,  Religion  VMique 
1,  60. 

2  Vedische  Studien,  1,  71-75. 


135.  140- 


Ayuta.     See  Ghrta. 


A-yudha,  '  weapon,'  in  its  widest  sense  covers  the  whole 
of  a  Ksatriya's  warlike  equipment,  which  in  the  Aitareya 
Brahmana1  is  summed  up  as  horse-chariot  (asva-ratha),  bow 
and  arrows  {isu-dhanva),  and  corselet  (kavaca).  As  the  bow  and 
arrow  (isu,  dhanvan)  were  essential  as  the  main  weapons  of 
the  Vedic  fighter,  they  are  probably  meant  when  Ayudha  is 
used  specifically  of  weapons,  as  often  from  the  Rigveda2 
onwards.  The  battle  hymn  in  the  Rigveda3  confirms  this 
view,  as  it  presents  to  us  the  warrior  armed  with  bow  and 
arrow  on  his  chariot,  and  clad  in  armour  (Varman),  with  a 
guard  (Hastagfhna)  on  the  left  arm  to  avoid  the  friction  of  the 
bow-string.  The  corselet  was  not  a  single  solid  piece  of  metal, 
but  consisted  of  many  pieces  fitted  together  (syida);4  it  may 

1  vii.  19,  2.  3  vi.  75. 

2  i.   39,  2;   6i,   13;  92,   1;   ii.   30,  9,  4  Rv.  i.  31,  15. 


etc. ;  Av.  vi.  133,  2,  etc. 


Aradhi  ] 


WEAPONS— BEE— A  WL 


61 


have  been  made  either  of  metal  plates  or,  as  is  more  likely,  of 
some  stiff  material  plated  with  metal.  In  addition  the  warrior 
wore  a  helmet  (Sipra).  There  is  no  trace  of  the  use  of  a 
shield,  nor  is  there  any  clear  record  of  the  employment  of 
greaves  or  other  guard  for  the  feet.5  Skill  in  the  use  of  weapons 
is  referred  to  in  the  Rigveda.6 

It  is  doubtful  whether  sling  stones  (Adri,  Asani)  were  in 
ordinary  use.  The  hook  (ankusa)7  also  is  merely  a  divine 
weapon,  and  the  axe  (svadhiti,8  vast,  parasu)  does  not  occur  in 
mortal  combats.  For  the  use  of  the  spear  see  Rsti,  Rambhini, 
Sakti,  Saru ;  of  the  sword,  Asi,  Krti.  Neither  weapon  can  be 
considered  ordinary  in  warfare,  nor  was  the  club  (Vajra)  used. 
For  the  modes  of  warfare  see  Samgrama. 


5  Grassmann  saw  greaves  in  vaturina 
pada  in  Rv.  i.  133,  2,  but  this  is  most 
improbable. 

6  i.  92,  1.  Cf.  Geldner,  Vedische 
Studien,  3,  183  ;  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the 
American  Oriental  Society,  13,  295. 

7  Rv.  viii.  17,  10 ;  x.  44,  9 ;  134,  6 ; 


Av.  vi.  83,  3.    Cf.  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts, 

5.87. 

8  Rv.  v.  32,  10 ;  ix.  67,  30 ;  x.  43,  9. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  298- 
301 ;  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  5,  469-472 ; 
Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  13,  281  et  seq. 


Ayograva.— Marutta  Avi-ksita,  the  Ayogava  king,  is  men- 
tioned as  a  sacrificer  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,1  where  also 
a  Gatha  ('  stanza ')  celebrating  his  sacrifice  is  cited.    Cf.  Ayogti. 

1  xiii.  5,  4,  6.     Cf.  Sankbayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  9,  14-16. 

Arangfara  is  one  of  the  names  of  the  bee  found  in  the 
Rigveda.1     Other  names  are  Sarah  and  Bhrng'a. 

1  x.  106,  10.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  97. 

Ara,  a  word  later1  known  as  an  '  awl'  or  'gimlet,'  occurs  in 
the  Rigveda2  only  to  designate  a  weapon  of  Pusan,  with  whose 
pastoral  character  its  later  use  for  piercing  leather  is  con- 
sistent.    Cf.  Vasi. 

1  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  My thologie,  3,  365,  n.  1.  2  vi.  53,  8. 


Aradhi. — Patronymic  of  Saujata.     Cf  Arada. 


62  ARJlKA  COUNTRY  [  Aruna  AupaveSi 

Aruna  Aupa-ve£i. — So  the  manuscripts  let  us  read  the  former 
word  in  the  MaitrayanI  Samhita,  but  this  is  doubtless  an  error 
for  Aruna. 


Aruni  is  the  patronymic  normally  referring  to  Uddalaka, 
son  of  Aruna  Aupavesi.  Uddalaka  is  probably  also  meant  by 
Aruni  Yasasvin,  who  occurs  as  a  teacher  of  the  Subrahmanya 
(a  kind  of  recitation)  in  the  Jaiminiya  Brahmana.1  Arunis  are 
referred  to  both  in  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana2  and  in 
the  Kathaka  Samhita,3  as  well  as  in  the  Aitareya  Aranyaka.4 


i  ii.  80. 

2  ii.  5,  1.     Cf.  Keith,  Aitareya  Aran- 
yaka, 204. 


3  xiii.  12. 

4  ii.  4.  1. 


Aruneya. — An  epithet  of  £vetaketu,  indicating  his  descent 
from  Uddalaka  Aruni  and  Aruna  AupaveSL  It  is  apparently 
confined  to  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  and  Chandogya  Upani- 
sad,2 in  which  Svetaketu  plays  a  great  part. 

1  x.  3,  4,  1;  xi.  2,  7,  12;  5,  4,  18;  6,  2,  1  ;  xii.  2,  1,  9;  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad,  vi.  2,  1.  2  v.  3,  1 ;  vi.  1,  1. 

_    A  5 

Arksa. — Patronymic  of  Srutarvan  and  of  ASvamedha. 

Arjika1  and  Arjikiya2  (masc),  Arjikiya3  (fern.). — The  two 
masculine  forms  probably  denote  the  people  or  land,  while  the 
feminine  word  designates  the  river  of  the  land.  Hillebrandt4 
locates  the  country  in  or  near  Kasmir,  as  Arrian5  mentions 
Arsaces,  brother  of  Abhisares,  who  presumably  took  his  name 
from  his  people,  and  Abhisara  bordered  on  Kasmir.  Pischel6 
accepts  Arjika  as  designating  a  country,  which  he,  however, 
thinks  cannot  be  identified.  But  neither  Roth7  nor  Zimmer8 
recognizes  the  word  as  a  proper  name.  On  the  other  hand, 
all  authorities  agree  in  regarding  Arjikiya  as  the  name  of  a 


1  Singular  :  Rv.  viii.  7,  29  ;  ix.  113,  2. 
Plural :  ix.  65,  23. 

2  Rv.  viii.  64,  11. 

3  Rv.  x.  75,  5. 

4  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  126-137. 


5  Anabasis,  v.  29,  4. 

6  Vedische  Studien,  2,  209,  217. 

7  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary. 

8  Altindisches  Leben,  12-14. 


Artava  ]  ARJIKIYA  RIVER  63 

river.  Roth9  does  so  in  one  passage10  only,  elsewhere  seeing 
references  to  Soma  vessels  ;  but  it  seems  necessary  to  treat  the 
word  alike  in  all  passages  containing  it.  Zimmer  does  not 
locate  the  river,  and  Pischel  denies  the  possibility  of  its 
identification.  Hillebrandt  thinks  it  may  have  been  the 
Upper  Indus,  or  the  Vitasta  (the  Jhelum),  or  some  other 
stream.  Grassmann  follows  Yaska11  in  identifying  it  with  the 
the  Vipas  (Beas),  but  this  is  rendered  improbable  by  the 
position  of  the  name  in  the  hymn  in  praise  of  rivers  (nadi- 
stuti).12  Brunnhofer13  identifies  it  with  the  Arghesan,  a  tributary 
of  the  Arghanab. 


9  Op.  cit.,  s.v.  susoma. 
"  Rv.  x.75,  5. 

11  Nirukta,  ix.  26. 

12  Rv.  x.  75. 


13  Iran  unci  Turan,  52. 
Cf.  Max  Miiller,  Sacred  Boohs  of  the 
East,  32,  398  ;  399. 


Arjuneya. — In  the  Rigveda1  this  name  occurs  as  the  patro- 
nymic of  Kautsa. 

1  i.  112,  23  ;  iv.  26,  1 ;  vii.  19,  2  ;  viii.  1,  11. 

Artabhagi-putra  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Saungi-putra 
in  a  Vamsa  or  Genealogy  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.1 
Artabhaga  is  a  patronymic  of  Jaratkarava  in  the  same 
Upanisad.2 

1  vi.  5,  2  (also  in  the  Madhyandina  version).  2  iii.  2,  1.  13. 


Artava. — This  expression  denotes  a  portion  of  the  year 
consisting  of  more  seasons  than  one.  But  it  does  not  bear  the 
exact  sense  of  '  half-year,'  as  suggested  by  Zimmer.1  This  is 
shown  by  the  fact  that  it  occurs  regularly  in  the  plural,  not  in 
the  dual.  In  the  Atharvaveda  it  occurs  between  seasons  and 
years  {hay ana),2,  but  also  in  the  combinations,  'seasons,  Artavas, 
months,   years';3    *  half-months,  months,  Artavas,    seasons';4 

1  Altindisches  Leben,  374.  1       3  ^   IO)  IO 

2  "i-  10,  9.  ^  xi.  7,  20.     Cf.  xv.  6,  6;  17,  6. 


64 


NOTCHED  END  OF  BOW— ARYAN 


[  Artni 


'  seasons,  Artavas,  months,  half-months,  days  and  nights,  day  ';6 
and  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita  '  months,  seasons,  Artavas,  the 
year,'6  or  simply  with  the  seasons.7 


5  xvi.  8,  18. 

6  xxii.  28. 

7  Av.  v.  28,  2.  13;  x.  6,   18;  7,  5; 
xi.  3,   17;  6,   17;  Taittiriya   Samhita, 


vii.  2,  6,  1.  3.  Kausitaki  Upanisad,  i.  3, 
cited  in  this  sense  in  the  St.  Petersburg 
Dictionary,  is  not  so  to  be  understood, 
as  the  word  there  is  merely  adjectival. 


Artni  denotes  the  end  of  the  bow  to  which  the  bow-string 
(jya)  was  attached.1  The  string  was  not  normally  kept 
fastened  to  both  ends  of  the  bow,  but  when  an  arrow  was  to 
be  shot  it  was  strung  taut.2  On  the  other  hand,  the  legend 
of  the  death  of  Visnu,  told  in  the  later  Samhitas3  and 
Brahmanas,4  expressly  contemplates  his  leaning  on  his  strung 
bow,  which  cleaves  his  head  by  the  sudden  springing  apart 
of  the  two  ends  when  the  bow-string  is  gnawed  through. 


1  Rv.  vi.  75,  4;  Av.  i.  1,  3;  Maitra- 
yani Samhita,  ii.  9,  2 ;  Kathaka  Sam- 
hita., xvii.  11 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xvi.  9,  etc. 

a  Rv.  x.  166,  3.     Cf.  Av.  vi.  42,  1. 

a  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iv.  5,  9. 


4  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  vii.  5,  6 ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiv.  1,  1,  7  et 
seq. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  297, 
298;  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  13,  270. 


Arya  is  the  normal  designation  in  the  Vedic  literature  from 
the  Rigveda1  onwards  of  an  Aryan,  a  member  of  the  three 
upper  classes,  Brahmana,  Ksatriya,  or  VaiSya,  as  the  formal 
division  is  given  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.2  The  Arya 
stands  in  opposition  to  the  Dasa,3  but  also  to  the  Sudra. 
Sometimes4  the  expression  is  restricted  to  the  Vaisya  caste, 


*  Rv.  i.  51,  8 ;  130,  8 ;  156,  5,  etc. 

2  iv.  1,  6  (Kanva  recension). 

3  Rv.  i.  51,  8.  9;  103,  3;  vi.  20,  10; 
25,  2.  3,  etc.  (opposed  to  Dasa) ;  Av. 
iv.  20,  4.  8  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iv.  6, 
6;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xiv.  30,  etc. 
(opposed  to  Sudra). 

4  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  205,  215, 
finds  this  use — understanding  Arya  as 
meant — in  Atharvaveda,  xix.  32,  8,  and 
62,  1,  as  well  as  in  passages  where 
Sudraryau     is     found.     Lanman,     in 


Whitney's  Translation  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 948,  1003,  quotes  his  view  with 
approval ;  but  Whitney's  version  leaves 
no  doubt  that  he  read  and  understood 
the  text  as  Arya,  the  Aryan,  not  the 
Vaisya.  For  Whitney's  view,  Av.  iv.  20, 
4.  8  may  be  cited;  and  so  Roth,  St. 
Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.,  takes  the 
passages.  In  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  3, 
10,  8,  Sudraryau  must  mean  Sudra  and 
VaiSya ;  but  the  Padapatha  takes  it  as 
Arya,  and  so  does  Zimmer. 


Arya  ] 


ARYAN 


65 


the  Brahmana  and  the  Ksatriya  receiving  special  designations ; 
but  this  use  is  not  common,  and  it  is  often  uncertain  also 
whether  Arya  is  not  meant.  The  phrase  Siidraryau6  is  espe- 
cially ambiguous,  but  appears  to  have  denoted  originally  the 
Sudra  and  the  Aryan,  for  in  the  Mahavrata  ceremony  the  fight 
between  a  Sudra  and  an  Arya  is  represented  in  the  Taittiriya 
Brahmana  as  one  between  a  Brahmana  and  a  Sudra,  though 
the  Sutra  treats  it  as  a  fight  between  a  Vaisya  and  a  Sudra. 

The  word  Arya  (fern.  Arya  or  Ari)  also  occurs  frequently 
used  as  an  adjective  to  describe  the  Aryan  classes  (visah),6  or 
name  (ndman),7  or  caste  (varna),8  or  dwellings  (dhdman) ;9  or 
again  reference  is  made  to  the  Aryan  supremacy  (vrata) 10  being 
extended  over  the  land.  Aryan  foes  (vrtra)11  are  referred  to 
beside  Dasa  foes,  and  there  are  many12  references  to  war 
of  Aryan  versus  Aryan,  as  well  as  to  war  of  Aryan  against 
Dasa.  From  this  it  can  be  fairly  deduced  that  even  by  the 
time  of  the  Rigveda  the  Aryan  communities  had  advanced 
far  beyond  the  stage  of  simple  conquest  of  the  aborigines.  In 
the  later  Samhitas  and  Brahmanas  the  wars  alluded  to  seem 
mainly  Aryan  wars,  no  doubt  in  consequence  of  the  fusion  of 
Arya  and  Dasa  into  one  community. 

Weber13  considers  that  the  five  peoples  known  to  the  Rigveda 
were  the  Aryans  and  the  four  peoples  of  the  quarters  (dis) 
of  the  earth,  but  this  is  doubtful.  Aryan  speech  (vac)14 
is  specially  referred  to  in  the  Aitareya  and  Sahkhayana 
Aranyakas. 


5  See  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  5,  9,  3, 
with  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xiii.  3, 
7.  8 ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxxiv.  5 ; 
PaiicavmiSa  Brahmana,  v.  5,  17 ;  Tait- 
tiriya Brahmana,  i.  2,  6,  7  ;  La.tya.yana 
Sutra,  iv.  2,  5 ;  Sahkhayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  xvii.  6,  2 ;  Anupada  Sutra,  vii.  10. 


6  Rv. 

i. 

77 

3; 

96,    31 ;   x. 

11. 

4; 

43,  4,  etc. 

»  Rv. 

X. 

49. 

3- 

8  Rv. 

iii 

•  34 

9- 

Cf.  Varna. 

9  Rv. 

ix 

63. 

14. 

10  Rv. 

X. 

65, 

11. 

So  Agni  and  Indra 

are  styled  Aryan,  as  supporters  of  the 
Aryan  people  (Rv.  vi.  60,  6). 

VOL.  I 


11  Rv.  vi.  33,  3;  vii.  83,  1;  x. 
69,  6. 

12  Rv.  i.  102,  5 ;  iii.  32,  14 ;  vi.  22, 
10;  25,  2.  3;  viii.  2,  4.  27;  x.  38,  3; 
83,  1  ;   102,  3,  etc. 

13  Indische  Studien,  17,  288.  Cf.  Roth, 
St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  krsti, 
and  Pafica  Janasah . 

14  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  iii.  2,  5 ; 
Sahkhayana  Aranyaka,  viii.  9.  Cf. 
Keith,  Aitareya  A~ranyaka,  196,  255; 
and  Vac. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  207  et  seq. ;  Zimmer,  Altin- 
disches  Leben,  214  et  seq. 


66 


NA  MES—G  UE  ST-HO  USE 


[  Arya 


Arya.  See  Malya. 

Arsti-sena. — Patronymic  of  Devapi.1 

1  Rv.  x.  98,  5.  6.  8 ;  Nirukta,  ii.  11 ;  Brhaddevata,  vii.  155. 

Ala  appears  to  mean  'weed'  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  and  to 
form  part  of  three  other  words,2  denoting,  according  to  Sayana, 
grass-creepers  (sasya-valli) — viz.,  Alasala,  Silanjala.,3  and  Nila- 
galasala.  Whitney,4  however,  does  not  think  that  the  words 
can  be  given  any  determinate  sense. 


1  Av.  vi.  16,  3.  But  Whitney  takes 
the  word  as  a  verb,  comparing  v. 
22,  6. 

2  Av.  vi.  16,  4. 

3  Sayana  reads  Salanjala,  and  the 


manuscripts    of    the    KauSika    Sutra 

(vi.  16) ,  have  Silanjala.    But  cf.  Silaci. 

4  Translation   of    the   Atharvaveda, 

292,    293.     Cf.   Bloomfield,   Hymns  of 

the  Atharvaveda,  466. 


Alambayani-putra  is  mentioned  in  a  Vamsa  or  Genealogy 
of  the  Kanva  recension  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad 
(vi.  5,  2)  as  a  pupil  of  Alambl-putra.  In  the  Madhyandina 
recension  (vi.  4,  32)  the  relation  is  reversed,  for  there  he  is 
teacher  of  Alambi-putra  and  pupil  of  Jayanti-putra. 

Alambl-putra  is  a  pupil  of  Jayanti-putra  according  to  a 
Vamsa  in  the  Kanva  recension  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad 
(vi.  5,  2),  but  of  Alambayani-putra  according  to  the  Madhy- 
andina (vi.  4,  32). 

Aligi  is  the  name  of  a  kind  of  serpent  in  the  Atharvaveda 
(v.  13,  7).     Cf.  Viligl. 

A-vasatha  ('dwelling'). — The  precise  sense1  of  this  term 
appears  to  be  a  place  for  the  reception  of  guests,  especially 
Brahmanas  and  others  on  the  occasion  of  feasts  and  sacrifices 
(somewhat  like  the  modern  meaning  of  Dharma-sala  as  a  rest- 
house  for  pilgrims),  a  use  derived  from  the  more  general  sense 
of '  abode.' 2 


1  Av.  ix.  6,  5  (a  hymn  in  praise  of 
entertaining  Brahmanas) ;  Taittiriya 
Brahmana,  i.  1,  10,  6;  iii.  7,  4,  6; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  xii.  4,  4,  6 
(where  Eggeling  renders  the  word  as  if 
meaning  '  house  '  merely) ;  Chandogya 
Upanisad,   iv.   1,   1,  etc.     Details  are 


given  in  the  Sutras — e.g.,  Apastamba 
Srauta  Sutra,  v.  9,  3 ;  Dharma  Sutra, 
ii.  9,  25,  4. 

2  E.g.,   Aitareya   Upanisad,    iii.    12. 
Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  2, 


ASu  ] 


WOOL— SOMA  ADMIXTURE 


67 


Avika  ('  coming  from  the  sheep,'  avi)  is  a  term  for  *  wool,' 
which  occurs  first  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  (ii.  3,  6). 
Cf.  Avi. 

Avi-ksita.— -Patronymic  of  Marutta,1  the  Ayograva. 

1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  21 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  5,  4,  6. 


A-6arIka  appears  to  denote  a  disease  in  a  hymn  of  the 
Atharvaveda1  celebrating  the  powers  of  the  Jarigida  plant. 
Zimmer2  thinks  that  it  merely  denotes  the  pain  in  the  limbs 
accompanying  fever.  Whitney3  suggests  taking  the  word  as 
merely  an  epithet. 


1  xix.  34,  10. 

-  Altindisches  Leben,  65,  391. 

8  Translation    of    the   Atharvaveda, 


953-     £/•    Bloomfield,    Hymns    of   the 
Atharvaveda,  673. 


A-6ir  ('  admixture  ')  denotes  the  mixing,  and  more  especially 
the  milk  mixed  with  the  juice,  of  the  Soma  before  it  was 
offered  to  the  gods.  In  this  sense  it  is  not  rare  from  the 
Rigveda1  onwards.  Not  milk  alone  was  employed  for  this 
purpose.  The  epithet  *  having  three  admixtures '  applied  to 
Soma2  is  explained  by  the  other  epithets,  'mixed  with  milk' 
(gavdsir),  '  mixed  with  curds '  (dadhy-dsir),  and  '  mixed  with 
grain  '  (yavasir) — all  referring  to  Soma. 


1  i.  134,  6;  iii.  53,  14;  viii.  2,  10. 
11,  etc. ;  Av.  ii.  29,  1,  etc. ;  Nirukta, 
vi.  8;  32. 


2  Rv.   v.    27,   5 ;    cf.  viii.   2,   7. 
Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  1, 
et  seq. 


Cf. 
209 


ASi-visa,  occurring  only  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana,1  is 
understood  by  Roth2  as  designating  a  particular  kind  of  snake, 
and  perhaps  means  '  having  poison  (visa)  in  its  fangs '  (dsi). 


2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.     It 


is  a  common  word   in  the   Epic  and 
later. 


Asu,  the  '  swift,'  is  frequently  used  without  A3va  to  denote 
the  chariot  steed  from  the  Rigveda1  onwards. 


1  ii.  16,  3 ;  31,  2  ;  38,  3,  etc.  ;  Av.  ii. 
14,  6;  iv.  27,  1;  xiii.  2,  2;  Taittiriya 


Samhita,    i.   8,    10 ;    Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, v.  3,  3,  3,  etc. 

5—2 


68 


STAGES  OF  LIFE 


[  A£umga 


A£um-g,a  in  the  Atharvaveda1  seems  to  denote  some  sort  of 
animal.  It  is  qualified  by  the  word  '  young'  (sisuka),  and 
Roth2  suggests  that  it  may  mean  a  bird  ('swift-flying'),  or 
that  the  expression  denotes  'a  foal  going  to  its  dam'  (asu-ga). 
Sayana,  however,  reads  the  accompanying  word  as  susuka, 
which  he  assumes  to  denote  an  animal.  Bloomfield3  renders 
the  two  words  '  a  swift  (dsumga)  foal  (sisuka),'  thus  agreeing 
with  one  of  Roth's  suggestions  in  sense,  though  not  in  the 
explanation  of  Asumga. 


1  vi.  14,  3. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Hymns    of    the    Atharvaveda,    464. 


Cf.  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 291. 


A-£rama  ('  resting-place ')  does  not  occur  in  any  Upanisad 
which  can  be  regarded  as  pre-Buddhistic.  Its  earliest  use  as 
denoting  the  stages  of  a  Hindu's  life  is  found  in  the  Svetasvatara 
Upanisad.1  In  one  passage2  of  the  Chandogya  Upanisad 
reference  is  made  only  to  the  Brahmacarin  and  householder,  to 
whom,  as  a  reward  for  study,  the  procreation  of  children,  the 
practice  of  Yoga,  abstention  from  injury  to  living  creatures, 
and  sacrifices,  freedom  from  transmigration  are  promised.  In 
another  place3  three  states  are  contemplated,  but  not  as  con- 
secutive. The  Brahmacarin  may  either  become  a  householder 
or  become  an  anchorite,  or  remain  in  his  teacher's  house  all  his 
life.  Similarly,  reference4  is  made  to  the  death  of  the  anchorite 
in  the  forest,  or  the  sacrifice  in  the  village.  In  contrast  with  all 
three5  is  the  man  who  stands  fast  in  Brahman  (Brahma- 
samstha).  In  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad6  the  knower  of  the 
Atman  is  contrasted  with  those  who  (1)  study,  or  (2)  sacrifice 
and  give  alms,  or  (3)  are  anchorites,  and  in  another  place7  with 
those  who  sacrifice  and  make  benefactions,  and  those  who 
practice  asceticism.  This  position  of  superiority  to,  and 
distinction  from,  the  Asramas  became  later  a  fourth8  Asrama, 


1  A  tyasramin,  Svetasvatara  Upanisad, 
vi.  21  ;  Maitrayani  Upanisad,  iv.  3,  etc. 

2  viii.  5. 

3  h-  23,  1. 

4  v.  10. 


0  11.  23,  1. 

6  iv.  2,  22. 

7  iii.  8,  10. 


Cf.  iii.  5. 


B  ja.ba.la  Upanisad, 
Upanisad,  ii.  1,  7. 


4.    Cf.  Mundaka 


I 


Asvasukti  ]  PATRONYMIC  NAMES  69 


the  Grhastha,  or  householder,  who  was  in  the  second  stage, 
being  required  to  pass  not  only  into  the  stage  of  Vanaprastha, 
but  also  that  of  the  Sannyasin  (Bhiksu,  Parivrajaka).  The 
first  stage,  that  of  the  Brahmacarin,  was  still  obligatory,  but 
was  no  longer  allowed  to  remain  a  permanent  one,  as  was 
originally  possible. 

Cf.  Deussen,  Philosophy  of  the  Upanishads,  60,  367  et  seq. 

A-gresa,  A-slesa.     See  Naksatra. 

Asva-g"hna. — This  name  occurs  in  one  passage  of  the  Rig- 
veda,1  in  a  very  obscure  hymn,  where  it  appears  to  denote  a 
prince  who  had  made  offerings  to  Indra,  and  who  may,  as 
Ludwig2  thinks,  have  been  called  Vitarana. 

1  x.  61,  21.  2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  165. 

Asvatara  ASvi,  or  ASvatarasvi. — These  two  expressions  are 
used1  as  patronymics  of  Budila,  denoting,  according  to  Sayana,2 
that  he  was  son  of  Asva,  and  descendant  of  Asvatara. 


1  The  first  is  found  in  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  vi.  30 ;  the  second  in  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,  iv.  6,  1,  9  ;  x.  6,  i,  1  ; 


Brhadaranyaka   Upanisad,    iv.   15,    8 

Chandogya  Upanisad,  v.  11,  1  ;  16,  1. 

2  On  Aitareya  Brahmana,  loc.  cit. 


ASva-tthya.— Patronymic  of  Ahina.1 

1  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  10,  9,  10.     Possibly  to  be  read  Asvathya. 

A£va-medha  is  the  patronymic  of  an  unnamed  prince,  who 
occurs  in  a  Danastuti  ('  Praise  of  Gifts  ')  in  the  Rigveda  (viii.  68, 
15.  16). 

Asva-vala. — From  this  adjective  ('  made  of  horse-tail  grass '), 
applied  to  a  strew  (prastara)  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (iii.  4, 
T>  17>  6,  3,  10),  follows  the  existence  of  the  Asvavala  grass 
[Saccharum  spontaneum). 

A6va-sukti  is  mentioned  in  Pancavimsa  Brahmana  (xix.  4,  2, 
et  seq.)  as  an  author  of  Samans  (Soma  chants)  along  with 
Gausukti. 


7o 


DAY'S  JOURNEY— KING  ASANGA 


[  ASvina 


Asvina,  or  A£vlna,  designates,  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  two 
Brahmanas,2  the  length  of  journey  made  in  a  day  by  a  horseman 
(asvin).  The  exact  distance  is  not  defined.  In  the  Atharva  it 
appears  to  exceed  five  leagues,  being  mentioned  immediately 
after  a  distance  of  three  or  five  Yojanas ;  in  the  Aitareya 
Brahmana  the  heavenly  world  is  placed  at  a  distance  of  a 
thousand  Asvinas. 


1  vi.  131,  3. 

2  Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.   17; 


I  cavimsa  Brahmana  in  Indische  Studien, 
Pan-   J    1,  34. 


Asadhi  Sausromateya.— According  to  the  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana,1 he  was  ruined  because  the  heads  were  put  on  at  the 
Agniciti  in  a  certain  manner,  and  not  correctly. 

1  vi.  2,  i,  37.  Eggeling  has  Asadhi,  but  as  it  is  a  patronymic  of  Asadha,  the 
form  Asadhi  seems  correct. 

Astra  seems  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita  (xxxvii.  1)  to  denot< 
the  ploughman's  goad. 

Astri. — In  the  Rigveda1  the  word  seems  to  denote  a  fire- 
place. The  evil  bird  is  entreated  not  to  settle  there  on  the 
hearth. 

1  x.  165,  3.     Cf.  Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  347. 


Asangfa  Playogi  is  a  king  who  appears  in  a  Danastuti 
('Praise  of  Gifts')  in  the  Rigveda1  as  a  generous  patron. 
Owing,  however,  to  the  addition  of  a  curious  phallic  verse  to 
the  hymn,  and  its  early  misunderstanding,2  a  legend  was 
invented  that  he  lost  his  manhood  and  became  a  woman,  but 
by  the  intercession  of  Medhyatithi  was  transformed  into  a  man, 
much  to  the  delight  of  his  wife,  SaSvati,  whose  existence  is 
based  on  a  misunderstanding  of  the  phrase  '  every  woman  ' 
(sasvati  naff)  in  the  added  verse.3     Another  misunderstanding 


1  viii.  i,  32.  33. 

2  viii.  1,  34.  See  Hopkins,  Religions 
of  India,  150,  n.  1 ;  Brhaddevata,  ii.  83  ; 
vi.  41,  with  Macdonell's  notes.  Dya- 
dviveda  gives  the  tale  at  length  in  Vedic 


words    taken    from    the    Nighantu,   a 
curious  jeu  d' esprit.      See  the  extract 
from   the  Nitimaiijari  given   by  Sieg, 
Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  40,  41. 
3  viii.  1,  34. 


Asandi  ] 


SEAT 


of  the  Danastuti4  gives  him  a  son  Svanad-ratha,  really  a  mere 
epithet,  and  makes  him  a  descendant  of  Yadu. 


4  viii.  i,  31.  32.  Cf.  Ludwig,  Trans- 
lation of  the  Rigveda,  3,  159  ;  Hopkins, 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 


17,  89;  Griffith,  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda, 
2,  106,  107  ;  Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten, 
1.  354- 


A-sandi. — This  is  a  generic  term  for  a  seat  of  some  sort, 
occurring  frequently  in  the  later  Samhitas1  and  Brahmanas,2 
but  not  in  the  Rigveda.  In  the  Atharvaveda3  the  settle  brought 
for  the  Vratya  is  described  at  length.  It  had  two  feet,  length- 
wise and  cross-pieces,  forward  and  cross-cords,  showing  that  it 
was  made  of  wood  and  also  cording.  It  was  also  covered  with 
a  cushion  (Astarana)  and  a  pillow  (Upabarhana),  had  a  seat 
(Asada)  and  a  support  (Upa£raya).  Similar  seats  are  described 
in  the  Kausltaki  Upanisad4  and  the  Jaiminiya  Brahmana.5 
The  seat  for  the  king  at  the  royal  consecration  is  described  in 
very  similar  terms  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana,6  where  the 
height  of  the  feet  is  placed  at  a  span,  and  the  lengthwise  and 
cross-pieces  are  each  to  be  a  cubit,  while  the  interwoven  part 
(vivayana)  is  to  be  of  Munja  grass,  and  the  seat  of  Udumbara 
wood.  In  another  passage  of  the  Atharvaveda7  Lanman 
seems  to  take  the  seat  meant  as  a  '  long  reclining  chair.'  There 
also  a  cushion  (Upadhana)  and  coverlet  (Upavasana)  are 
mentioned.  The  Satapatha  Brahmana  repeatedly  describes 
the  Asandi  in  terms  showing  that  it  was  an  elaborate  seat.  In 
one  place8  it  is  said  to  be  made  of  Khadira  wood,  perforated 
{vi-trnnd),  and  joined  with  straps  (vardhra-yutd)  like  that  of  the 
Bharatas.  At  the  Sautramani  rite9  (an  Indra  sacrifice)  the 
seat  is  of  Udumbara  wood,  is  knee-high,  and  of  unlimited 
width  and  depth,  and  is  covered  with  plaited  reed-work.     The 


1  Av.  xiv.  2,  65;    xv.    3,   2   et  seq.; 

1,    397;     Keith,     Sahkhayana     Aran 

Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  5,  8,  5  ;  Vaja- 

yaka,  19. 

saneyi  Samhita,  viii.  56 ;   xix.   16  ;  86, 

5  ii.  24. 

etc. 

6  viii.  5 ;  6;  12. 

2  Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  5  ;  6  ;  12  ; 

7  xiv.  2,  65.    See  his  note  in  Whit 

Satapatha    Brahmana,    iii.    3,    4,    26; 

ney's  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda 

v.  2,  1,  22 ;  4,  4,  1,  etc. 

765- 

3  xv.  3,  2  et  seq. 

8  v.  4,  4,  1. 

4  i.  5.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien, 

9  xii.  8,  3,  4  et  seq. 

72 


CITY  OF  ASANDlVANT— SEAT— NAMES    [  Asandivant 


imperial  seat10  is  to  be  shoulder-high,  of  Udumbara  wood,  and 
wound  all  over  with  cords  of  Balvaja  grass  (Eleusina  indica). 
Elsewhere11  the  seat  is  a  span  high,  a  cubit  in  width  and 
depth,  of  Udumbara  wood,  and  covered  with  reed-grass  cords, 
and  daubed  with  clay. 

10  xiv.  i,  3,  8  et  seq.  **  vi.  7,  1,  12  et  seq. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  155. 


Asandi-vant,  '  possessing  the  throne,'  is  the  title  of  the  royal 
city  of  Janamejaya  Pariksita,  in  which  the  horse,  for  his  famous 
Asvamedha,  was  bound.  The  authorities  both  cite  a  Gatha  for 
the  fact,  but  they  differ  as  to  the  priest  who  celebrated  the  rite. 
In  the  Satapatba  Brahmana1  he  is  stated  to  have  been  Indrota 
Daivapa  Saunaka,  but  in  the  Aitareya2  Tura  Kavaseya. 


xiii.  5,  4,  2.  I   Sutra,   xvi.  9,   1. 

viii.  21.     Cf.   Sankhayana   Srauta  |   knows  the  name. 


Panini,  viii.   2,    12, 


A-sada,  '  seat,'  occurs  in  the  Atharvaveda1  as  a  description 
of  part  of  the  settle  (Asandl)  of.  the  Vratya.  It  seems  best  to 
regard  it  with  Whitney2  as  the  seat  proper;  Aufrecht,3 
Zimmer,4  and  Roth5  render  it  as  the  *  cushion  for  the  seat,'  but 
that  is  sufficiently  described  by  the  word  Astarana. 


1  xv.  3,  «. 

2  Translation   of    the   Atharvaveda, 
771. 


3  Indische  Studien,  i,  131. 

4  Altindisches  Leben,  155. 

5  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Asurayana  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Traivani  in  the  first 
two  Vamsas1  (lists  of  teachers)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad 
in  both  recensions,  but  as  a  pupil  of  Asuri  in  the  third  Vamsa.2 

1  ii.  6,  3 ;  iv.  6,  3. 

2  vi.  5,  2.      Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  434,  n. 


Asuri  occurs  in  the  first  two  Vamsas1  (lists  of  teachers)  of 
the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  as  a  pupil  of  Bharadvaja  and 
teacher  of  Aupaj andhani,  but  in  the  third2  as  a  pupil  of 
Yajhavalkya  and  teacher  of  Asurayana.      He  appears  as  a 


1  ii.  6,  3 ;  iv.  6,  3. 


2  vi.  5,  2, 


A-sthatr  ]         NAMES— COVERLET— CAR-FIGHTER 


73 


ritual  authority  in  the  first  four  books  of  the  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana,3 and  as  an  authority  on  dogmatic,  specially  noted  for  his 
insistence  on  truth,  in  the  last  book.4 


3  i.  6,  3,  26;  ii.  1,  4,  27;  3,  1,  9; 
4,  i,  2;  6,  I,  25.  33;  3,  17;  iv.  5,  8, 
14. 

4  xiv.  1,  1,  33,  and  notes  1,  2. 

Cf.   Weber,  Indische  Studien,   1,  430 


et  seq.,  whose  suggestion  of  the  identity 
of  this  teacher  and  the  founder  of  the 
Samkhya  system  is  not,  however,  ac- 
ceptable. See  Garbe,  Samkhya  Philo- 
sophic 29,  30. 


Asuri-vasin  is  a  name  of  Praim-putra  in  a  Vamsa  (list  of 
teachers)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  (vi.  5,  2,  in  both 
recensions). 

A-secana  designates  a  vessel  to  hold  liquids,  such  as  meat 
juice  (yusan)1  or  ghee.2  Of  its  shape  and  make  we  know 
nothing. 

1  Rv.  i.  162,  13. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  1,9,  5.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  271. 


A-starana  denotes  the  coverlet  of  the  settle  (Asandl)  of  the 
Vratya.1  A  tiger's  skin  serves  as  the  coverlet  of  the  king's 
seat  in  the  royal  consecration  (Rajasuya).2  In  the  Kausltaki 
Upanisad3  the  word  used  is  Upastarana. 


1  Av.  xv.  3,  7. 

2  Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  5. 


i.  5.    Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben, 


155- 


Astra-budhna  is  the  name  of  a  man  whom  Indra  is  said  in  the 
Rigveda1  to  have  assisted.  It  is  not  clear  whether  Venya,  who 
is  mentioned  in  the  same  line,  was  his  friend2  or  his  enemy,3 
whom  Indra  saved  or  defeated  for  him. 


1  x.  171,  3. 

2  So  Grassmann  and  Griffith  in  their 
translations. 


a  So    Ludwig,    Translation    of    the 
Rigveda,  3,  167. 


A-sthatP. — The  warrior  in  the  chariot  is  once  thus  desig- 
nated (as  '  standing  on  the  car  ')  in  the  Rigveda.1  Normally  he 
is  named  Rathin  or  Rathestha. 


1  vi.  47,  26.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  296. 


74 


FLUX— OBSCENE  VERSES— SUGAR-CANE      [  Asrava 


A-srava  ('  discharge ')  denotes  a  disease,  thrice  referred  to  in 
the  Atharvaveda,1  the  precise  nature  of  which  is  uncertain. 
The  Scholiast2  in  one  place  interprets  it  as  painful  urination 
(mutrdtisara),  while  Lanman3  suggests  diabetes.  Bloomfield4 
takes  it  to  be  diarrhoea,  and  Zimmer5  argues  that  as  the  remedy 
is  called  *  wound  healer '  (arus-srdna),  the  sense  is  '  the  flux  from 
unhealed  wounds.'  Whitney0  renders  it  'flux,'  and  questions 
Bloomfield's  rendering.  Ludwig7  translates  it  vaguely  by  '  sick- 
ness '  and  '  cold.' 


1  i.  2,  4  ;  ii.  3,  2  ;  vi.  44,  2. 

2  On  Av.  i.  2,  4.     Cf.  on  ii.  3,  2. 

3  In  Whitney's  Translation   of   the 
Atharvaveda,  3. 

4  American  Journal  of  Philology,  7,  467  ; 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 


13,    cxiii;    Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
233.  234. 

5  Altindisches  Leben,  392. 

6  Op.  cit.,  3,  41. 

7  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  507, 
509- 


Ahanasya  ('  unchaste '). — This  word  in  the  plural  ('  lascivious 
verses')  denotes  a  section  (xx.  136)  of  the  Kuntapa  hymns  oi 
the  Atharvaveda,  which  are  of  an  obscene  character.1 

1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vi.  36;  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xxx.  7.  Cf.  Bloomfield, 
Atharvaveda,  99. 

A-hava  denotes  a  pail  or  bucket,  especially  in  conjunction 
with  a  well  (Avata).1 

1  Rv.  i.  34,  8 ;  vi.  7,  2 ;  x.  101,  5 ;  112,  6 ;  Nirukta,  v.  26. 

Ahneya. — Patronymic  of  Sauca  (Taittirlya  Aranyaka,  ii.  12). 


I. 

Iksu,  the  generic  name  for  the  sugar-cane,  is  first  found  in 
the  Atharvaveda1  and  the  later  Samhitas.2  Whether  it  grew 
wild,  or  was  cultivated,  does  not  appear  from  the  references. 


1  i.  34.  5- 

2  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  7,  9  ;  iv.  2, 
g(iksu-kanda).  In  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xxv.  1  ;  Taittirlya  Samhita,  vii.  3,  16,  1  ; 


Kathaka  Asvamedha,  iii.  8,  '  eyelash  ' 
is  meant.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches 
Leben,  72;  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dic- 
tionary, s.v. 


Ita  ] 


KING  IKSVAKU 


Iksvaku. — In  the  Rigveda  this  name  occurs  but  once,1  and  in 
a  doubtful  context.  It  is  clear,  however,  that  it  denotes  a 
prince  ;  later  interpretations  make  Asamati,  whose  name  is  read 
into  the  hymn,  an  Iksvaku  prince.2  In  the  Atharvaveda3  also 
the  name  is  found  in  only  one  passage,  where  it  is  uncertain 
whether  a  descendant  of  Iksvaku,  or  Iksvaku  himself,  is  referred 
to ;  in  either  case  he  seems  to  be  regarded  as  an  ancient  hero. 
In  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana4  mention  is  made  of  Tryaruna 
Traidhatva  Aiksvaka,  who  is  identical  with  the  Tryaruna 
Traivrsna  of  the  Brhaddevata,5  and  with  Tryaruna  Trasa- 
dasyu  in  the  Rigveda.6  The  connection  of  Trasadasyu  with 
the  Iksvakus  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  Purukutsa  was  an 
Aiksvaka,  according  to  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.7  Thus  the 
Iksvaku  line  was  originally  a  line  of  princes  of  the  Piirus. 
Zimmer8  places  them  on  the  upper  Indus,  but  they  may  well 
have  been  somewhat  further  east.9  Later  Iksvaku  is  connected 
with  Ayodhya. 


1  x.  60,  4. 

2  Cf.  Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  iii.  167 ; 
Satyayanaka  in  Max  Miiller,  Rigveda, 
4,  c-cvii,  167;  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  18,  42 ;  Brhaddevata, 
vii.  85  et  seq.,  with  Macdonell's  notes. 

3  xiv.  39,  9.  Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  680;  Whitney, 
Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  961. 

4  xiii.  3,  12. 


5  v.  14  et  seq. 

6  v.  27,  3.  Cf.  Sieg,  Die  Sagenstoffe 
des  Rgveda,  68-75 ;  Macdonell,  Brhad- 
devata, 2,  170 ;  Oldenberg,  Vedic  Hymns, 
366  et  seq. ;  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the 
Rigveda,  3,  133,  138 ;  4,  324. 

7  xiii-  5.  4.  5- 

8  Altindisches  Leben,  104,  130. 

9  Cf.    Pischel,     Vedische    Studien,    2, 
1    218;  Geldner,  ibid.,  3,  152. 


i.  Ita. — This  word  occurs  twice  in  the  Atharvaveda.  In 
the  first  passage1  it  seems  to  denote  a  bulrush  of  the  sort  that 
dies  in  a  year;  in  the  second2  it  refers  to  the  reed  work  of  the 
house. 


1  vi.  14,  3.    Cf.  iv.  19,  1  ;  Bloomfield, 
Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  464. 

2  ix.  3,   18.     Cf.   Pischel,  Zeitschrift 


der   Deutschen    Morgenldndischen    Gesell- 
schaft,  35,  718. 


2.  Ita  appears  as  a  Esi  and  a  protege  of  Indra  in  one  hymn 
of  the  Rigveda.1  Roth,2  however,  thinks  that  the  word  is 
really  part  of  a  verb  (it)  meaning  '  to  err,  wander '  (cp.  at),  and 

1  x.  171,  1.  2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


76 


LEGEND 


[  Itant  Kavya 


that  the  name  is  a  mere  misunderstanding.  It  is  already 
so  regarded  in  the  Anukramani,  but  not  apparently  in  the 
Brhaddevata.3 

3  viii.  73.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  133. 


Itant  Kavya  is  the  name  of  a  sage,  contemporary  with 
Ke3in  Darbhya,  in  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana.1  He  is  also 
mentioned  as  Idhant  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.2 


1  vii.  4.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  i,  293  ;  2,  308. 


2  xiv.  9,  16. 


Itihasa,  as  a  kind  of  literature,  is  repeatedly  mentioned 
along  with  Purana  in  the  later  texts  of  the  Vedic  period. 
The  earliest  reference  to  both  occurs  in  the  late  fifteenth  book 
of  the  Atharvaveda.1  Itihasa  then  appears  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana,2  the  Jaimimya,3  Brhadaranyaka,4  and  Chandogya 
Upanisads.5  In  the  latter  it  is  expressly  declared  with  Purana 
to  make  up  the  fifth  Veda,  while  the  Sarikhayana  Srauta  Sutra6 
makes  the  Itihasa  a  Veda  and  the  Purana  a  Veda.  The 
Itihasa-veda  and  the  Purana-veda  appear  also  in  the  Gopatha 
Brahmana,7  while  the  Satapatha8  identifies  the  Itihasa  as  well 
as  the  Purana  with  the  Veda.  In  one  passage  Anvakhyana 
and  Itihasa  are  distinguished9  as  different  classes  of  works,  but 
the  exact  point  of  distinction  is  obscure ;  probably  the  former 
was  supplementary.  The  Taittiriya  Aranyaka10  mentions 
Itihasas  and  Puranas  in  the  plural. 

There  is  nothing  to  show  in  the  older  literature  what  dis- 
tinction there  was,  if  any,  between  Itihasa  and  Purana ;  and 
the  late  literature,11  which  has  been  elaborately  examined  by 
Sieg,12  yields  no  consistent  result.  Geldner13  has  conjectured 
that  there  existed  a  single  work,  the  Itihasa-purana,  a  collection 


1  xv.  6,  4  et  seq. 

2  xiii.    4,    3,    12.    13,    and   as    com- 
pounded in  xi.  5,  6,  8 ;  7,  9. 

3  i-  53- 

4  ii.  4,  10 ;  iv.  1,2;  v.  11. 

5  iii.  4,  1.  2 ;  vii.  1,  2.  4 ;  2,  1 ;  7,  1. 
*  xvi.  2,  21.  27. 

7  i.  10. 

8  xiii.  4,  3,  12.  13. 

9  xi.  1,  6,  9.     Cf.  p.  24. 


w  11.  9. 

11  See  Sayana's  Introduction  to  the 
Rigveda,  p.  12  (ed.  Max  Muller),  and 
his  commentary  on  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, xi.  5,  6,  8  ;  Samkara  on  Brhad- 
aranyaka Upanisad,  ii.  4,  10. 

12  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  31  et 
seq. 

13  Vedische  Studien,  1,  290.  Cf.  Sieg, 
op.  cit.,  33. 


Itihasa  ] 


LEGEND 


77 


of  the  old  legends  of  all  sorts,  heroic,  cosmogonic,  genealogical ; 
but  though  a  work  called  Itihasa,  and  another  called  Purana, 
were  probably  known  to  Patanjali,14  the  inaccuracy  of  Geldner's 
view  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  Yaska  shows  no  sign  of  having 
known  any  such  work.  To  him  the  Itihasa  may  be  a  part  of 
the  Mantra  literature  itself,15  Aitihasikas  being  merely  people 
who  interpret  the  Rigveda  by  seeing  in  it  legends  where  others 
see  myths.16  The  fact,  however,  that  the  use  of  the  compound 
form  is  rare,  and  that  Yaska  regularly  has  Itihasa,17  not 
Itihasa-purana,  is  against  the  theory  of  there  ever  having  been 
one  work. 

The  relation  of  Itihasa  to  Akhyana  is  also  uncertain.  Sieg18 
considers  that  the  words  Itihasa  and  Purana  referred  to  the 
great  body  of  mythology,  legendary  history,  and  cosmogonic 
legend  available  to  the  Vedic  poets,  and  roughly  classed  as  a 
fifth  Veda,  though  not  definitely  and  finally  fixed.  Thus, 
Anvakhyanas,  Anuvyakhyanas,  and  Vyakhyanas  could  arise, 
and  separate  Akhyanas  could  still  exist  outside  the  cycle, 
while  an  Akhyana  could  also  be  a  part  of  the  Itihasa-purana. 
He  also  suggests  that  the  word  Akhyana  has  special  reference 
to  the  form  of  the  narrative.  Oldenberg,19  following  Windisch,20 
and  followed  by  Geldner,21  Sieg,  and  others,  has  found  in  the 
Akhyana  form  a  mixture  of  prose  and  verse,  alternating  as 
the  narrative  was  concerned  with  the  mere  accessory  parts  of 
the  tale,  or  with  the  chief  points,  at  which  the  poetic  form 
was  naturally  produced  to  correspond  with  the  stress  of  the 
emotion.  This  theory  has  been  severely  criticized  by  Hertel22 
and  von  Schroeder.23  These  scholars,  in  accordance  with 
older   suggestions   of   Max    Miiller24   and   Levi,25   see   in   the 


14  Varttika  on  Panini,  iv.  2,  60 ,  and 
Mahabhasya  (ed.  Kielhorn),  2,  284. 
18  Nirukta,  iv.  6. 

16  Ibid.,  ii.  16;  xii.  1. 

17  Ibid.,  ii.  10;  24;  iv.  6;  x.  26; 
xii.  10. 

18  Op.  cit.,  31  et  seq. 

VJ  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  37,  54  et  seq.  ; 
39,  52  et  seq.  Cf.  also  Gottingische  Gelehrte 
Anzcigen,  1908,  67  et  seq. 


20  V  erhandlungen  der  dreiunddreissigsten 
Versammlung  deutscher  Philologen  und 
Schulmdnner  in  Gera  (1879),  15  et  seq. 

21  Vedische  Studien,  1,  284  ;  2,  1  et  seq. 

22  Vienna  Oriental  Journal,  18,  59  et 
seq. ;  23,  273  et  seq.  Cf.  Winternitz, 
ibid.,  23,  102  et  seq. 

23  Mysterium  und  Mimus  im  Rigveda, 
3  et  seq. 

24  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32,  183. 

25  Le  Theatre  indien,  303,  307. 


78  NAMES  [  Id-,  Ida-,  Idi 

so-called  Akhyana  hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  in  which  Oldenberg 
finds  actual  specimens  of  the  supposed  literary  genus,  though 
the  prose  has  been  lost,  actual  remains  of  ritual  dramas. 
Elsewhere26  it  has  been  suggested  that  the  hymns  in  question 
are  merely  literary  dialogues. 

26  Keith,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1909,  200  et  seq. 


Id-,  Ida-,  Idu-  Vatsara.    See  Samvatsara. 


Indra-g"opa  ('protected  by  Indra'),  masc,  is  a  designation 
of  the  cochineal  insect  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad 
(ii.  3,  6). 

Indra-dyumna  Bhallaveya  Vaiyaghra-padya  is  mentioned 
as  a  teacher  who  with  others  was  unable  to  agree  as  to  the 
nature  of  Agni  Vaisvanara,  and  who  was  instructed  by 
ASvapati  Kaikeya.1  As  Bhallaveya  he  is  cited  several  times 
in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana2  on  ritual  points. 


1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  x.  6,  1, 
1  et  seq.  ;  Chandogya  Upanisad,  v.  11, 
1  et  seq. 


7  Z 

2  i.  6,  1,  19;  xiii.  5,  3,  4.     Cf.  ii. 
4.6. 


■ 


Indra-bhu  Kagyapa  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Mitrabhu 
Kagyapa  in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana.1 

1  Indische  Studien,  4,  374. 

i.  Indrota  is  twice  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1  in  a  Danastuti 
('  Praise  of  Liberality  ')  as  a  giver  of  gifts.  In  the  second  passage 
he  has  the  epithet  Atithigva,  which  shows  conclusively  that  he 
was  a  son  of  Atithigva,  as  Ludwig2  holds,  and  not  of  Rksa,  as 
Roth3  states. 

1  viii.  68,  10  et  seq.  2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  163. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

2.  Indrota  Daivapa  Saunaka  is  mentioned  in  the  Sata- 
patha   Brahmana1  as   the   priest  who  officiated  at  the  horse 

1  xiii.  5,  3,  5 ;  4,1;  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  7,  7 ;  8,  27. 


Ibha  ] 


RETAINERS 


79 


sacrifice  of  Janamejaya,  although  this  honour  is  attributed  in 
the  Aitareya  Brahmana2  to  Tura  Kavaseya.  He  also  appears 
in  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana3  as  a  pupil  of  Sruta, 
and  is  mentioned  in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana.4  He  cannot  be 
connected  in  any  way  with  Devapi,  who  occurs  in  the 
Rigveda.5 


2  viii.  21. 

3  iii.  40,  1. 

4  Indische  Studien,  4,  384,  385. 


5  x.  98.  Cf.  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift 
der  Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  Gesell- 
scha/t,  42,  240. 


i.  Ibha  is  a  word  of  somewhat  doubtful  sense  and  inter- 
pretation. It  is  found  only  in  the  Samhitas,1  and  especially  in 
the  Rigveda.2  According  to  Roth3  and  Ludwig4  the  sense  is 
'retainer,'  and  Zimmer5  thinks  that  it  includes  not  only 
dependants  and  servants,  but  also  the  royal  family  and  the 
youthful  cadets  of  the  chief  families.  In  the  opinion  of  Pischel 
and  Geldner6  it  denotes  '  elephant.'  This  view  is  supported 
by  the  authority  of  the  commentators  Sayana7  and  Mahidhara;8 
the  Nirukta,9  too,  gives  '  elephant '  as  one  of  the  senses  of  the 
word.  Megasthenes10  and  Nearchos11  tell  us  that  elephants 
were  a  royal  prerogative,  and  the  derivative  word  Ibhya  may 
thus  be  naturally  explained  as  denoting  merely  '  rich '  (lit., 
1  possessor  of  elephants  ').12 


1  Taittiriya    Samhita,    i.    2,    14,    1 ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xiii.  9. 

2  i.  84,   17;  iv.  4,   1;  ix.  57,  3,  and 
perhaps  vi.  20,  8. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

4  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  246, 
247. 

5  Altindisches  Leben,  167. 

6  Vedische  Studien,  1,  xv,  xvi. 

7  On  Taittiriya  Samhita,  loc.  cit. 

8  On  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  loc.  cit. 


9  vi.  12.  It  gives  also  the  sense 
'  retainer,'  and  in  Asoka's  Edicts,  No.  5, 
Biihler,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen Gesellschaft,  37,  279,  finds  a 
VaiSya  denoted  by  its  Pali  form. 

10  A  pud  Strabo,  704. 

11  Ibid.,  705. 

12  But  it  may  equally  well  be  ex- 
plained as  '  rich  '  from  the  other  sense 
of  the  primary  word :  '  possessor  of 
(many)  retainers.' 


2.  Ibha  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda1  appears  certainly  to 
be  intended  as  an  abbreviation  of  the  proper  name  Smadibha. 


1  vi.  20,  8.  Cf.  Pischel  and  Geldner, 
Vedische  Studien,  1,  xvi ;  Roth,  St.  Peters- 
burg Dictionary,  s.v.  ;  Oldenberg, 
Rgveda-Noten,  1,  380.     Zimmer,  Altin- 


disches Leben,  167,  treats  it  as  'retinue,' 
as  does  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the 
Rigveda,  3,  246,  247. 


8o 


RETAINERS— HOLE  IN  THE  GROUND 


[  Ibhya 


fe»\> 


Ibhya  occurs  once  in  the  Rigveda1  in  the  plural,  when  a  king 
is  said  to  devour  his  Ibhyas  as  the  fire  the  forest ;  and  twice 
in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad,2  in  one  passage  as  the  first 
member  of  a  compound,  and  in  the  other  as  either  a  proper 
name  or  an  adjective.  Roth,3  Ludwig,4  and  Zimmer5  interpret 
the  word  as  '  retainers '  in  the  Rigveda,  but  in  the  Chandogya 
Upanisad  Roth  thinks  it  means  'rich.'  Pischel  and  Geldner0 
accept  the  sense  in  all  passages.  Bohtlingk  in  his  trans- 
lation ol  the  Chandogya  treats  the  word  as  simply  a  proper 
name,  '  Ibhya's  village '  (ibhya-grdma)  and  '  Ibhya.' 


1  i-  65,  4. 

2  i.  10,  1.  2. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

4  Translation    of    the    Rigveda, 

247. 

5  Altindisches  Leben,  168. 


6  Vedische  Studien,  1,  xvi.  Cf.  Say  ana 
on  Rigveda,  loc.  cit.,  dhaninah,  and 
Samkara  on  Chandogya  Upanisad, 
loc.  cit.,  isvaro  hastyaroho  va;  Weber, 
Indische  Studien,  1,  476.  Cf.  also  Little, 
Grammatical  Index,  35. 


Irina  (neut.)  occurs  not  rarely  in  the  later  Samhitas1  and 
Brahmanas2  in  the  sense  of  •  a  cleft  in  the  ground,'  usually 
natural  (sva-krta).  The  same  meaning  is  also,  as  Pischel3 
shows,  to  be  ascribed  to  it  in  three  passages  of  the  Rigveda,4 
in  one5  of  which  the  hole  is  referred  to  as  '  made  by  water  ' 
(apd  krtam).  In  another  passage  of  the  Rigveda6  the  word 
refers  to  the  place  on  which  the  dice  are  thrown.  Hence 
Pischel7  concludes  that  the  dicing-board  must  have  been 
so  called  because  it  contained  holes  into  which  the  dice  had 
to  be  thrown  if  possible.  Liiders,8  however,  points  out  that 
this  assumption  is  not  necessary ;  the  dice  (Aksa)  were  merely 
thrown  on  a  space  dug  out,  which  could  be  called  Irina,  as 
being  a  hole  in  the  ground,  though  not  a  natural  one.  This 
view  is  supported  by  the  commentary  of  Sayana,9  as  well  as 
by  Durga  in  his  note  on  the  Nirukta.10 


1  Av.  iv.  15,  12 ;  Taittiriya  Sarnhita, 
ii.  5.  1.  3;  iii-  4-  8>  5i  v-  2,  4,  3 ; 
Kathaka  Sarnhita,  ix.  16. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  2,  3,  2 ; 
vii.  2,  1,  8. 

3  Vedische  Studien,  2,  222-225. 

4  i.  186,  9;  viii.  4,  3;  87,  1.  4. 


via.  4,  3. 
x.  34,  1.  9. 


7  Op.  cit.,  2,  225. 

8  Das  Wiirfehpiel  im  alten  Indien,  14. 

9  On  Rv.,  loc.  cit.  (a-sphara). 

10  ix.  8  (dsphuraka-sthana). 


Isu  ] 


REED  GRASS— ARROW 


81 


Isa  Syavasvi  is  mentioned  in  a  Vamsa  ('  list  of  teachers ')  of 
the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana  (iv.  16,  1)  as  a  pupil  of 
Agastya. 


Isika,  '  a  stalk  of  reed  grass,'  occurs  frequently  from  the 
Atharvaveda1  onwards,  often  as  an  emblem  of  fragility.  In 
the  Sankhayana  Aranyaka2  it  seems  to  denote  the  pin  fixed  in 
the  bar  of  a  pen  to  keep  cattle  in  (argalestke,  '  bolt  and  pin '). 
A  basket  (surpa)  of  Isika.  is  referred  to  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana.3 


1  Av.  vii.  56,  4  ;  xii.  2,  54  ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  iv.  3,  4,  16,  etc.  ;  Jaiminiya 
Brahmana,  i.  9;  ii.  134;  Chandogya 
Upanisad,  v.  24,  3  ;  Kathaka  Upanisad, 
ii.  6,  17,  etc.;  Nirukta,  ix.  8. 


2  ii.  16  {v.  I.  °ike). 

3  i.  1,  4,  19. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  71  ; 
Oertel,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  19,  122,  n.  3. 


Isu   is   the  usual    name    for    'arrow'   from    the    Rigveda1 
onwards.     Other  names  are  Sarya,  Sari,  and  Bana.     In  the 

hymn  of  the  Rigveda,2  which  gives  a  catalogue  of  armour, 
two  kinds  of  arrows  are  distinctly  referred  to  :  the  one  is 
poisoned  (dldkta),  and  has  a  head  of  horn  (riiru-sirsni) ;  the 
other  is  copper-,  bronze-,  or  iron-headed  (ayo-mukham).  Poisoned 
(digdhd)  arrows  are  also  referred  to  in  the  Atharvaveda.3  The 
arrows  were  feathered.4  The  parts  of  an  arrow  are  enumerated 
in  the  Atharvaveda5  as  the  shaft  {salya),  the  feather-socket 
(parna-dhi),  the  point  (srhga),  the  neck  of  the  point  in  which 
the  shaft  is  fixed  (kulmala),  and  the  Apaskambha  and  Apastha, 
which  are  of  more  doubtful  significance.  In  the  Aitareya 
Brahmana6  the  parts  of  an  arrow  are  given  as  the  point  (anika), 
the  salya,  tejana,  and  the  feathers  (parnani),  where  salya  and 
tejana  must  apparently  mean  the  upper  and  lower  parts  of  the 
shaft,  since  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  arrow  is 
described  as  a  whole  consecutively.  So  in  the  Atharvaveda7 
the  arrow  of  Kama  is  described  as  having   feathers,  a  shaft 


1  ii.  24,  8  ;  vin.  7,  4,  etc. ;  Av.  1.  13, 
4,  etc.  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  3, 
etc.;  Nirukta,  ix.  18. 

2  vi.  75.  15- 

3  iv.  6,  7 ;  v.  18,  8.  15 ;  31,  4. 

VOL.  I. 


4  Rv.    x. 

v.  25,  1. 

5  iv.  6. 


18,    14;    vi.    75,    11;    Av. 


0  1.  25. 

7  Av.  iii.  25,  2. 


82 


ARROW— QUIVER— CAR-POLE       [  I§u  Trikanda 


(salya),  and  a  firm  fastening  (kulmala).8  The  arrow  was  shot 
from  the  ear,  and  so  is  described  in  the  Rigveda9  as  '  having 
the  ear  for  its  place  of  birth.' 

As  a  measure  of  length,  the  Isu  was  five  spans,  say  three  feet.10 
A  regular  profession  of  arrow-making  existed  (isu-krt,nisu-kara).12 


8  See  also  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  8, 
i.  2;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxv.  1. 

9  Rv.   vi.   75,    3 ;    ii.    24,    8   (kania- 
yoni). 

10  Satapatha  Brahmana,  vi.  5,  2,  10. 

11  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  46.      Cf. 
Rv.  i.  184,  3. 


12  Ibid.,  xxx.  7  ;  Taittiriya Brahmana, 
iii.  4,  3.  I- 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  300; 
Weber,  Indische  Studien,  18,  29,  286 ; 
Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  13,  275  et  seq.  ;  25,  337. 


Isu  Tri-kanda  is  the  name  given  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana1 
to  some  constellation,  perhaps  Orion's  girdle.  It  is  mentioned 
with  Mrga,  Mrgavyadha,  and  Rohini. 

1  iii.  33.     Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  2,  205,  n. 

Isu-dhi  ('  arrow-holder  ')  is  the  name  of  the  quiver  which  was 
carried  by  every  bowman.  The  word  is  common  from  the 
Rigveda1  onwards.  No  trace  is  to  be  found  in  Vedic  literature 
of  the  later  practice  of  carrying  two  quivers.2  According  to 
Pischel,3  the  curious  expression  isu-krt  in  the  Rigveda4  means 
quiver. 


1  i-  33-  3;  vi.  75,  5;  x.  95,  3;  Av. 
ii.  33,  2 ;  iv.  10,  6,  etc.;  Nirukta,  ix.  13. 

2  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  13,  274.  Each  quiver 
held  from  ten  to  twenty  arrows. 


3  Vedische    Studien,    i,    17.     But   see 
Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  182. 

4  i-  184,  3. 

Cf.      Zimmer,      Altindisches      Leben, 
300. 


Isa  denotes  the  '  pole  of  a  chariot.'  Normally  the  chariot  had 
one  pole  (ekesah),1  but  sometimes  two  poles  are  referred  to.2 
The  word  is  often3  compounded  with  Yuga,  '  yoke,'  into  which 
it  was  fastened  (see  Kha),  and  tied  with  ropes.4  Exactly  how  it 
was  attached  to  the  chariot  we  do  not  know.5     See  also  Ratha. 


1  Rv.  x.  135,  3;  iii.  53,  17;  viii.  5, 
29  ;  Av.  viii.  8,  23. 

2  Cf.  Av.  ii.  8,  4 ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, i.  1,  2,  12  (isa-yugani,  but  in 
iii.  9.  4.  3  dual)  ;  Katyayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  vii.  9,  14,  etc. 


3  Av.,  loc.  cit.,  etc. 

4  Rv.  x.  60,  8.     Cf.  iii.  6,  6. 

5  Van'i  in  Rv.  i.  119,  5  is  taken  by 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  249,  to  refer 
to  the  front  part  of  the  chariot,  but  it 
seems  simply  to  be  '  voice. ' 


Ugradeva  ]      COOKING-POT— POLICEMAN— NAMES  83 

u. 

Uksan.     See  Go. 

Uksanyayana  is  mentioned  in  a  Danastuti  (*  Praise  of  Gifts  ') 
in  the  Rigveda1  along  with  Harayana  and  Susaman.  Ludwig2 
thinks  that  all  three  are  identical.  Roth3  finds  a  reference  to 
Uksan    himself  in   the   verb   uksanyati4  and  in   the  adjective 

uksanyu.5 


1  Vlll.  25,  22. 

2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  162, 
276. 


3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

4  Rv.  viii.  26,  9. 

5  Rv.  viii.  23,  16. 


Uksno-randhra  Kavya  is  mentioned  as  a  seer  in  the  Pafica- 
vimsa  Brahmana  (xiii.  9,  19). 1 

1  Cf.  Max  Miiller,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32,  397. 

Ukha  is  the  regular  word  for  a  '.cooking  pot,'  usually 
mentioned  in  connexion  with  sacrifice,  from  the  Rigveda1 
onwards.     It  was  made  of  clay  (mrn-mayl) .2     See  also  Sthali. 

1  i.  162,  13.  15;  iii.  53,  22;  Av.  xii.  3,    I       a  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xi.  59;  Tait- 
23;    Taittiriya    Samhita,    v.    1,    6,    3,    i    tiriya  Sarnhita,  iv.  1,  5,  4. 
etc.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  253, 

271. 

Ugra  in  one  passage  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad1  seems 
to  have  a  technical  force,  denoting  '  man  in  authority,'  or 
according  to  Max  Miiller's  rendering,  'policeman.'  Roth2 
compares  a  passage  in  the  Rigveda,3  where,  however,  the  word 
has  simply  the  general  sense  of  '  mighty  man.'  Bohtlingk,4  in 
his  rendering  of  the  Upanisad,  treats  the  word  as  merely 
adjectival. 

1  iv-  3»  37-  38-  3  vii-  38»  6. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  4  P.  66  (with  pratyenasah). 

Ugra-deva  is  mentioned  with  Turvasa  and  Yadu  in  the 
Rigveda1  apparently  as  a  powerful  protector.  The  name  occurs 
also  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana2  and  the  Taittiriya  Aranyaka,3 
where  he  is  styled  Rajani  and  called  a  leper  (kildsa). 

1  i.  36,  18  (Ugradeva). 
-  xiv.  3,  17  ;  xxiii.  16,  11. 


:!  v.  4,  12. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 


veda, 3,  147;  Roth,  St.  Petersburg 
Dictionary,  s.v.,  who  suggests  that  in 
the  Rv.  passage  the  word  should  be 
taken  adjectivally. 

6—2 


84 


NAMES— UTTARA  KURUS  AND  MADRAS      [  Ugrasena 


Ugra-sena  is  mentioned  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (xiii.  5, 
4,  3),  and  in  a  Gatha  there  cited  as  being,  with  Bhimasena  and 
&rutasena,  a  Pariksitiya  and  a  brother  of  Janamejaya.  The 
brothers  were  cleansed  by  the  horse  sacrifice  from  sin. 

Uccaih-sravas  Kaupayeya  appears  in  the  Jaiminiya  Upani- 
sad  Brahmana  (iii.  29,  1-3)  as  a  king  of  the  Kurus  and  as 
maternal  uncle  of  Kesln.  His  connexion  with  the  Kurus  is 
borne  out  by  the  fact  that  Upamasravas  was  son  of  Kuru- 
6ravana,  the  names  being  strikingly  similar. 

Uc-chirsaka. — This  word,  occurring  in  the  description  of  the 
couch  (paryanka)  in  the  Kausltaki  Upanisad1  (i.  5),  apparently 
denotes  a  cushion  for  the  head.     See  also  Asandi. 

1  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  403  ;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  155. 


Uttara  Kuru.— The  Uttara  Kurus,  who  play  a  mythical  part 
in  the  Epic  and  later  literature,  are  still  a  historical  people  in 
the  Aitareya  Brahmana,1  where  they  are  located  beyond  the 
Himalaya  (parena  Himavantam).  In  another  passage,2  how- 
ever, the  country  of  the  Uttara  Kurus  is  stated  by  Vasi§tha 
Satyahavya  to  be  a  land  of  the  gods  (deva-ksetra),  but  Janam- 
tapi  Atyarati  was  anxious  to  conquer  it,  so  that  it  is  still  not 
wholly  mythical.  It  is  reasonable  to  accept  Zimmer's  view 
that  the  northern  Kurus  were  settled  in  Kasmir,  especially  as 
Kuruk§etra  is  the  region  where  tribes  advancing  from  Kasmir 
might  naturally  be  found.     Cf.  Udicyas. 


1  viii.  14. 

2  viii.  23. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  165; 


Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  101,  102; 
Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  13,  75,  n. 


Uttara  Madra  is  the  name  of  a  tribe  mentioned  with  the 
Uttara  Kurus  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana1  as  living  beyond  the 
Himalaya.  Zimmer2  points  out  that  in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana3 
Kamboja  Aupamanyava  is  a  pupil  of  Madrag-ara,  and  thence 


1  viii.  14. 


2  Altindisches  Leben,  102. 


3  Indische  Studien,  4,  371, 


Udala  ]  NAMES— BUCKET  85 

infers  that  Kambojas  and  Madras  were  not  far  distant  in  space. 
This  conclusion  is  perfectly  reasonable  in  view  of  the  probable 
position  of  the  Kambojas.4 

4  See  map  in  Pargiter,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1908,  p.  332. 
Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  i,  165. 

Ut-tana  Ahgirasa  is  mentioned  in  the  Taittirlya  Brahmana1 
as  a  quasi-mythical  person  who  received  all  good  things,  and 
yet  was  not  harmed,  as  he  was  really  a  form  of  the  earth, 
according  to  Sayana's2  explanation.  His  name  occurs  also  in 
the  Kathaka  Samhita,3  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,4  and  the 
Taittirlya  Aranyaka.5 

1  ii.  3,  2,  5.     Cf.  ii.  2,  5,  3.  I  3  ix.  9. 

*2  On    Taittirlya    Brahmana,    ii.    3,    I  4i.8,n. 

2,  5.  5  iii.  10,  2.  3. 

Udag-ayana.     See  Surya. 

Ud-ahka  Saulbayana. — His  views  on  Brahman,  which  he 
identified  with  the  vital  airs  (prana),  are  mentioned  in  the 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  (iv.  1,  3).  He  would  thus  have  been 
a  contemporary  of  Janaka  of  Videha.  He  is  also  mentioned  in 
the  Taittirlya  Samhita  (vii.  5,  4,  2)  as  holding  that  the 
Dasaratra  ceremony  was  the  prosperity  or  best  part  of  the 
Sattra  ("  sacrificial  session  '). 

Ud-aiicana. — This  word,  occurring  only  metaphorically  in  the 
Rigveda,1  means  a  '  pail '  or  '  bucket '  in  the  Brahmanas.2 

1  v.  44,  13  (dhiyam  udahcanah,  'a very   |       2  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  32;  Sata- 
well  of  prayers').  |   patha  Brahmana,  iv.  3,  5,  21. 

Udamaya  Atreya  is  mentioned  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana 
(viii.  22)  as  Purohita,  or  domestic  priest,  of  Ahg*a  Vairocana. 

Udara  Sandilya  is  mentioned  as  a  teacher  in  the  Chandogya 
Upanisad,1  and  as  a  pupil  of  Atidhanvan  Saunaka  in  the 
Vamsa  Brahmana.2 

1  i.  9,  3.  2  Indische  Studien,  4,  384. 

Udala,  a  Vaisvamitra,  is  mentioned  in  the  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana  (xiv.  11,  33)  as  the  seer  of  a  Saman. 


86  BOOTY—  VITAL  BREATHS— NORTHERNERS      [  Udaja 

Ud-aja  is  the  word  used  in  the  Maitrayani  Samhita1  to  denote 
the  share  of  the  booty  of  war  taken  by  the  king  after  a  victory 
{samgramam  jitva).  This  interpretation,  which  is  that  of 
Delbriick,2  is  clearly  correct,  as  against  the  older  version, 
'  march  out,'  given  by  von  Schroeder3  and  accepted  by 
Bohtlingk.4  The  Udaja  thus  corresponds  precisely  with  the 
Homeric  <yipa<;.  This  sense  also  suits  Niraja,  the  variant  of 
both  the  Kathaka5  and  the  Kapisthala6  Samhitas. 


1  i.  io,  16 ;  iv.  3,  1. 

2  Festgruss  an  Bohtlingk,  25. 

3  Maitrayani  Samhita,  1,  xv. 


4  Dictionary,  s. 

5  xxviii.  3. 

6  xliv.  3. 


Udana  is  usually  the  fifth  of  the  vital  breaths  (Prana)  when 
five  are  enumerated.1  Sometimes2  it  appears  as  the  second, 
coming  after  Prana,  and  followed  by  Vyana  or  Samana. 
Again,3  it  is  found  simply  opposed  to  Prana,  or  it  simply  follows 
Prana  and  Apana.4  In  the  Satapatha  Brahmana5  it  is  treated 
as  the  breath  that  consumes  food,  a  notion  traceable  in 
the  later  Upanisads,6  while  it  is  also  regarded  as  the  wind 
that  rises  up  by  the  throat,7  and  leads  the  spirit  forth  at 
death.8 


1  E.g.,  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  12, 
9 ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  v.  4 ;  10 ;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  ix.  2,  2,  5  ;  xi.  8,  3,  6 
(in  the  order  Prana,  Vyana,  Apana, 
Udana,  Samana)  ;  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad,  i.  5,  3 ;  iii.  4,  1  (Samana  is 
omitted) ;  iii.  9,  26  ;  Chandogya  Upani- 
sad, iii.  13,  5;  v.  23,  1.  2;  Aitareya 
Aranyaka,  ii.  3,  3,  etc. 


(with  Vyana) ;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  7, 
2  (with  Samana). 

3  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  vi.  20;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  iv.  1,  2,  2  ;  ix.  2,  4,  5, 
etc. 

4  Sahkhayana  Aranyaka,  viii.  8;  xi.  1. 

5  xi.  2,  4,  5. 

6  Maitrayani  Upanisad,  ii.  6. 

7  Amrtabindu  Upanisad,  34. 


2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  i.  20;  vii.  27;    j       8  Prasna  Upanisad,  iii.  7.     Cf.  Deus- 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  ix.  4,  2,  10,  etc.    1   sen,  Philosophy  of  the  Upanisads,  280. 

Ud-Icyas. — The  Brahmanas  of  the  northern  parts  are  referred 
to  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  as  engaging,  with  Svaidayana 
Saunaka  as  their  spokesman,  in  a  dispute  with  the  Kurupancala 
Brahmana  Uddalaka  Aruni,  and  as  vanquishing  him.  Their 
relation  to  the  Kurupancalas  appears  also  from  the  fact  that  in 

1  xi.  4,  1,  1.     Cf.  Gopatha  Brahmana,  i.  3,  6. 


Uddalaka  Aruni  ]    NORTHERNERS— FIG-TREE 


87 


the  same  Brahmana2  reference  is  made  to  the  speech  of  the 
north  being  similar  to  that  of  the  Kurupancalas.  The  speech 
of  the  Northerners  was  also  celebrated  for  purity ;  hence 
Brahmanas  used  to  go  to  the  north  for  purposes  of  study, 
according  to  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana,3  while  in  the  Buddhist 
texts  the  school  of  Taksasila.  (in  Gandhara)  is  famous  as  a 
resort  of  students.4  Possibly,  too,  Sanskrit  was  specially 
developed  in  Kasmir,  as  suggested  by  Franke.5    See  also  Kupu. 

-  iii.   2,  3,   15.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  j       4  Rhys  Davids,  Buddhist  India,  8,  28, 

Studien,   1,   191  ;    Levi,   La  Doctrine  du  j   203. 
Sacrifice,  35.  5  Cf.   Pali   und    Sanskrit    (1902),    88, 

3  vii.  6.     Cf.  Weber,  op.  cit.,  1,  153  ;  |   89. 
2,  309. 


Udumbara. — This  name  of  the  Ficus  glomerata  does  not  occur 
in  the  Rigveda,  but  is  often  found  from  the  Atharvaveda1 
onwards.  For  ritual  purposes  of  all  kinds  its  wood  was 
constantly  used.  The  sacrificial  post  (yupa)2,  and  the  sacrificial 
ladle3  were  made  of  it,  and  amulets  of  Udumbara  are 
mentioned.4  Its  wood,  like  that  of  other  kinds  of  figtree — 
Asvattha,  Nyagrodha,  and  Plaksa — was  considered  suitable 
for  employment  at  the  sacrifice.5  The  sweetness  of  its  fruit  is 
referred  to  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana,6  where  it  is  put  on  the 
same  level  as  Madhu.  It  is  there  also  spoken  of  as  ripening 
three  times  a  year.7  A  forest  of  Udumbara  trees  is  mentioned 
in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.8 


1  xix.  31,  1;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii. 
1,  6,  etc. ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii. 
i,  33;  vii.  4,  1,  38,  etc. 

2  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  1,  1,  6. 

3  Ibid.,  v.  4,  7,  3. 

4  Atharvaveda,  xix.  31,  1. 


5  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  4,  8,  4. 

6  vii.  15. 

7  v.  24. 

8  xvi.  6,  4. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  59. 


Uddalaka  Aruni.— Uddalaka,  son  of  Aruna,  is  one  of  the 
most  prominent  teachers  of  the  Vedic  period.  He  was  a  Brah- 
mana of  the  Kurupancalas,  according  to  the  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana.1 This  statement  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  he  was 
teacher  of  Proti  Kausurubindi  of  Kausambi,2  and  that  his  son 


xi.  4,  1,  2.     Cf.  Gopatha  Brahmana,  i.  3,  6. 


xn.  2,  2,  13. 


88 


A  FAMOUS  VEDIC  TEACHER    [  Uddalaka  Aruni 


Svetaketu  is  found  disputing  among  the  Pancalas.3  He  was  a 
pupil  of  Aruna,  his  father,4  as  well  as  of  Patancala  Kapya,5  of 
Madra,  while  he  was  the  teacher  of  the  famous  Yajnavalkya6 
Vajasaneya  and  of  Kausitaki,7  although  the  former  is  represented 
elsewhere8  as  having  silenced  him.  He  overcame  in  argument 
Pracinayogya  Sauceya,9  and  apparently  also  Bhadrasena  Ajata- 
satrava,10  though  the  text  here  seems  to  read  the  name  as 
Arani.  He  was  a  Gautama,11  and  is  often  alluded  to  as  such. 
As  an  authority  on  questions  of  ritual  and  philosophy,  he  is 
repeatedly  referred  to  by  his  patronymic  name  Aruni  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana,12  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,13  the 
Chandogya  Upanisad,14  and  occasionally  in  the  Aitareya,16  the 
Kausitaki,16  and  the  Sadvimsa17  Brahmanas,  as  well  as  the 
Kausitaki  Upanisad.18  In  the  Maitrayani  Samhita  he  is  not 
mentioned,  according  to  Geldner,19  but  only  his  father  Aruna  ; 
his  name  does  not  occur,  according  to  Weber,20  in  the  Pafica- 
vimsa  Brahmana,  but  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita21  he  is,  as 
Aruni,  known  as  a  contemporary  of  Divodasa  Bhaimaseni,  and 
in  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana22  he  is  mentioned  as 
serving  Vasistha  Caikitaneya.  In  the  Taittiriya  tradition  he 
seldom  appears.  There  is  an  allusion  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita23 
to  Kusurubinda  Auddalaki,  and  according  to  the  Taittiriya 
Brahmana,24  Naciketas  was  a  son  of  Vajasravasa  Gautama,  who 

3  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  i,  i  ; 
Chandogya  Upanisad,  v.  3,  1. 

*  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  4,  33 
(in  both  recensions). 

5  Ibid.,  iii.  7,  1. 

6  Ibid.,  vi.  3,  15  ;  4,  33. 

7  Sankhayana  Aranyaka,  xv. 

8  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  iii.  7,  31. 

9  SatapathaBrahmana.xi.  5, 3,  letseq. 

10  v-  5.  5.  J4-  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books 
of  the  East,  41,  141,  has  Arani.  There 
is  a  chronological  difficulty  in  taking 
Aruni  as  meant,  since  Ajatasatrava 
must  presumably  have  been  a  descen- 
dant of  AjataSatru,  a  contemporary  of 
Janaka  (see  Kausitaki  Upanisad,  iv.  1), 
who  again  was  a  patron  of  Yajnavalkya, 
a  pupil  of  Aruni.  But  this  difficulty  is 
not  fatal. 


In 

Ll 

lau 

Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  5,  3 
*itaki  Upanisad,  i.  1. 

,  2  ; 

12 

i.  1,  2,  ii  ;  ii.  2,  1,  34 ;  iii.  3,  4, 

19; 

i\ 

'•  4 

,  8,  9 ;  xi.  2,  6,  12. 

13 

iii.  5,  1. 

U 

iii.    11,   4;    v.   11,    2;    17,    1; 

vi. 

8 

,    I- 

15 

viii.  7. 

16 

xxvi.  4. 

17 

i.  6. 

18 

i.  1  et  seq. 

19 

Vedische  Studien,  3,  146. 

20 

Indian  Literature,  69.     But  cf.  xxiii. 

1 

.   5- 

21 

vii.  8.     Cf.  viii.  6. 

22 

i.  42,  1. 

23 

vii.  2,  2,  1  (a  late  passage). 

21 

iii.  11,  8,  1  et  seq. 

Upakosala  Kamalayana  ]    NAMES— OTTER— CAR-SEAT  89 

is  made  out  to  be  Uddalaka  by  Sayana.25  But  the  episode  of 
Naciketas,  being  somewhat  unreal,  cannot  be  regarded  as  of 
historical  value  in  proving  relationship.  Aruna  is  known  to  the 
Taittiriya  Samhita.  A  real  son  of  Uddalaka  was  the  famous 
Svetaketu,  who  is  expressly  reported  by  Apastamba26  to  have 
been  in  his  time  an  Avara  or  later  authority,  a  statement  of 
importance  for  the  date  of  Aruni. 


25  On  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  loc.  cit. 
Cf.  Kathaka  Upanisad,  i.  n. 

26  See  Biihler,  Sacred  Books  of  the 
East,  2,  xxxviii ;  Keith,  Aitareya  Aran- 
yaka,  39. 


Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  170, 
n. ;  2,  201,  202;  Oldenberg,  Buddha, 
396,  n.  ;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the 
East,  12,  xl.,  xli. 


Uddalakayana  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Jaba.la.yana  in  the 
second  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers)  contained  in  the  Kanva  recen- 
sion of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  (iv.  6,  2). 

Udra  is  the  name  of  an  animal  occurring  only  in  the  list  of 
sacrificial  victims  at  the  Asvamedha  given  in  the  Samhitas  of 
the  Yajurveda.1  According  to  Mahidhara2  it  was  a  crab;  but 
as  the  commentary  on  the  Taittiriya  Samhita3  calls  it  a  water- 
cat,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  was  an  otter. 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  20,  1  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  18 ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  37. 

2  On  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  loc.  cit. 

3  Loc.  cit. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  95, 
96  ;  Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities, 
247.  U drin  occurs  in  the  Baudhayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  ii.  5. 


Uddhi1  denotes  some  part  of  a  chariot,  probably  the  seat,2 
but,  according  to  Roth,3  the  frame  resting  on  the  axle. 


1  Av.  viii.  8,  22 ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, xii.  2,  2,  2;  Aitareya  Aranyaka, 
ii.  3,  8. 

2  So  Whitney's  Translation  of  the 


Atharvaveda,    506 ;    Eggeling,    Sacred 
Books  of  the  East,  44,  149. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Upa-ketu  is  the  name  of  a  man  mentioned  in  the  Kathaka 
Samhita  (xiii.  1). 

Upa-kosala  Kamalayana  is  mentioned  as  a  teacher  and  a 
pupil  of  Satyakama  Jabala  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad 
(iv.  10,  1 ;  14,  1). 


9o 


INSECT— DISEA SE—A NT— CUSHION      [  Upakvasa 


Upa-kvasa  is  the  name  in  the  Atharvaveda  (vi.  50,  2)  of  a 
noxious  insect  injurious  to  seed.  Sayana,  however,  reads  the 
word  as  a  plural  adjective  {a-pakvasah  =  a-dagdhdh))  but  the 
Paippalada  recension  supports  the  form  upakvasah. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  237; 
Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 


486  ;    Whitney's    Translation    of    the 
Atharvaveda,  318. 


Upa-gu  SauSravasa  is  mentioned  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brah- 
mana (xiv.  6,  8)  as  Purohita  of  Kutsa  Aurava,  by  whom  he 
was  murdered  because  of  his  paying  homage  to  Indra. 

Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  3,  268  ;  Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the  Con- 
necticut Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15,  57. 


Upa-cit  occurs  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita1  as  the  name  of 
a  disease,  which  Roth2  renders  as  '  swelling,'  and  which 
Bloomfield3  identifies  with  Apacit. 


x  xn.  97. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


3  Proceedings  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  October,  1887,  xviii. 


Upa-jihvika,  Upa-jika,  Upa-dika  are  all  forms  of  one  word 
denoting  a  species  of  ant.1  To  these  ants  is  attributed  in  the 
Atharvaveda2  the  power  of  penetrating  to  water  which  possesses 
curative  properties.  They  were  accordingly  used  in  all  sorts  of 
spells  against  poisoning.  The  belief  in  their  healing  qualities 
was  no  doubt  due  to  the  well-known  properties  of  the  earth  of 
ant-heaps  which  contains  their  water. 


1  Upajihvika  is  the  form  in  Rv.  viii. 
102,  21  ;  upajika  in  Av.  ii.  3,  4;  vi.  100, 
2  ;  but  upaclka  in  both  passages  in  the 
Paippalada  recension ;  upadika  in  the 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  1,  3,  4  ;  Tait- 
tiriya  Aranyaka,  v.  1,  4;  10,  9  ;  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,  xiv.  1,  1,  8. 


Cf.  Bloomfield,  American  Journal  of 
Philology,  7,  482  et  seq.  ;  Hymns  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  511  ;  Whitney's  Transla- 
tion of  the  Atharvaveda,  41,  354  ; 
Bergaigne  and  Henry,  Manuel  Vedique, 
153. 


Upa-dhana  denotes  the  '  cushion '  of  a  seat  (Asandi)  in  the 
Atharvaveda  (xiv.  2,  65).  It  corresponds  to  the  Upabarhana 
of  other  texts. 


Upanisad  ] 


SPOKES— SECRET  DOCTRINE 


9i 


Upa-dhi  occurs  once  each  in  the  Rigveda1  and  the  Athar- 
vaveda,2  in  conjunction  with  Pradhi,  denoting  part  of  the 
wheel  of  a  chariot.  It  is  impossible  to  decide  exactly  what 
part  is  meant.  Roth,3  Zimmer4  and  Bloomfield,5  agree  in 
thinking  that  the  word  denotes  the  spokes  collectively. 
Whitney,6  considering  this  improbable,  prefers  to  see  in  it  the 
designation  of  a  solid  wheel,  Pradhi  being  presumably  the  rim 
and  Upadhi  the  rest.  Other  possibilities7  are  that  the  Upadhi 
is  a  rim  beneath  the  felly,  or  the  felly  itself  as  compared  with 
the  tire  (ordinarily  Pavi). 


1  n.  39,  4- 

2  vi.  70,  3. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

4  Altindisches  Leben,  248  (ignoring  the 
Atharvaveda  passage). 


5  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  493. 

6  Translation   of    the   Atharvaveda, 

334- 

7  Bloomfield,  loc.  cit. 


Upa-nisad  in  the  Brahmanas1  normally  denotes  the  '  secret 
sense  '  of  some  word  or  text,  sometimes  the  *  secret  rule  '  of  the 
mendicant.  But  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad2  it  is  already 
used  in  the  plural  as  the  designation  of  a  class  of  writings,  no 
doubt  actually  existing  and  similar  to  the  Upanisads  in  the 
nature  of  their  subject-matter  and  its  treatment.  Similarly 
the  sections  of  the  Taittiriya  Upanisad  end  with  the  words 
ity  upanisad.  The  Aitareya  Aranyaka3  commences  its  third 
part  with  the  title  '  The  Upanisad  of  the  Samhita/  and  the 
title  occurs  also  in  the  Sankhayana  Aranyaka.4  The  exact 
primary  sense  of  the  expression  is  doubtful.  The  natural 
derivation,  adopted  by  Max  Miiller5  and  usual  ever  since, 
makes  the  word  mean  firstly  a  session  of  pupils,  hence  secret 
doctrine,  and  secondly  the  title  of  a  work  on  secret  doctrine. 
Oldenberg,6  however,  traces  the  use  of  the  word  to  the  earlier 


1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  x.  3,  5,  12 ; 
4.  5.  1  ;  5,  i»  1 ;  xii.  2,  2,  23,  etc.  ; 
Chandogya  Upanisad,  i.  1,  10;  13,  4; 
viii.  8,  4.  5  ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad, 
ii.  1,  20;  iv.  2,  1 ;  v.  5,  3  ;  Aitareya 
Aranyaka,  iii.  1,  6;  2,  5;  Kausitaki 
Upanisad,  ii.  1,  etc. 

2  ii.  4,  10  ;  iv.  1,  2  ;  5,  11. 

3  iii.  1,  1. 


*  vn.    2. 
i.  3.  i- 


Cf.    Taittiriya    Upanisad, 


5  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  1,  xxxiii 
et  seq.  Cf.  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v.;  Macdonell,  Sanskrit  Literature, 
204. 

6  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  50,  457 ;  54,  70  ; 
Die  Liter atur  des  alien  Indien,  72. 


92 


PILLO  W— CHURN  ING-STICK 


[  Upapati 


sense  of  'worship'  (cf.  upasana).  Deussen7  considers  the 
original  sense  to  have  been  'secret  word,'  next  'secret  text,' 
and  then  '  secret  import,'  but  this  order  of  meaning  is  im- 
probable. Hopkins8  suggests  that  Upanisad  denotes  a  sub- 
sidiary treatise,  but  this  sense  does  not  account  naturally  for 
the  common  use  as  '  secret  meaning,'  which  is  far  more 
frequent  than  any  other. 


Philosophy  of  the  Upanisads,  16  et  seq. 


8  Religions  of  India,  2ii 


Upa-pati,  '  the  gallant,'  is  mentioned  with  the  Jara,  '  lover,' 
in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita1  as  a  victim  in  the  human  sacrifice 
(purusamedha) . 

1  xxx.  9;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  4,  1. 


Upa-barhana  denotes  a  '  pillow '  or  '  cushion,'  especially  of  a 
seat  (asandi),  occurring  in  the  Rigveda,1  the  Atharvaveda,2  and 
the  Brahmanas.3  The  feminine  Upabarhani  is  found  in  the 
Rigveda  with  the  same  sense,  but  used  metaphorically  of  the 
earth. 


1  x.  85,  7- 

2  ix.  5,  28;  xii.  2,  19.  20;  xv.  3,  7. 

3  Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  12  ;  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,  xiii.  8,  4,  10 ;  Kausl- 


taki  Upanisad,  i.  5 ;  Taittiriya  Brah- 
mana, i.  1,  6,  10;  6,  8,  9;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  xxviii.  4,  etc. 


Upa-manthanl  is  used  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad1  to 
denote  '  churning  sticks.'  In  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita2  the 
'churner'  (upamanthitr)  is  included  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the 
human  sacrifice  {purusamedha),  and  the  verb  upa-manth  is  often 
used  of  churning  or  mixing  fluids.3 


1  vi.  3,  13. 

2  xxx.  12;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii. 
4,  8,  1. 


3  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  6,  8,  4.  5  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  6,  1,  6  ;  Chan- 
dogya  Upanisad,  v.  2,  4. 


Upa-manyu  is,  according  to  Ludwig,1  the  name  of  a  person 
in  the  Rigveda,2  but  is  more  probably  explained  by  Roth3  as  a 
mere  epithet. 


1  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  113. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v . 


1.  102.  9. 


Upara  ]     UPAMASRAVAS— PILLAR— PRESSING-STONE 


93 


Upama-sravas  is  mentioned  in  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda1  as 
a  son  of  KuruSravana,  and  grandson  of  Mgdhatithi.  The  M  i  T/l  A  — 
exact  force  of  the  reference  to  him  is,  however,  uncertain. 
According  to  the  Brhaddevata,2  followed  by  Ludwig,3  and  by 
Lanman,4  the  poet  in  the  hymn  consoles  Upamasravas  for  the 
death  of  his  grandfather,  Medhatithi.  Geldner,5  on  the  other 
hand,  thinks  that  the  poet,  who  was  Kavasa  Ailusa,  was 
ill-treated  by  his  patron's  son,  Upamasravas,  and  cast  into 
a  ditch  or  well,  where  he  uttered  his  complaint  and  appeal  for 
mercy.  But  of  this  there  is  no  adequate  evidence,  and  the 
tradition  of  the  Brhaddevata  seems  sound. 


1  x.  33,  6.  7. 

2  vii.     35.     36,      with 
notes. 


3  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  165. 
Macdonell's  4  Sanskrit  Reader,  386,  389. 

5  Vedische  Studien,  2,  150,  n. 


Upa-mit  occurs  twice  in  the  Rigveda,1  and  once  in  the 
Atharvaveda,2  as  the  designation  of  some  part  of  a  house.  The 
passages  in  the  Rigveda  leave  little  doubt  that  the  word  means 
an  upright  pillar.  As  it  is,  in  the  Atharvaveda,  coupled  with 
Parimit  and  Pratimit,  the  conclusion  is  natural  that  the  latter 
word  denotes  the  beams  supporting  the  Upamit,  presumably  by 
leaning  against  it  at  an  angle,  while  Parimit  denotes  the  beams 
connecting  the  Upamits  horizontally.  These  interpretations, 
however,  can  only  be  conjectural.     See  also  Grha. 


1  i,  59,  1  ;  iv.  5,  1. 

2  ix.  3.  1. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  153 


Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
596 ;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  525. 


Upara,  which,  according  to  Pischel,1  means  '  stone '  in 
general,  is  the  technical  name  of  the  stone  on  which  the  Soma 
plant  was  laid  in  order  to  be  pounded  for  the  extraction  of  the 
juice  by  other  stones  (adri,  gravan).  The  word  is  rare,  occur- 
ring only  thrice  in  the  Rigveda,2  and  once  in  the  Atharvaveda.3 


1  Vedische  Studien,  1,  109.  This  is  the 
sense  of  the  form  upala  (Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxv.  8,  etc.). 

2  i-  79.  3;  x.  94,  5;  175,  3. 

3  vi.  49,  3. 


Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie, 
1,  154;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  317  ;  Von  Schroeder, 
Mysterium  und  Mimus,  414. 


94  CORN-GRINDER— PESTLE— GRAIN     [  Upalap:ak§inl 

Upala-praksim  occurs  once  in  the  Rigveda,1  where  it  desig- 
nates the  occupation  of  a  woman,  as  opposed  to  that  of  her 
son,  who  is  a  poet  (kdru),  and  to  that  of  his  father,  who  is  a 
physician  (bhisaj).  Yaska2  renders  the  word  by  '  maker  of 
groats  '  (saktu-karikd),  and  Roth,3  Grassmann,4  Zimmer,5  as  well 
as  others,  connect  it  with  the  operation  of  grinding  corn. 
Pischel,6  however,  who  points  out  that  corn  was  not  ground 
between  two  stones,  but  beaten  on  a  stone  with  a  pestle  (drsad), 
considers  that  Upala-praksim  denotes  a  woman  that  assisted  at 
the  crushing  of  Soma  (cf.  Upara).  Von  Schroeder,7  who  more 
correctly  points  out  that  there  is  no  objection  to  regarding 
upala  as  the  mortar  in  which  the  corn  was  placed  and  then 
beaten  with  the  pestle,  renders  the  word  literally  as  '  one  who 
fills  the  (lower)  stone  (with  corn).' 

1  ix.  112,  3.  6   Vedische  Studien,  1,  308-310. 

2  Nirukta,  vi.  5.  7  Mysterium   und  Mimas,   412  et  seq. 


s  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

4  Ibid.,  s.v.,  'fitting  the  upper  (to  the 
lower)  millstone.' 

5  Altindisches  Leben,  269.     Cf.  Hille- 
brandt,    Vedachrestomathie,    s.v.,    who, 


Von  Schroeder  does  not  accept  the 
view  that  the  mother  of  the  singer  is 
alluded  to ;  but  it  seems  impossible  to 
draw  any  other  conclusion  from  the 
language  of  the  passage,  and  his  own 


taking  pre  in  the  sense  of  'fill,  'explains  ;   explanation     of    the    word    as    refer- 

the  compound  as  '  filling  the  upper  mill-  ring    to    a    corn-mother    is    very  im- 

stone,'  an  interpretation  which   as  it  probable ;  cf.  Keith,  Journal  of  the  Royal 

stands  is  unintelligible.  Asiatic  Society,  1909,  204. 


Upala  in  the  Brahmanas1  may  denote  the  upper  and  smaller 
*  stone,'  which  was  used  as  a  pestle  with  the  Drsad  as  the 
mortar,  whereas  Upara  in  the  Samhitas  denotes  rather  the 
mortar,  and  Drsad  the  pestle.    But  see  Dr§ad. 

1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  1,  1,  22;  I  Cf.  Von  Schroeder,  Mysterium  und 
ii.  1,  14,  17 ;  ii.  2,  2,  1,  etc.  I  Mimus,  413,  n.  3. 

Upa-vaka  occurs  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita1  and  the  Brah- 
manas2 as  a  description  of  a  species  of  grain,  the  Wrightia 
antidysenterica,  known  later  as  Indra-yava.  The  commentator 
Mahidhara3  simply  glosses  it  with  the  more  general  term  Yava. 

1  xix.  22;  90;  xxi.  30  (as  'heal-  I  2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xii.  7,  1,  3; 
ing  ').  I   2,  9,  etc. 


Upastarana  ]  NAME— CUSHION— COVERLET  95 

According  to  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  it  formed  the  essential 
element  of  gruel  (karambha),  and  Upavaka  groats  (saktavah)  are 
mentioned  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.4 

3  On  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xix.  22.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  240, 

4  xii.  9,  1,  5.  I   270. 

Upa-vesi  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Ku&ri  in  a  Vamsa  (list  of 
teachers)  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  (vi.  5,  3,  in  both 
recensions).     See  also  Aupave&i. 

Upa-6ri,  Upa-sraya,  are  two  readings  of  the  same  term.  The 
former  is  found  in  one  recension  of  the  Kausitaki  Upanisad,1 
while  the  latter  is  probably  the  reading  of  the  other  recension 
of  the  Upanisad,2  and  certainly  the  reading  in  one  passage  of 
the  Atharvaveda,3  though  the  text  has  apasrayah,  which  is 
accepted  as  possible  by  Roth.4  In  both  cases  the  term  clearly 
means  something  connected  with  a  couch  (Asandi  in  the 
Atharvaveda,  Paryanka  in  the  Kausitaki  Upanisad).  Aufrecht,5 
Roth,6  and  Max  Miiller7  render  it  as  'coverlet'  or  'cushion,' 
but  Whitney8  seems  evidently  right  in  holding  that  it  must 
mean  a  '  support '  or  something  similar. 

5  Indische  Studien,  1,  131. 

6  S.v.  apasraya. 

7  Sacred  Books  af  the  East,  1 ,  278 . 

8  Translation   of    the  Atharvaveda, 

777- 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,   1,  402  ; 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  155. 


i-  5- 


2  See  Keith,   Sankhayana  Aranyaka, 
20,  n.  3. 

3  xv.  3,  8.    Cf.  Whitney's  note  in  his 
Translation. 

4  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s. v.,  and 
still  followed  by  Bohtlingk,  Dictionary, 


Upa-starana  denotes  in  the  description  of  the  couch  (Par- 
yanka) in  the  Kausitaki  Upanisad1  a  '  coverlet,'  and  has  this 
sense,  used  metaphorically,  in  the  Rigveda2  also.  In  the 
Atharvaveda3  it  seems  to  have  the  same  meaning.  Whitney,4 
however,  renders  it  '  couch,'  though  he  translates5  the  parallel 
word  Astarana  in  another  passage6  by  'cushion.' 

1  i.  5.  I       5  Ibid.,  776. 

2  ix.  69,  5.  6  xv.  3,  7. 

3  v.  19,  12.  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  403  ; 

4  Translation  of    the   Atharvaveda,    |   Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  155. 
254- 


96 


ROYAL  CLIENTS 


[  Upasti 


Upa-Sti  denotes  both  in  the  Rigveda1  and  the  Atharvaveda2  a 
1  dependent,'  just  as  later  in  the  Epic3  the  subordination  of  the 
Vaisya  to  the  two  superior  castes  is  expressed  by  the  verb 
upa-sthd,  '  stand  under,'  '  support.'  The  word  also  appears, 
with  the  same  sense,  in  the  form  of  Sti,  but  only  in  the 
Rigveda.4  The  exact  nature  of  the  dependence  connoted  by 
the  term  is  quite  uncertain.  Zimmer5  conjectures  that  the 
'  dependents '  were  the  members  of  defeated  Aryan  tribes  who 
became  clients  of  the  king,  as  among  the  Greeks,  Romans,  and 
Germans,  the  term  possibly  including  persons  who  had  lost 
their  freedom  through  dicing.6  The  evidence  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda7 shows  that  among  the  Upastis  were  included  the 
chariot-makers  (ratha-kara),  the  smiths  (taksan),  and  the 
charioteers  (siita),  and  troop-leaders  (grdma-m),  while  the 
Rigveda  passages  negative  the  possibility  of  the  '  subjects '  (sti) 
being  the  whole  people.  It  is  therefore  fair  to  assume  that 
they  were  the  clients  proper  of  the  king,  not  servile,  but 
attached  in  a  special  relation  to  him  as  opposed  to  the  ordinary 
population.  They  may  well  have  included  among  them  not 
only  the  classes  suggested  by  Zimmer,  but  also  higher  elements, 
such  as  refugees  from  other  clans,  as  well  as  ambitious  men 
who  sought  advancement  in  the  royal  service.  Indeed,  the 
Suta  and  the  Gramani  were,  as  such,  officers  of  the  king's  house- 
hold— kingmakers,  not  themselves  kings,  as  they  are  described 
in  the  Atharvaveda.8  The  use  of  the  word  in  the  Taittiriya 
Samhita,9  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana,10  and  the  Kathaka,11  is 
purely  metaphorical,  as  well  as  in  the  one  passage  of  the 
Rigveda  in  which  it  occurs.  In  the  Paippalada  recension  of 
the  Atharvaveda,12  Vaisya,  Sudra,  and  Arya  are  referred  to  as 
Upastis,  perhaps  in  the  general  sense  of  ■  subject.' 


i  x.  97,   23  (  =  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xii.  101  ;  Av.  vi.  15,  1). 

2  iii.  5,  6. 

3  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  13,  92. 

4  vii.  19, 11 ;  x.  148,  4  ;  sti-pa,  vii.  66, 

3;  x   69.  4-  :.. 

5  Altindisches  Leben,  184,  185.        v 

6  Rv.  x.  34. 

7  Av.  iii.  5,  6.  7. 


a  111.  5-  7- 

9  vii.  2,  5,  4.     Cf.  vi.  5,  8,  2. 

10  iii-  3.  5.  4- 

11  xxxi.  9. 

12  "i.  5-  7- 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig. 
veda,  3,  246;  Whitney,  Translation  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  92  ;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  17,  196  et  seq. 


1  i.  36,  10.  17;   ii2,  15; 

viii. 

5- 

25; 

x.  115,  8. 

2  x.  115,  9. 

3  viii.  103,  8;  x.  115,  9. 

Ubhayadant  ]         SAGES— PARTS  OF  CAR—SHOE  97 

Upa-stuta  is  mentioned  several  times  in  the  Rigveda,1  always 
as  a  sage  of  old,  and  usually  in  connexion  with  Kanva,  who 
was  aided  or  favoured  by  Agni,  the  Asvins,  and  other  gods. 
The  Upastutas,  sons  of  Vrstihavya,2  are  mentioned  as  singers.3 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  108  ;  Max  Muller,  Sacred  Books 
of  the  East,  32,  152,  153. 


Upa-hvara  denotes,  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda,1  according 
to  Geldner,2  the  body  of  a  chariot  (upa-stha). 

1  i.  87,  2.  2  Vedische  Studien,  3,  46. 

Upanasa  is  in  the  Atharvaveda1  opposed  to  Aksa,  and  must 
mean  something  like  '  the  body  of  the  wagon,'  though  Sayana 
suggests  that  it  signifies  either  a  '  granary '  or  a  '  wagon  full  of 
grain.'  In  the  Rigveda,2  where  the  word  occurs  only  once,  its 
sense  is  doubtful.  Pischel8  explains  the  form  which  occurs 
there  not  as  an  adjective,  but  as  an  infinitive. 

1  ii.  14,  2. 

2  x.  105,  4. 

3  Vedische  Studien,  1,  197. 


Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 301  ;  Whitney,  Translation  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  56. 


Upa-nah  is  the  regular  word  for  a  '  sandal '  or  '  shoe '  from 
the  later  Samhitas1  onwards.  Boarskin  is  mentioned  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana2  as  a  material  of  which  shoes  were  made. 
The  combination  '  staff  and  sandals '  (dandopdnaha)  occurs  as 
early  as  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana.3 

1  Taittiriya    Sainhita,    v.    4,    4,    4 ;   1  2  v.  4,  3,  19. 

6,  6,  1,  etc.  3  hi.  3. 

Upavi  Jana-£ruteya  is  mentioned  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana 
(i.  25,  15)  as  an  authority  on  the  Upasads  (a  kind  of  Soma 
ceremony). 

Upoditi  Gaupaleya  is  mentioned  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brah- 
mana (xii.  13,  n)  as  a  seer  of  Samans. 

Ubhaya-dant, '  having  incisors  in  both  jaws,'  is  an  expression 
employed  to  distinguish,  among  domestic  animals,  the  horse, 
vol.  1.  7 


98 


HORSE  AND  ASS— SHEEP 


[  Ura 


the  ass,  etc.,  from  the  goat,  the  sheep,  and  cattle.  The 
distinction  occurs  in  a  late  hymn  of  the  Rigveda,1  and  is  several 
times  alluded  to  in  the  later  Samhitas2  and  the  Brahmanas.3 
In  one  passage  of  the  Taittiriya  Samhita4  man  is  classed  with 
the  horse  as  ubhaya-dant.  The  opposite  is  anyato-dant,  '  having 
incisors  in  one  jaw  only,'  a  term  regularly  applied  to  cattle,5 
the  eight  incisors  of  which  are,  in  fact,  limited  to  the  lower  jaw. 
The  ass  is  styled  ubhaya-dant  in  the  Atharvaveda.6  In  one 
passage  of  the  Atharvaveda,7  however,  the  epithet  is  applied  to 
a  ram  ;  but  the  sense  here  is  that  a  marvel  occurs,  just  as  in 
the  Rigveda8  a  ram  destroys  a  lioness.  Bloomfield9  suggests 
in  the  Atharvaveda  passage  another  reading  which  would  mean 
1  horse.'  A  parallel  division  of  animals  is  that  of  the  Taittiriya10 
and  Vajasaneyi  Samhitas11  into  '  whole-hoofed '  (eka-sapha)  and 
'  small '  (ksudra). 

Zimmer12  seeks  to  show  from  the  Greek  ajupooSovTa13  and  the 
Latin  ambidens14,  that  the  Indo-European  was  familiar  with 
the  division  of  the  five  sacrificial  animals  into  the  two  classes 
of  man  and  horse  on  the  one  hand,  and  cattle,  sheep,  and 
goats  on  the  other.     But  this  supposition  is  not  necessary. 


1  x.  90,  10. 

2  Taittiriya    Samhita,    ii.    2,    6,    3 ; 
v.  1,  2,  6  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  8,  1. 

3  Satapatha   Brahmana,  i.  6,  3,  30 
(ubhayato-dant). 

4  ii.  2,  6,  3. 

5  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.i,  1,  5;  v.  1, 
2.  6;  5,  1,  3. 

6  v.  31,  3. 


7  v.  19,  2. 

8  viii.  18,  17. 

9  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  434. 

10  iv.  3,  10,  2. 

11  xiv.  30. 

12  Altindisches  Leben,  74-76. 

13  Aristotle,  Hist.  An.,  ii.  1,  8. 

14  Festus  apud    Paulum    Diaconum. 
Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  10,  58. 


Ura  as  a  name  for  '  sheep '  is  confined  to  the  Rigveda.1  It 
is  curious  that  in  one  of  its  two  occurrences  the  wolf  should  be 
referred  to  as  terrifying  sheep,  and  that  the  epithet  of  the  wolf, 
urd-mathi,  *  killing  sheep,'  should  occur  once  in  the  Rigveda,2 
both  references  being  in  one  book  of  the  Samhita,  a  fact 
which  suggests  a  dialectical  origin  of  the  word  ura.  See 
also  Avi. 


vni.  34,  3- 


2  viii.  66,  8.     Cf.  Nirukta,  v.  21 


Urvara  ] 


NAMES— ARABLE  LAND 


99 


Uru-kaksa  occurs  in  only  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda,1 
where  the  sense  of  the  word  is  much  disputed.  The  reading 
of  the  text  is  uruh  kakso  na  gdngyah,  which  may  refer  to  a  man, 
Urukaksa,  'dwelling  on  the  Ganges,'2  or  to  a  man,  son  of 
Gariga,  or  to  a  wood  so  called,3  or  may  simply  denote  the 
1  broad  thicket  on  the  Ganges.'4 


1  vi.  45,  31. 

2  Grassmann ;  St.  Petersburg  Dic- 
tionary. Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic  Grammar, 
291. 


3  Ludwig's  translation  (der  ivald  Uru- 
kaksa, or  das  weite  dickicht). 

4  Weber,  Episches  im  vedischen  Ritual, 
28, n.  5 ;  Oldenberg, Rgveda-Noten,  1,396. 


Uru-ksaya. — A  family  of  Uruksayas,  singers  and  worshippers 
of  Agni,  is  referred  to  in  one  hymn  of  the  Rigveda  (x.  118,  8.  9). 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  167. 

Urunjira  is  given  in  the  Nirukta  (ix.  26)  as  one  of  the  names 
of  the  river  Vipas  (now  Beas). 


Urvara  is  with  Ksetra  the  regular  expression,  from  the 
Rigveda1  onwards,  denoting  a  piece  of  '  ploughland  '  (apovpa). 
Fertile  (apnasvati)  fields2  are  spoken  of  as  well  as  waste  fields 
(drtand).3  Intensive  cultivation  by  means  of  irrigation  is 
clearly  referred  to  both  in  the  Rigveda4  and  in  the  Atharva- 
veda,5  while  allusion  is  also  made  to  the  use  of  manure.6  The 
fields  (ksetra)  were  carefully  measured  according  to  the  Rigveda.7 
This  fact  points  clearly  to  individual  ownership  in  land  for  the 
plough,  a  conclusion  supported  by  the  reference  of  Apala,  in 
a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda,8  to  her  father's  field  (urvara),  which 
is  put  on  the  same  level  as  his  head  of  hair  as  a  personal 
possession.  Consistent  with  this  are  the  epithets  *  winning 
fields  '  (urvard-sd,  urvard-jit,  ksetra-sd),9  while  *  lord  of  fields ' 
used  of  a  god10  is  presumably  a  transfer  of  a  human  epithet 
{itrvard-pati).      Moreover,    fields   are   spoken    of   in    the   same 


1  i.  127,  6;  iv.  41,  6;  v.  33,  4 ; 
vi.  25,  4 ;  x.  30,  3 ;  142,  3,  etc.  ;  Av. 
x.  6,  33  ;   10,  8 ;  xiv.  2,  14,  etc. 

2  Rv.  i.  127,  6.  3  Ibid. 
4  vii.  49,  2. 

8  i.  6,  4  ;  xix.  2,  2. 


6  Av. 


m-  i4>  3,  4;  xix.  31,  3. 


7  1.  no,  5. 

8  viii.  91,  5. 

9  Rv.  iv.  38, 1,  and  vi.  20, 1 ;  ii.  21,  1 ; 
iv.  38,  1. 

10  viii.  21,  3.     Cf.  Ksetra. 

7—2 


IOO 


OWNERSHIP  IN  LAND 


[  Urvara 


connexion  as  children,11  and  the  conquest  of  fields  (ksetrdni 
sam-ji)  is  often  referred  to  in  the  Samhitas.12  Very  probably,  as 
suggested  by  Pischel,13  the  ploughland  was  bounded  by  grass 
land  (perhaps  denoted  by  Khila,  Khilya)  which  in  all  likelihood 
would  be  joint  property  on  the  analogy  of  property  elsewhere. 
There  is  no  trace  in  Vedic  literature  of  communal  property 
in  the  sense  of  ownership  by  a  community  of  any  sort,14  nor  is 
there  mention  of  communal  cultivation.  Individual  property 
in  land  seems  also  presumed  later  on.  In  the  Chandogya 
Upanisad15  the  things  given  as  examples  of  wealth  include 
fields  and  houses  (ayatandni).  The  Greek  evidence16  also 
points  to  individual  ownership.  The  precise  nature  of  the 
ownership  is  of  course  not  determined  by  the  expression 
*  individual  ownership.'  The  legal  relationship  of  the  head 
of  a  family  and  its  members  is  nowhere  explained,  and  can 
only  be  conjectured  (see  Pitr).  Very  often  a  family  may  have 
lived  together  with  undivided  shares  in  the  land.  The  rules 
about  the  inheritance  of  landed  property  do  not  occur  before  the 
Sutras.17  In  the  Satapatha  Brahmana18  the  giving  of  land  as 
a  fee  to  priests  is  mentioned,  but  with  reproof:  land  was  no 
doubt  even  then  a  very  special  kind  of  property,  not  lightly  to 
be  given  away  or  parted  with.19 

land  and  its  partition  must  have  become 
inevitable. 

18  xiii.  6,  2,  18 ;  7,  1,  13.  15. 

19  It  is  significant  that  in  the  famous 
episode  (Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  1,  9,  4) 
of  Manu's  division  of  his  property, 
from  which  Nabhanedistha  was  ex- 
cluded, this  exclusion  is  made  good  by 
the  son's  obtaining  cattle  (paiavah).  It 
is  clear  that  cattle,  not  land,  was  the 
real  foundation  of  wealth,  just  as  in 
Ireland,  Italy  {cf.  pecunia),  Greece,  etc. 
Cattle  could  be,  and  were,  used  indi- 
vidually, but  land  was  not  open  to  a 
man's  free  disposal ;  no  doubt,  at  any 
rate,  the  consent  of  the  family  or  the 
community  might  be  required,  but  we 
are  reduced  to  reliance  on  analogy  in 
view  of  the  silence  of  the  texts.  Cf. 
Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  289; 
Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  94-96 ;  Rhys 
Davids,  Buddhist  India,  48  et  seq. 


11  Rv.  iv.  41,  6,  etc. 

12  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  2,  8,  5; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  v.  2 ;  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  iv.  12,  3. 

13  Vedische  Studien,  2,  204-207. 

14  Cf.  Baden  Powell,  Indian  Village 
Community  (1899)  ;  Zimmer,  Altin- 
disches  Lcben,  236;  Mrs.  Rhys  Davids, 
Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1901, 
860. 

15  vii.  24,  2. 

16  Cf.  Diodorus,  ii.  40;  Arrian,  I  ndica, 
n;  Strabo,  p.  703;  Hopkins,  Journal 
of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  13,  87 
et  seq.     Cf.  ibid.,  20,  22,  23. 

17  Cf.  Gautama  Dharma  Sutra,  xviii. 
5  et  seq. ;  Baudhayana  Dharma  Sutra,  ii. 
2,  3 ;  Apastamba  Dharma  Sutra,  ii.  6, 14. 
Of  course,  the  rules  probably  go  back 
to  the  earlier  period,  but  how  far  it  is 
impossible  to  say.  With  the  settlement 
of  the  country,  however,  inheritance  of 


Ulukya  JanaSruteya  ]    CUCUMBER— GRA SS—TEA CHERS 


101 


On  the  relation  of  the   owners   of  land   to   the   king   and 
others  see  Grama ;  on  its  cultivation  see  Krsi. 


Urvaru,  f.,  Urvaruka,  n.,  '  cucumber.'  The  former1  of  these 
words  denotes  the  plant,  the  latter2  the  fruit,  but  both  are  very 
rare.  The  passages  all  seem  to  refer  to  the  fact  that  the  stem 
of  the  plant  becomes  loosened  when  the  fruit  is  ripe.3  The 
fruit  is  also  called  Urvaru  in  a  Brahmana.4 


1  Av.  vi.  14,  2. 

2  Rv.  vii.  59,  i2  =  Av.  xiv.  1,  17  = 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  10,  4  =  Taittiriya 
Samhita,  i.  8,  6,  2  =  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 
hita, iii.  60. 


19. 


8  Sayana  on  Av.  vi.  14,  2. 

4  Pancavimsa     Brahmana,     ix. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  242. 


Ula  is  the  name  of  some  unknown  wild  animal,  perhaps,  as 
Whitney1  suggests,  the  ' jackal.'  It  is  mentioned  in  the 
Atharvaveda2  and  later  Samhitas,3  but  not  definitely  identified 
by  the  commentators. 


1  Translation   of    the   Atharvaveda, 
669. 

2  xii.  1,  49. 

3  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  12,  1  (as 


ula) ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  13,  12 ; 

14,2  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.31.   Cf. 

ulala  in  Baudhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  ii.  5. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  82. 


Ula  Varsni-vrddha  is  mentioned  as  a  teacher  in  the  Kausitaki 
Brahmana  (vii.  4). 


Ulapa1  is  the  name  of  a  species  of  grass  referred  to  in  the 
Rigveda  and  the  later  Samhitas.2 


1  x.  142,  3. 

2  Av.  vii.  66,  1.     Adjectives  derived 
from  the  word  are  ulapya  (Vajasaneyi 


Samhita,    xvi.    45,    etc.)    and    upolupa 
(Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  7,  2). 


Ulukya  Jana-sruteya   is    mentioned  as  a  teacher  in   the 
Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana  (i.  6,  3). 


102 


O  WL—MORTA  R— FIRE BRA  ND— TONGS 


[  Uluka 


Uluka  is  the  ordinary  word  for  '  owl '  from  the  Rigveda  x 
onwards.  The  bird  was  noted  for  its  cry,2  and  was  deemed 
the  harbinger  of  ill-fortune  (nairrta).3  Owls  were  offered  at  the 
horse  sacrifice  to  the  forest  trees,4  no  doubt  because  they 
roosted  there. 


1  x.  165,  4. 

2  Rv.  loc.  cit. 

3  Av.  vi.  19,  2  ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v. 
5, 18,  1 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  38. 


4  Vajasaneyi     Samhita,     xxiv.     23 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  4. 


Ulukhala  is  the  regular  expression  for  '  mortar '  from  the 
Rigveda1  onwards,  occurring  frequently  also  in  the  compound2 
Ulukala-musala,  '  mortar  and  pestle.'  The  exact  construction 
of  the  vessel  is  quite  unknown  till  we  reach  the  Sutra  period. 


1  i.  28,  6;  Av.  x.  9,  26;  xi.  3,  3; 
xii.  3,  13 ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  2, 
8,  7  ;  vii.  2, 1,  3  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
i.  1,  4,  6,  etc. 


2  Av.  ix.  6,  15  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
i.  1,  1,  22. 


Ulka  regularly  denotes  a  meteor  from  the  Rigveda1  onwards. 
In  the  Brahmanas2  it  also  signifies  a  'firebrand.'  The  much 
rarer  form  UlkusI3  has  both  senses. 


1  iv.  4,  2;  x.  68,  4;  Av.  xix.  9,  £ 
Sadvimsa  Brahmana,  vi.  8,  etc. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  5,  4,  19. 


3  As  'meteor,'  Av.  v.  17,  4;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  xi.  2,  7,  21  ;  as  '  fire- 
brand,' ibid.,  iii.  9,  2,  9. 


Ulmuka  is  the  common  word  in  the  Brahmanas1  for  'fire- 
brand,' from  which  a  coal  (angdra)2  could  be  taken. 


1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  11  ;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  i.  8,  2,  1  ;  ii.  1,  4, 
28,  etc. ;  Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  ii.  76 
(Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
15.  239)- 


2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xii.  4,  3,  3  ; 
Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  i.  61,  1  (Journal 
of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  23, 
342). 


Ulmukavaksayana  is  an  expression  that  occurs  several 
times  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,1  signifying  a  '  means  of 
extinguishing  (ava-ksayana)  a  firebrand,'  or  possibly  more  pre- 
cisely '  tongs.'     Compare  Ahgaravaksayana. 

1  iv.  6,  8,  7  ;  v.  2,  4,  15  ;  xi.  6,  3,  3 ;  Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  ii.  76.  Cf.  Bohtlingk, 
Dictionary,  s.v. 


Usinara  ]      USANAS  KAVYA—THE  USINARA  TRIBE  103 

Usanas  Kavya  is  an  ancient  seer,  already  a  half-mythical 
figure  in  the  Rigveda,1  where  he  is  often  mentioned,  especially 
as  associated  with  Kutsa  and  Indra.  Later  on2  he  becomes 
the  Purohita  of  the  Asuras  in  their  contests  with  the  gods. 
A  variant  of  his  name  is  Kavi  Usanas.3  He  appears  in  the 
Brahmanas  as  a  teacher  also.4 

1  i.  51,  10;  83,  5;  I2i,  12;  iv.  16,  2;  ■  Rv.  iv.  26,  1. 

vi.  20,  11  ;  viii.  23,  17  ;  ix.  87,  3;  97,  7;  4  Paiicavimsa  Brahmana,  xiv.  12,  5  ; 

x.  40,  7;  probably  also  i.  130,  9;  v.  31,  :   Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana,  ii.  7, 

8  ;  34,  2  ;  viii.  7,  26 ;  x.  22,  6.    Also  in  '    2,  6. 

Av.  iv.  29,  6.  Cf.  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 

2  Taittirlya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  8,  5;  s.v. ;  Geldner,  Vedische  Studien,  2,  167  et 
Paiicavimsa  Brahmana,  vii.  5,  20;  seq.;  Berg&igne,  Religion  Vedique,  2,  339^ 
Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xiv.  27,  1.  |   seq.;  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  147. 

Usana  occurs  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (iii.  4,  3,  13 ;  iv.  2, 
5,  15)  as  the  name  of  a  plant  from  which  Soma  was  prepared. 

U£inara. — In  the  Aitareya  Brahmana1  the  Kuru-Pancalas  are 
mentioned  as  dwelling  together  in  the  '  Middle  Country '  with 
the  Vasas  and  the  Usinaras.  In  the  Kausitaki  Upanisad2  also 
the  Usinaras  are  associated  with  the  Kuru-Pancalas  and  Vasas, 
but  in  the  Gopatha  Brahmana3  the  Usinaras  and  Vasas  are  re- 
garded as  northerners.  In  the  Rigveda4  the  people  is  alluded  to 
in  one  passage  by  reference  to  their  queen,  Usinarani.  Zimmer5 
thinks  that  the  Usinaras  earlier  lived  farther  to  the  north-west, 
but  for  this  there  is  no  clear  evidence.  His  theory  is  based 
merely  on  the  fact  that  the  Anukramani  (Index)  of  the  Rigveda 
ascribes  one  hymn6  to  Sibi  Ausinara,  and  that  the  Sibis  were 
known  to  Alexander's  followers  as  St/Sot,7  living  between  the 
Indus  and  the  Akesines  (Chenab).  But  this  is  in  no  way 
conclusive,  as  the  Sibis,  at  any  rate  in  Epic  times,8  occupied 
the  land  to  the  north  of  Kuruksetra,  and  there  is  no  reason 
whatever  to  show  that  in  the  Vedic  period  the  Usinaras  were 
farther  west  than  the  '  Middle  Country.' 

1  viii.  14.  6  Rv.  x.  179. 

2  iv.     1.        See     Keith,     Sankhayana   1        7  Diodorus,  xvii.  19. 

Aranyaka,  36.  8  See  Pargiter's  map,  Journal  of  the 

3  ii.  9.  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1908,  p.  322. 

4  x.  59,  10.  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1, 213,419; 

5  Altindisches  Leben,  130.  Hultzsch,  Indian  Antiquary,  34,  179. 


io4 


CAMEL— TURBAN 


[  Usa 


Usa,  'salt  ground,'  occurs  as  a  variant  of  Usa  in  the 
Maitrayam  Samhita  (i.  6,  3). 

Usasta  Cakrayana  is  mentioned  as  a  teacher  in  the  Brhad- 
aranyaka  (iii.  %  1)  and  Chandogya  (i.  10,  1  ;  11,  1)  Upanisads, 
the  name  in  the  latter  work  appearing  as  Usasti. 


Usti,  Ustra. — Both  of  these  words,  of  which  the  former  is 
quite  rare,1  must  have  the  same  sense.  Roth2  and  Aufrecht3 
hold  that  in  the  Rigveda4  and  the  Brahmanas5  the  sense  is 
*  humped  bull '  or  '  buffalo,'  but  the  former  thinks  that  in  the 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita6  the  sense  is  doubtful,  and  '  camel '  may  be 
meant.  Hopkins7  is  decidedly  of  opinion  that  the  sense  in 
every  case  is  '  camel.'  The  animal  was  used  as  a  beast  of 
burden  yoked  in  fours.8 

1  Perhaps  in  Rv.  x.  106,  2 ;  Tait- 
tiriya  Samhita,  v.  6,  21,  1 ;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  xv.  2. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Cited  in  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  5, 
468.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben, 
224. 

4  i.   138,  2 ;    viii.  5,  37 ;    6,  48 ;    46, 


22.  31 ;  Av.  xx.  127,  2;  132,  13  ;  Vaja- 
saneyi Samhita,  xiii.  50. 

6  Satapatha   Brahmana,   1,  2,  3,  9, 
etc.  ;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  8. 

6  xxiv.  28.  39. 

7  Journal    of    the    American    Oriental 
Society,  17,  83. 

8  Av.  xx.  127,  2;  Rv.  viii.  6,  48. 


Usnlsa  denotes  the  '  turban '  worn  by  Vedic  Indians,  men 
and  women1  alike.  The  Vratya's  turban  is  expressly  referred 
to  in  the  Atharvaveda2  and  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.3  A 
turban  was  also  worn  at  the  Vajapeya4  and  the  Rajasuya5 
ceremonies  by  the  king  as  a  token  of  his  position. 


1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vi.  1 ;    Sata-   j 
patha  Brahmana,  iii.   3,  2,  3 ;    iv.   5, 
2,  7  (used  at  the  sacrifice  to  wrap  the 
embryo   in);    xiv.    2,    1,    8   (Indrani's 
U§nlsa),etc.;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xiii.  10. 


*  xv.  2,  1. 

3  xvii.  1,  14.     Cf.  xvi.  6,  13. 

4  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  3,  5,  23. 

5  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iv.  4,  3. 


Usyala  occurs  once  in  the  description  of  the  couch  or  the 
bridal  car  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  where  it  seems  to  mean  the  four 
'  frame-pieces.'     The  form  is  doubtful :  uspala  is  possible.2 

1  xiv.  1,  60.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  155; 

2  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Athar-   |   Whitney,  op.  cit.,  752. 
vaveda,  385.  I 


Urnanabhi  ] 


BULL  AND  COW— WOOL 


105 


Usra,  m. ;  Usra,  f. ;  Usrika,  m. ;  Usriya,  m. ;  Usriya,  f.  All 
these  words  denote  a  '  bull '  or  a  '  cow,'  occurring  frequently  in 
the  Rigveda,1  and  sometimes  later,2  but  usually  with  some 
reference  to  the  morning  light.  In  some  passages  the  sense  is 
doubtful.     See  Go. 


1  Usra,  Rv.  vi.  12,  4 ;  usra,  i.  3,8; 
viii.  75,  8 ;  96,  8 ;  ix.  58,  2,  etc.  ; 
usrika,  i.  190,  5;  usriya,  v.  58,  6  (with 
vrsabhah);  ix.  74,  3;  usriya,  i.  153,  4; 
180,  3 ;  ii.  40,  2,  etc.  In  ix.  70,  6, 
usriya  is  applied  to  a  calf;  and  in  j  hide,' or  perhaps  in  v.  28,  3,  'milk, 
ix.  68,  1 ;  93,  2,  usriya  means  *  milk.' 


2  Usrau  dhursahau,  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 
hita, iv.  33 ;  usra,  Av.  xii.  3,  37;  usriya, 
Av.  i.  12,  1 ;  usriya,  Av.  ix.  4,  1 ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxxv.  2.  3.  In 
Av.  v.  20,  1;    28,  3,  it  means   'cow- 


U. 

Urjayant  Aupamanyava  is  mentioned  in  the  Vamsa  Brah- 
mana1 as  a  pupil  of  Bhanumant  Aupamanyava. 

1  Indische  Studien,  4,  372. 

tjrjayanti  is  regarded  by  Ludwig1  in  one  passage  of  the 
Rigveda2  as  the  name  of  a  fort,  the  stronghold  of  Narmara. 
The  verse  is,  however,  quite  unintelligible.3 


1  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  152. 

2  ii.  13,  8. 

3  Sayana  makes  Urjayanti  a  Pisaci ; 


Grassmann,  the  sun ;  Roth,  s.v.  urjay, 
takes  it  adjectivally.  Cf.  Oldenberg, 
Rgveda-Noten,  1,  199. 


Urjavya,  a  word  occurring  only  once  in  the  Rigveda,1  is 
taken  by  Ludwig2  to  be  the  name  of  a  sacrificer.  Roth,3  how- 
ever, regards  the  word  as  an  adjective  meaning  *  rich  in  strength,' 
and  this  is  the  more  probable  interpretation. 

1  v.  41,  20.  2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  155. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

Urna-nabhi,1  Urna-vabhi,  Orna-vant  are  all  names  of  the 
spider  in  the  later  Samhitas  and  the  Brahmanas  in  allusion  to 
the  insect's  spinning  threads  of  wool,  as  it  were. 


1  Urna-nabhi  ('having  wool  in  its 
navel '),  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  1,  2, 
5  ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  1,  23  ; 
urna-vabhi   ('wool-spinner'),  Kathaka 


Samhita,  viii.  1 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
xiv.  5,  1,  23;  urna-vant  ('possessing 
wool'),  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xix.  3  (in 
a  Mantra). 


io6 


SPIDER-  IND  US—GA  RNER 


[  Urna 


Urna,  '  wool,'  is  very  frequently  mentioned  from  the  Rigveda1 
onwards.  The  Parusni  country  was  famous  for  its  wool,2  like 
Gandhara3  for  its  sheep.  The  term  for  the  separate  tufts  was 
parvan4  or  par  us.5  '  Soft  as  wool '  (urna-mradas)6  is  not  a  rare 
epithet.  The  sheep  is  called  ' woolly'  {urndvati).7  'Woollen 
thread '  (urna-siitra)  is  repeatedly  referred  to  in  the  later 
Samhitas8  and  the  Brahmanas.9  The  word  urna  was  not 
restricted  to  the  sense  of  sheep's  wool,10  but  might  denote  goat's 
hair  also.11 


1  iv.  22,  2 ;  v.  52,  9 ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  xii.  5,  1,  13;  7,  2,  10,  etc. ; 
urnayu,  'woolly,'  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xiii.  50 ;  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xii. 
11,  10. 

2  Rv.,  loc.  cit. ;  Pischel,  Vedische 
Studien,  2,  210.  But  cf.  Max  Muller, 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32,  315. 

3  Rv.  i.  126,  7. 

4  Rv.  iv.  22,  10. 

5  Rv.  ix.  15,  6. 

6  Rv.  v.  5,  4;  x.  18,  10;  Vajasa- 
neyi Samhita,  ii.  2  ;  iv.  10  ;  xxi.  33,  etc. 

7  Rv.  viii.  56,  3. 


8  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  11,  9; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxxviii.  3 ;  Vaja- 
saneyi Samhita,  xix.  80,  etc.  Cf. 
ur/ia-stukd,  Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  28 ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxv.  3. 

9  Taittirlya  Brahmana,  ii.  6,  4 ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  xii.  7,  2,  11, 
etc. 

10  Cf.  anaujakir  urnah  ('  wool  not 
coming  from  the  edaka,'  a  species  of 
sheep)  in  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  5, 
2,  15- 

11  Cf.  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  A  merican 
Oriental  Society,  17,  83,  n. 


Orna-vati. — In  the  hymn  of  the  Rigveda1  which  celebrates 
the  rivers  Ludwig2  finds  a  reference  to  an  affluent  of  the  Indus 
called  Urnavati.  This  interpretation,  however,  seems  certainly 
wrong.  Roth3  renders  the  word  merely  as  '  woolly,'  and  Zimmer4 
rejects  Ludwig's  explanation  on  the  ground  that  it  throws  the 
structure  of  the  hymn  into  confusion.  Pischel5  makes  the 
word  an  epithet  of  the  Indus,  '  rich  in  sheep.' 


x.  75,  »• 

Translation    of    the    Rigveda,    3, 


200. 


3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

4  Altindisches  Leben,  429. 

5  Vedische  Studien,  2,  210. 


Urdara. — This  word   occurs   once   in   the   Rigveda,1  when 
reference  is  made  to  filling  Indra  with  Soma  as  one  fills  an 


11.  14,  11. 


Rk§aka  ]  BEAR— CONSTELLATION  107 

Urdara  with  grain  (Yava).  Sayana  renders  it  '  granary,'  but 
Roth2  and  Zimmer3  seem  more  correct  in  simply  making  it  a 
measure  for  holding  grain,  or  '  garner.' 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  3  AUindisches  Leben,  238. 

Ola  is  a  variant  of  Ula. 

Usa  in  the  later  Samhitas x  and  Brahmanas 2  denotes  salt 
ground  suited  for  cattle.     Cf.  Usa. 

1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  2,  3,  2,  etc.     1        2  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iv.  27;  Sata- 

j    patha  Brahmana,  v.  2,  1,  16,  etc. 


R. 

i.  Rksa,  '  bear,'  is  found  only  once  in  the  Rigveda,1  and  seldom 
later,2  the  animal  having  evidently  been  scarce  in  the  regions 
occupied  by  the  Vedic  Indians.  Not  more  frequent3  is  the  use 
of  the  word  in  the  plural  to  denote  the  *  seven  bears,'  later 
called  the  'seven  Rsis,'4  the  constellation  of  the  'Great  Bear' 
(ap/cros,  ursa). 

1  v-  56,  3-  ii.  i,  2,  4  ;  Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  i.  11,  2. 

a  Maitrayani   Samhita,    iii.    14,    17 ;  j   Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  3, 

Vajasaneyi    Samhita,    xxiv.    36;    Jai-  !   422. 

miniya  Brahmana,  i.  184.    Cf.  Zimmer,  1       4  Cf.    Macdonell,     Vedic    Mythology, 

AUindisches  Leben,  81.  p.  144  (D). 

3  Rv.i.24, 10;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 

2.  Rksa  is  the  name  of  a  patron  mentioned  in  one  verse  of  a 
Danastuti  ('  Praise  of  Gifts ')  in  the  Rigveda,1  his  son  being 
referred  to  in  the  next  verse  as  Arksa. 

1  viii.  68,  15.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  163. 

Rksaka  is  a  word  occurring  once  in  an  obscure  passage  of  the 
Atharvaveda.1  The  sense  is  quite  unknown.  Weber2  thinks 
it  refers  to  the  '  milky  way,'  but  his  view  rests  on  no  evidence. 
Whitney3  despairs  of  the  passage. 

1  xviii.  2,  31.  I   Catalogue,  2,  59,  n.  ;  Proceedings  of  the 

~  Festgruss  an  Roth,  138,  n.  2  ;  Berlin  |   Berlin  Academy,  1895,  856. 
3  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  840. 


108  DEMON— RIGVEDA— NAMES  [  Rk§Ika 

Rksika,  a  word  found  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  the  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita.,2  and  the  Satapatha  Brahmana3  appears  to  denote  a 
demon.  Harisvamin,  however,  in  his  commentary  on  the  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  connects  the  word  with  Rksa,  as  meaning 
'  bear.' 

1  xii.  i,  49.  3  xiii.  2,  4,  2.  4.     Cf.  Eggeling,  Sacred 

2  xxx.  8.  J   Books  of  the  East,  44,  307. 


Rg-veda,  the  formal  name  of  the  collection  of  Res,  first 
appears  in  the  Brahmanas,1  and  thereafter  frequently  in  the 
Aranyakas  2  and  Upanisads.3 

1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  32,  and  |  3  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  i.  5,  12  ; 
implied  in  Taittirlya  Brahmana,  iii.  12,  j  ii.  4,  10;  iv.  1,  6;  5,  11;  Chandogya 
9,  1;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  vi.  5,  4,  6;  j  Upanisad,  i.  3,  7;  iii.  1,  2.  3;  15,  7; 
8,  3  ;  xii.  3,  4,  9.  I  vii.  1,  2.  4 ;  2,  1 ;  7,  1. 

2  Aitareya  Aranyaka,    iii.    2,   3.    5;  j 
Sankhayana  Aranyaka,  viii.  3.8. 

RjiSvan  is  mentioned  several  times  in  the  Rigveda,1  but 
always  in  a  vague  manner,  as  if  very  ancient.  He  assists 
Indra  in  fights  against  demoniac  figures  like  Pipru  and  the 
dusky  brood  (krsna-garbhdh).  According  to  Ludwig,2  he  was 
called  Ausija's  son,3  but  this  is  doubtful.  He  is  twice4  clearly 
called  Vaidathina,  or  descendant  of  Vidathin. 


1  i-  51*  5;  53.  8;  101,  1;  vi.  20,  7; 
viii.  49,  10;  x.  99,  11 ;   138,  3. 

2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  143, 
149. 


3  Rv.  x.  99,  11.     Cf.  AuSija. 

4  Rv.  iv.  16,  13 ;  v.  29,  11. 

Cf.     Macdonell,      Vedic     Mythology, 
p.  161  (C). 


Rjunas  is  mentioned  once  only  in  the  Rigveda1  along  with 
six  other  Soma  sacrificers. 

1  viii.  52,  2.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  163. 


Rjra£va  appears  in  the  Rigveda1  as  one  of  the  Varsagiras, 
along  with  Ambarisa,  Suradhas,  Sahadeva,  and  Bhayamana, 

and   as   apparently  victorious  in  a  race.     Elsewhere2  in   the 

1  i.  100,  16.  17.  2  i.  116,  if;  117,  j/.  17.-T 


Rna  ] 


DEBT 


109 


Rigveda  he  is  celebrated  as  having  been  blinded  by  his  father 
for  slaying  one  hundred  rams  for  a  she-wolf,  and  as  having 
been  restored  to  sight  by  the  Asvins,  a  legend  of  quite  obscure 
meaning. 

Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  52. 


Rna,  'debt,'  is  repeatedly  mentioned  from  the  Rigveda1 
onwards,  having  apparently  been  a  normal  condition  among 
the  Vedic  Indians.  Reference  is  often  made2  to  debts  con- 
tracted at  dicing.  To  pay  off  a  debt  was  called  rnam  sam-nl? 
Allusion  is  made  to  debt  contracted  without  intention  of 
payment.4 

The  result  of  non-payment  of  a  debt  might  be  very  serious : 
the  dicer  might  fall  into  slavery.5  Debtors,  like  other  male- 
factors, such  as  thieves,  were  frequently  bound  by  their 
creditors  to  posts  (dru-pada)?  presumably  as  a  means  of 
putting  pressure  on  them  or  their  friends  to  pay  up  the 
debt. 

The  amount  of  interest  payable  is  impossible  to  make  out. 
In  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda  and  Atharvaveda7  an  eighth 
(sapha)  and  a  sixteenth  (kala)  are  mentioned  as  paid,  but  it  is 
quite  uncertain  whether  interest  or  an  instalment  of  the 
principal  is  meant.  Presumably  the  interest  would  be  paid 
in  kind. 

How  far  a  debt  was  a  heritable  interest  or  obligation  does 
not  appear.     The  Kausika  Sutra8  regards  three  hymns  of  the 


1  ii.  27,  4,  etc.,  usually  in  a  meta- 
phorical sense. 

2  Rv.  x.  34,  10;  Av.  vi.  119,  1. 

3  Rv.  viii.  47,  i7  =  Av.  vi.  46,  3. 

4  Av.  vi.  119,  1. 

5  Rv.  x.  34.  Cf.  Liiders,  Das  Wurf el- 
spiel  im  alten  Indien,  61. 

6  Rv.  x.  34,  4,  seems  to  refer  rather 
to  the  binding  and  taking  away  as  a 
slave,  though  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien, 
1,  228,  explains  it  as  the  binding  of  a 
debtor  for  non-payment,  interpreting 
the  obscure  verse  i.  169,  7,  in  the  same 
way.  But  Av.  vi.  115,  2.  3,  may  refer 
to  debt,  and  if  this  is  the  meaning  the 


allusion  to  binding  to  a  post  as  a  punish- 
ment is  clear.  See,  however,  Bloom- 
field,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  528, 
n.  1 ;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  364,  who  interprets  the 
hymn  as  referring  only  to  sin.  Rv. 
i.  24,  13.  15;  Av.  vi.  63,  3  =  84,  4; 
121,  1  et  seq.,  are  general;  while  Rv. 
vii.  86,  5;  Av.  xix.  47,  9;  50,  1,  refer 
to  the  binding  of  thieves  in  the 
stocks.    Cf.  Taskara. 

7  Rv.  viii.  47,  i7  =  Av.  vi.  46,  3. 

8  xlvi.  36-40.  See  Caland,  Altindisches 
Zauberritual,  154;  Bloomfield,  op.  cit., 
528. 


no 


PAYMENT  OF  DEBT— KING  RNAMCAYA      [  Rnamcaya 


Atharvaveda9  as  applicable  to  the  occasion  of  the  payment  of 
a  debt  after  the  creditor's  decease.  For  the  payment  of  a  debt 
by  a  relation  of  the  debtor  the  evidence  is  still  less  clear.10 

Zimmer11  thinks  that  payments  of  debt  were  made  in  the 
presence  of  witnesses  who  could  be  appealed  to  in  case  of 
dispute.  This  conclusion  is,  however,  very  uncertain,  resting 
solely  on  a  vague  verse  in  the  Atharvaveda.12 


9  vi.  1 1 7-1 19.  The  name  for  unpaid 
debt  is  in  Av.  vi.  117,  1,  apamityam 
apratlttam.  In  the  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
iii.  3,  8,  1,  husldam  apratlttam;  in  the 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iv.  14,  17,  and 
Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  ii.  3,  1,  8,  husldam 
apratltam ;  in  the  Mantra  Brahmana, 
ii.  3,  20,  apradattam. 


10  Cf.  Rv.  iv.  3,  13  (a  brother's  sin 
or  debt);  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  99,  100. 

11  Altindisches  Leben,  181.  This  sug- 
gestion is  ignored  by  Bloomfield,  op.  cit., 
375,  and  Whitney,  op.  cit.,  304. 

12  vi.  32,  3  =  viii.  8,  21.  Cf.  Sankh- 
ayana  Aranyaka,  xii.  14,  and  see  Jnatr. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  op.  cit.,  181,  182;  259. 


Rnam-caya,  a  prince  of  the  Rusamas,  is  celebrated  in  a 
Danastuti  ('  Praise  of  Gifts')  of  the  Rigveda  (v.  30,  12.  14)  for 
his  generosity  to  a  poet  named  Babhru. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  129;  Byhaddevata,  ed.  Macdonell,  2,  169,  174 


Rtu,  '  season,'  is  a  term  repeatedly  mentioned  from  the 
Rigveda1  onwards.  Three  seasons  of  the  year  are  often 
alluded  to,2  but  the  names  are  not  usually  specified.  In  one 
passage  of  the  Rigveda3  spring  (vasanta),  summer  (grisma),  and 
autumn  (sarad)  are  given.  The  Rigveda  knows  also  the  rainy 
season  (prd-vrs)  and  the  winter  {hima,  hemanta).  A  more 
usual4  division  (not  found  in  the  Rigveda)  is  into  five  seasons, 


1  i.  49,  3 ;  84,  18,  etc. 

2  Cf.  Rv.  i.  164,  2  (tri-ndbhi),  48  (trlni 
nabhydni) ;  also  perhaps  the  Rbhus  as 
the  genii  of  the  three  seasons  and  the 
three  dawns.  Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic 
Mythology,  p.  133  ;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische 
Mythologie,  2, 33  et  seq. ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, xiv.  1,  1,  28,  and  the  cdturmdsydni , 
or  four- monthly  sacrifices  performed  at 
the  beginning  of  the  seasons  in  the 
ritual  (Weber,  Naxatra,  2,  329  et  seq.). 

3  x.  90,  6.  Hillebrandt,  op.  cit.,  2, 
35,  finds  in  Rv.  v.  14,  4;  ix.  91,  6, 
reference  to  three  seasons  in  the  triad 
gdvah    (?  spring),    apah    (rains),    svar 


(=gharma),  and  in  the  ritual  literature 
(Apastamba  Srauta  Sutra,  viii.  4,  2)  in 
the  threefold  division  into  rta,  gharma, 
and  osadhi. 

4  Av.  viii.  2,  22;  9,  15;  xiii.   1,   18; 
Taittiriya  Samhita,  i.  6,  2,  3 ;  iv.  3,  3, 

I.  2;  v.  1,  10,  3;  3,  1,  2;  4.  12,  2; 
6.  10,  1 ;  7,  2,  4 ;  vii.  1,  18,  1.  2 ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  7,  3  ;  iii.  4,  8  ; 
13,  1  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  iv.  14  ;  ix.  16  ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  x.  10-14;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  i.  3,  5,  11  ;  vi.  2,  2,  3, 
etc.  ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  10,4, 1  ; 

II,  10,  4,  etc.  Cf.  Rv.  i.  164,  13.  See 
also  Weber,  op.  cit.,  2,  352. 


Rtu  ] 


DIVISION  OF  THE  SEASONS 


in 


vasanta,  grisma,  varsa,  sarad,  hemanta-sisira ;  but  occasionally 
the  five  are  otherwise  divided,  varsa-sarad  being  made  one 
season.5  Sometimes  six6  seasons  are  reckoned,  hemanta  and 
sisira  being  divided,  so  that  the  six  seasons  can  be  made 
parallel  to  the  twelve  months  of  the  year.  A  still  more 
artificial  arrangement7  makes  the  seasons  seven,  possibly  by 
reckoning  the  intercalary  month  as  a  season,  as  Weber  and 
Zimmer8  hold,  or  more  probably  because  of  the  predilection 
for  the  number  seven,  as  Roth9  suggests.  Occasionally  the 
word  rtu  is  applied  to  the  months.10  The  last  season, 
according  to  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,11  is  hemanta. 

The  growth  of  the  division  of  the  seasons  from  three  to  five 
is  rightly  explained  by  Zimmer12  as  indicating  the  advance  of 
the  Vedic  Indians  towards  the  east.  It  is  not  Rigvedic,  but 
dominates  the  later  Samhitas.  Traces  of  an  earlier  division  of 
the  year  into  winter  and  summer  do  not  appear  clearly  in  the 
Rigveda,  where  the  appropriate  words  hima  and  sama  are 
merely  general  appellations  of  the  year,  and  where  sarad13  is 
commoner  than  either  as  a  designation  of  the  year,  because  it 
denotes  the  harvest,  a  time  of  overwhelming  importance  to  a 
young  agricultural  people.  The  division  of  the  year  in  one 
passage  of  the  Atharvaveda14  into  two  periods  of  six  months 
is  merely  formal,  and  in  no  way  an  indication  of  old 
tradition. 


5  Satapatha   Brahmana,    xiii.    6,    i, 

10.    II. 

6  Av.  vi.  55,  2  ;  xii.  i,  36  ;  Taittirlya 
Samhita,  v.  1,  5,  2 ;  7,  3  ;  2.  6,  1,  etc.  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  7,  3  ;  iii.  11,  12  ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  viii.  6;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxi.  23-28  ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, i.  7,  2,  21  ;  ii.  4,  2,  24  ;  xii.  8,  2, 
34;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  ii.  6,19,  etc. 
Cf.  also  Rv.  i.  23,  15,  as  interpreted 
by  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v.  indn. 

7  Av.  vi.  61,  2;  viii.  9,  18;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  viii.  5,  1,  15  ;  ix.  1, 
2,  31;  2,  3,  45;  3,  1,  19;  5.  2,  8; 
perhaps  Av.  iv.  11,  9,  and  cf.  Rv. 
i.  164,  1. 


8  Indische  Studien,  18,  44;  Altindisches 
j   Leben,  374. 

9  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  rtu. 
Cf.    Hopkins,    Religions    of   India,    18, 

|   33- 

10  Av.  xv.  4;  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
iv.  4,  ii,  1  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xiii.  25  ;  xiv.  6.  15.  26.  27;  xv.  57, 
etc. 

11  i-  5-  3,  13- 

12  Op.  tit.,  373. 

13  Hopkins,  American  Journal  of  Phil- 
ology, 15,  159,  160 ;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  17,  232  ;  Buhler,  Zeitschrift  der 
Deutschen  M orgenldndischen  Gesellschaft, 
41,  28. 

14  viii.  9,  17.     Cf.  Zimmer,  372. 


112 


KING  RTUPARNA— SACRIFICIAL  PRIEST    [  Rtuparna 


Rtu-parna  appears  in  a  Brahmana-like  passage  of  the  Baudh- 
ayana  Srauta  Sutra1  as  son  of  Bhangasvina  and  king  of 
Saphala.  In  the  Apastamba  Srauta  Sutra2  are  mentioned 
Etuparna-Kayovadhi  Bhangyasvinau. 


1  XX.   12. 

2  xxi.  20, 


Cf.  Caland,  Zeitschnft  der  Deutschen 
Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  57,  745. 


Rtv-ij  is  the  regular  term  for  *  sacrificial  priest,'  covering  all 
the  different  kinds  of  priests  employed  at  the  sacrifice.  It 
appears  certain  that  all  the  priests  were  Brahmanas.1  The 
number  of  priests  officiating  at  a  sacrifice  with  different  functions 
was  almost  certainly  seven.  The  oldest  list,  occurring  in  one 
passage  of  the  Rigveda,2  enumerates  their  names  as  Hotr,  Potr, 
Nestr,  Agnidh,  Prasastr,  Adhvaryu,  Brahman,  besides  the 
institutor  of  the  sacrifice.  The  number  of  seven  probably 
explains  the  phrase  '  seven  Hotrs  '  occurring  so  frequently  in 
the  Rigveda,  and  is  most  likely  connected  with  that  of  the 
mythical  '  seven  Rsis.'  It  may  be  compared  with  the  eight  of 
Iran.3  The  chief  of  the  seven  priests  was  the  Hotr,  who  was 
the  singer  of  the  hymns,  and  in  the  early  times  their  composer 
also.  The  Adhvaryu  performed  the  practical  work  of  the 
sacrifice,  and  accompanied  his  performance  with  muttered 
formulas  of  prayer  and  deprecation  of  evil.  His  chief  assist- 
ance was  derived  from  the  Agnidh,  the  two  performing  the 
smaller  sacrifices  without  other  help  in  practical  matters.  The 
Prasastr,  Upavaktr,  or  Maitravaruna,  as  he  was  variously 
called,  appeared  only  in  the  greater  sacrifices  as  giving  in- 
structions to  the  Hotr,  and  as  entrusted  with  certain  litanies. 
The  Potr,  Nestr,  and  Brahman  belonged  to  the  ritual  of  the 
Soma  sacrifice,  the  latter  being  later  styled  Brahmanac- 
chamsin  to  distinguish  him  from  the  priest  who  in  the  later 


1  This  is  assumed  throughout  the 
Vedic  texts,  and  is  accompanied  by 
the  rule  that  no  Ksatriya  can  eat  of 
the  sacrificial  offering  (cf.  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  vii.  26) :  no  doubt  because 
only  the  Brahmanas  were  sufficiently 
holy  to  receive  the   divine  essence  of 


the  sacrifice  into  which,  by  partaking 
of  it,  the  deity  has  entered  in  part. 

2  ii.   1,  2.     Cf.   Oldenberg,   Religion 
des  Veda,  383. 

3  Darmesteter,   Le   Zend-Avesta,    1, 
lxx  et  seq. 


Rtvij  ] 


VARIOUS  PRIESTS 


"3 


ritual  acted  as  supervisor.  Other  priests  referred  to  in  the 
Rigveda4  are  the  singers  of  Samans  or  chants,  the  Udgatr 
and  his  assistant  the  Prastotr,  while  the  Pratihartr,  another 
assistant,  though  not  mentioned,  may  quite  well  have  been 
known.  Their  functions  undoubtedly  represent  a  later  stage 
of  the  ritual,  the  development  of  the  elaborate  series  of 
sacrificial  calls  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  the  use 
of  long  hymns  addressed  to  the  Soma  plant.  Other  priests, 
such  as  the  Achavaka,5  the  Gravastut,  the  Unnetr,  and  the 
Subrahmanya>  were  known  later  in  the  developed  ritual  of  the 
Brahmanas,  making  in  all  sixteen  priests,  who  were  technically 
and  artificially  classed  in  four  groups6:  Hotr,  Maitravaruna, 
Achavaka,  and  Gravastut ;  Udgatr,  Prastotr,  Pratihartr,  and 
Subrahmanya ;  Adhvaryu,  Pratistha.tr,  Nestr,  and  Unnetr ; 
Brahman,  Brahmanacchamsin,  Agnldhra,  and  Potr. 

Apart  from  all  these  priests  was  the  Purohita,  who  was 
the  spiritual  adviser  of  the  king  in  all  his  religious  duties. 
Geldner7  holds  that,  as  a  rule,  when  the  Purohita  actually 
took  part  in  one  of  the  great  sacrifices  he  played  the  part  of 
the  Brahman,  in  the  sense  of  the  priest  who  superintended  the 
whole  conduct  of  the  ritual.  He  sees  evidence  for  this  view  in 
a  considerable  number  of  passages  of  the  Rigveda8  and  the 
later  literature,9  where  Purohita  and  Brahman  were  combined 
or  identified.     Oldenberg,10  however,  more  correctly  points  out 


4  Rv.  viii.  81,  5. 

5  C/.,  for  the  Achavaka,  Kausitaki 
Brahmana,  xxviii.  4 ;  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana, vi.  14,  8,  etc.  ;  Bergaigne, 
Recherches  sur  Vhistoire  de  la  liturgie 
vedique,  47  ;  Oldenberg,  Religion  des 
Veda,  397,  n.  2.  The  other  three  occur 
in  the  Aitareya  and  other  Brahmanas. 
See  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

6  Asvalayana  Srauta  Sutra,  iv.  1,  4-6 ; 
Sahkhayana  Srauta  Sutras,  xiii.  14, 
1,  etc.  In  the  Rigveda  Sutra  the  order 
of  the  four  sets  is  Hotr,  Brahman, 
Udgatr,  and  Adhvaryu.  Sometimes  a 
seventeenth  priest  is  mentioned,  but 
he  was  not  usually  approved,  though 
the  Kausitakins  maintained  him  as  the 
Sadasya.     See   Satapatha  Brahmana, 

VOL.  I. 


|   x.  4,  1,  19;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of 

the  East,  43,  348,  n.  ;   Keith,  Aitareya 

j   Aranyaka,  37  ;  Weber,  Indische  Studien, 

9.  375- 

7  Vedische  Studien,  2,  143  et  seq. 

8  Rv.  i.  44,  10  ;  94,  6  ;  viii.  27,  1,  etc. 

9  Brhaspati  is  Purohita  of  the  gods, 
Rv.  ii.  24,  9  ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana, 
ii.  7,  1,  2  ;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iii.  17, 
2  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  3,  1,  2  ; 
but  Brahman  in  Rv.  x.  141,  3  ;  Kausi- 
taki Brahmana,  vi.  13 ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  i.  7,  4,  21.  Vasistha  is 
Purohita,  Rv.  x.  150,  5,  of  Sudas 
Paijavana,  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
xvi.  11,4;  but  Brahman  of  the  Sunah- 
sepa  sacrifice,  ibid.,  xv.  21. 

10  Op.  cit.,  380  et  seq. 

8 


H4  STATUS  OF  THE  PUROHITA  [  Rtvij 

that  in  the  earlier  period  this  was  not  the  case :  the  Purohita 
was  then  normally  the  Hotr,  the  singer  of  the  most  important 
of  the  songs ;  it  was  only  later  that  the  Brahman,  who  in  the 
capacity  of  overseer  of  the  rite  is  not  known  to  the  Rigveda, 
acquired  the  function  of  general  supervision  hitherto  exercised 
by  the  Purohita,  who  was  ex  officio  skilled  in  the  use  of  magic 
and  in  guarding  the  king  by  spells  which  could  also  be  applied 
to  guarding  the  sacrifice  from  evil  demons.  With  this  agrees 
the  fact  that  Agni,  pre-eminently11  the  Purohita  of  men,  is  also 
a  Hotr,  and  that  the  two  divine  Hotrs  of  the  Apr!  hymns  are 
called12  the  divine  Purohitas.  On  the  other  hand,  the  rule 
is  explicitly  recognized  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana13  that  a 
Ksatriya  should  have  a  Brahman  as  a  Purohita ;  and  in 
the  Taittiriya  Samhita14  the  Vasistha  family  have  a  special 
claim  to  the  office  of  Brahman-Purohita,  perhaps  an  indi- 
cation that  it  was  they  who  first  as  Purohitas  exchanged  the 
function  of  Hotrs  for  that  of  Brahmans  in  the  sacrificial 
ritual. 

The  sacrifices  were  performed  for  an  individual  in  the  great 
majority  of  cases.  The  Sattra,ls  or  prolonged  sacrificial  session, 
was,  however,  performed  for  the  common  benefit  of  the  priests 
taking  part  in  it,  though  its  advantageous  results  could  only  be 
secured  if  all  the  members  actually  engaged  were  consecrated 
(diksita).  Sacrifices  for  a  people  as  such  were  unknown.  The 
sacrifice  for  the  king  was,  it  is  true,  intended  to  bring  about 
the  prosperity  of  his  people  also ;  but  it  is  characteristic  that 
the  prayer16  for  welfare  includes  by  name  only  the  priest  and 
the  king,  referring  to  the  people  indirectly  in  connexion  with 
the  prosperity  of  their  cattle  and  agriculture. 


11  Agni  as  Hotr  and  Purohita  occurs  ,  I5  Oldenberg,  371. 
in  Rv.  i.  1,  1  ;  iii.  3,  2  ;  11,1;  v.  11,  2.  j  1B  Vajasaneyi     Samhita,     xxii.     22 
His  Purohitaship  is  described  in  terms  j  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  5,  18 ;  Maitra- 
characteristic  of  the  Hotr's  functions  :  yani  Samhita,  iii.  12,  6;  Kathaka  Sam- 
in  Rv.  viii.  27,  1  ;  x.  i,  6.     Devapi  is  ,  hita,  v.  5,  14,  etc. 

Purohita  and  Hotr,  Rv.  x.  98.  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  10,  141 

12  Rv.  x.  66,  13  ;  in  x.  70,  7,  purohitav  et  seq. ;  376  et  seq. ;  Hillebrandt,  Rituul- 
rtvija.  1  Utter atur,  97  ;  Oldenberg,  op.  tit.,  370- 

13  vii.  26.  j  397;  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 

14  iii.  5,  2,  1,  etc.  veda,  3,  224. 


Rsi  ] 


ST  A  G—B  ULL—SEER 


ii5 


Rsya. — This  is  the  correct1  spelling  of  a  word  that  occurs  in 
the  Kigveda2  and  the  later  literature3  meaning  'stag,'  the 
feminine  being  Rohit.4  Apparently  deer  were  caught  in  pits 
(rsya-da).5  The  procreative  power  of  the  stag  {drsya  vrsnya) 
was  celebrated.6 


1  It  appears  in  Av.  iv.  4,  7,  as  Rsa ; 
as  Rsya  in  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14, 
9.  18. 

8  viii.  4,  10. 

»  Av.  iv.  4l  5.  7;  v.  14,  3  ;  i.  18,  4 
(rsya-pad) ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv. 
27.  37 ;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iii.  33 ; 
citation  in  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
viii.  25,  8,  etc. 


4  Av.  iv.  4,  7. 

5  Rv.  x.  39,  8. 

6  Av.  iv.  4,  5. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  18,  18  ; 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  82;  Whit- 
ney, Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
150.  151- 


i.  Rsabha   is   the    common    name  of  the   'bull'    from   the 
Rigveda1  onwards.2     See  also  Go. 

28,    8  ;    x.    91,     14 


1  vi.     16,    47 
etc. 


2  Av.  iii.  6,  4 ;  23,  4,  etc. ;  Taittiriya 


Samhita,  ii.  1,  3,  2,  etc. ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxi.  22,  etc.  ;  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana,  xiii.  5,  18,  etc. 


2.  R§abha,  king  of  the  Sviknas,  appears  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana1  with  the  patronymic  Yajnatura,  as  one  of  those 
who  performed  an  Asvamedha  or  horse  sacrifice.  He  is  also 
mentioned  there2  as  having  probably  been  the  source  of  a 
saying  of  Gauriviti  Saktya's. 

1  xiii.  5,  4,  15.     Cf.  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  9,  8-10. 

2  xii.  8,  3,  7. 

3.  Rsabha  is  mentioned  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana  (vii.  17) 
as  a  son  of  Visvamitra. 


Rsi,  '  seer,'  is  primarily  a  composer  of  hymns  to  the  gods. 
In  the  Rigveda1  reference  is  often  made  to  previous  singers 
and  to  contemporary  poets.  Old  poems  were  inherited  and 
refurbished  by  members  of  the  composer's  family,2  but  the 
great  aim  of  the  singers  was  to  produce  new  and  approved 
hymns.3     It  is  not  till  the  time  of  the   Brahmanas  that  the 


1  i.  1,  2  ;  45,  3  ;  viii.  43,  13,  etc. 

3  i.    109,    2  ; 

ii.    18,    3;    iii.    62,    7; 

2  i.  89,  3;  96,  2;  iii.  39,  2;  viii.  6, 

vi.   50,  6  ;   vii. 

J4.  4 ;  93>   !  i  vin-  23» 

II.  43;  76,  6,  etc. 

14,  etc. 

8—2 


u6 


SEERS 


[  W 


composition  of  hymns  appears  to  have  fallen  into  disuse,4 
though  poetry  was  still  produced,  for  example,  in  the  form  of 
Gathas,  which  the  priests  were  required  to  compose  them- 
selves5 and  sing  to  the  accompaniment  of  the  lute  at  the 
sacrifice.  The  Rsi  was  the  most  exalted  of  Brahmanas,6  and 
his  skill,  which  is  often  compared  with  that  of  a  carpenter,7 
was  regarded  as  heaven-sent.8  The  Purohita,  whether  as  Hotr 
or  as  Brahman  (see  Rtvij),  was  a  singer.9  No  doubt  the  Rsis 
were  normally10  attached  to  the  houses  of  the  great,  the  petty 
kings  of  Vedic  times,  or  the  nobles  of  the  royal  household. 
Nor  need  it  be  doubted  that  occasionally11  the  princes  them- 
selves essayed  poetry :  a  Rajanyarsi,  the  prototype  of  the  later 
Rajarsi  or  *  royal  seer,'  who  appears  in  the  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana,12  though  he  must  be  mythical  as  Oldenberg13 
points  out,  indicates  that  kings  cultivated  poetry14  just  as  later 
they  engaged  in  philosophic  disputations.15  Normally,  how- 
ever, the  poetical  function  is  Brahminical,  Visamitra  and  others 
not  being  kings,  but  merely  Brahmanas,  in  the  Rigveda. 

In  the  later  literature  the  Rsis  are  the  poets  of  the  hymns 
preserved  in  the  Samhitas,  a  Rsi  being  regularly16  cited  when 
a  Vedic  Samhita  is  quoted.  Moreover,  the  Rsis  become  the 
representatives  of  a  sacred  past,  and  are  regarded  as  holy  sages, 


4  Geldner,  Vedische  Studien,  2,  151. 

5  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  4,  2,  8; 

3.  5- 

6  Rv.  ix.  96,  6,  etc.  Cf.  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  xii.  4,  4,  6,  where  pre- 
eminence is  assigned  to  a  Brahmana 
descended  from  a  Rsi. 

7  Rv.  i.  130,  6;  v.  2,  11  ;  29,  15;  73, 
10 ;  x.  39,  14.  So  a  poet  is  a  Ka.ru 
(if  from  kr,  '  make,'  but  usually  derived 
from  kr,  '  commemorate '),  and  makes 
(kr,  Rv.  ii.  39,  8 ;  viii.  62,  4)  as  well  as 
creates  (jan,  Rv.  vii.  15,  4;  viii.  88,  4) 
hymns. 

8  Rv.  i.  37,  4  ;  vii.  36,  1.9;  viii.  32, 
27  5  57.  6,  etc. 

9  Rv.  i.  151,  7;  Geldner,  op.  cit.,  2, 
153  ;  Oldenberg,  Religion  des  Veda,  380. 

10  Geldner,  op.  cit.,  2,  154,  cites  the 
Danastutis  as  characteristic  of  princes 


in  the  tradition  of  the   Brhaddevata, 
etc. 

11  Ibid.,  154. 

12  xii.  12,  6,  etc. 

13  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  45,  235,  n.  3. 

14  Later  on  it  was  deemed  quite 
normal  and  natural.  See  the  story  of 
Rathaviti  Darbhya,  or  Dalbhya,  him- 
self a  royal  seer,  and  Taranta  and 
Purumilha,  seers  and  also  kings,  in 
Brhaddevata,  v.  50  et  seq. 

15  Cf.  Garbe,  Philosophy  of  Ancient 
India,  73  et  seq. ;  Deussen,  Philosophy  of 
the  Upanisads,  16  et  seq.;  Keith,  Aitareya 
Ay  any  oka,  50. 

16  Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  25 ;  viii.  26 ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  7,  4,  4 ;  ii.  2, 
3,  6 ;  5,  1,  4 ;  vi.  1,  1,  1,  etc.  ;  Nirukta, 
vii.  3,  etc. 


B§is  ]  SEERS— GREAT  BEAR  117 

whose  deeds  are  narrated  as  if  they  were  the  deeds  of  gods  or 
Asuras.17  They  are  typified  by  a  particular  group  of  seven,18 
mentioned  four  times  in  the  Rigveda,19  several  times  in  the 
later  Samhitas,20  and  enumerated  in  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad21  as  Gotama,  Bharadvaja,  Visvamitra,  Jamadagni, 
Vasistha,  Kasyapa,  and  Atri.  In  the  Rigveda  itself  Kutsa,22 
Atri,23  Rebha,24  Agastya,25  the  Kusikas,26  Vasistha,27  Vyasva,28 
and  others  appear  as  Rsis;  and  the  Atharvaveda29  contains  a 
long  list,  including  Angiras,  Agasti,  Jamadagni,  Atri,  Kasyapa, 
Vasistha,  Bharadvaja,  Gavisthira,  Visvamitra,  Kutsa,  Kaksivant, 
Kanva,  Medhatithi,  Trisoka,  Usana.  Kavya,  Gotama,  and 
Mudgala. 

Competition  among  the  bards  appears  to  have  been  known. 
This  is  one  of  the  sides  of  the  riddle  poetry  (Brahmodya)  that 
forms  a  distinctive  feature30  of  the  Vedic  ritual  of  the  Asva- 
medha,  or  horse  sacrifice.  In  the  Upanisad  period  such 
competitions  were  quite  frequent.  The  most  famous  was  that 
of  Yajnavalkya,  which  was  held  at  the  court  of  Janaka  of 
Videha,  as  detailed  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,31  and 
which  was  a  source  of  annoyance  to  Ajatasatru  of  Kasl.32 
According  to  an  analogous  practice,  a  Brahmana,  like  Uddalaka 
Aruni,  would  go  about  disputing  with  all  he  came  across,  and 
compete  with  them  for  a  prize  of  money.33 


17  Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  17 ;  ii.  19 ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  6,  2,  7,  etc. 

18  Cf.  Indische  Studien,  8,  167. 

19  iv.  42,  8;  x.  109,  4;   130,  7;  Mac- 
donell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  144. 

20  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xiv.  24  ;  Av. 
xi.  1,  1.  24  ;  xii.  1,  39,  etc. 

21  ii.  2,  6. 
2-  i.  106,  6. 
88  i-  117.  3- 

24  i.  117.  4. 

25  i.  179,  6. 

26  iii.  53,  10. 

27  vii.  33,  13. 

28  viii.  23,  16. 


29  iv.  29.     Cf.  xviii.  3,  15.  16. 

30  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  345, 
346;  Bloomfield,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  15,  172 ;  Religion  des 
Veda,  216  et  seq. 

31  iii.  1,  1  et  seq. 

32  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  1,  1 
et  seq. ;  Kausitaki  Upanisad,  iv.  1  et  seq. 

33  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  4,  1, 
1  et  seq. ;  Gopatha  Brahmana,  i.  3, 
8  et  seq. ;  Geldner,   Vedische  Studien,  2, 

185.  344- 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  340- 
347 ;  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  3,  120  et 
seq. 


R§is. — The  term  '  Seven  Rsis  '  denotes  the  '  Great  Bear '  (see 
1.  Rksa)    in  one  passage   of  the    Rigveda,1  and   occasionally 

1    X.  82,   2. 


u8 


SPEAR— NAMES 


[Brti 

later.2     This  is  probably  a  secondary  use,  instead  of  the  seven 
Rksas,  brought  about  by  the  frequent  mention  of  the  seven  Rsis. 

2,  4  ;  xiii.  8,  i,  g  ;  Nirukta,  x.  26, 


2  Av.  vi.  40,  1  (where,  however, 
Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharva- 
veda,  310,  merely  renders  it  as  '  seven 
seers,'  and  appears  not  to  take  it  in  a 
technical  sense) ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 


11.  1 
etc. 


Cf.  Hi\\ebra.ndt, Vedischc  My  thologie,  3, 
422;  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v.;  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  144. 


Rsti  is  a  term  frequently  employed  in  the  Rigveda 1  to  desig- 
nate a  weapon  held  in  the  hands  of  the  Maruts,  and  doubtless 
meant  to  indicate  lightning.  That  it  denotes  a  spear  in  mortal 
warfare,  as  Zimmer2  thinks,  is  not  shown  by  a  single  passage.3 


1  Rv.  i.  37,  1;  64,  4.  8;  166,  4; 
v.  52,  6;  54,  11;  57,  6;  viii.  20,  11. 
Indra  has  a  Rsti  in  Rv.  i.  169,  3  (cf. 
Av.  iv.  37,  8).  Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic 
Mythology,  p.  79. 

2  Altindisches  Leben,  301. 


3  Rv.  i.  167,  3;  vii.  55,  2;  viii.  28,  5; 
x.  87,  7.  24  are  all  mythological  or 
contain  similes. 

Cf.  Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities^ 
221. 


Rsti-sena  is  mentioned  in  the  Nirukta1  as  an  explanation  of 
the  patronymic  Arstisena,  but  nothing  else  is  known  of  him. 

1  ii.  11.     Cf.  Sieg,  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  130,  136. 

Rsya-grnga  appears  as  a  teacher,  pupil  of  Kasyapa,  and  as 
bearing  the  patronymic  Kasyapa  in  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad 
Brahmana1  and  in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana.2  The  more  correct 
spelling  of  the  name  is  Rsya-srriga.3 


1  iii.  40,   1  (in  a  Vamsa,   or  list  of 
teachers). 

2  Indische  Studien,  4,  374,  385. 

3  The  later  legend  connected  with 
the  name   may  contain  old  elements 


(see  Liiders,  Die  Sage  von  Rshyasriiga, 
1897 >  Von  Schroeder,  Mysterium  und 
Mimus,  292-301),  but  it  is  not  known  to 
any  Vedic  text. 


Eka-dyu  is  mentioned  as  a  poet  in  one  hymn  of  the  Rigveda.1 

1  viii.  80,  10.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  112. 

Eka-yavan  Gam-dama  is  a  man  mentioned  in  the  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana  x  and  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana.2 


1  xxi.  14,  20. 

3  ii.  7,  11  (Kamdama).1- 

Cf.   Weber,   Indische  Studien,  i.   32 


Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the  Connecticut 
Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15,  69. 


Edaka  ] 


KING—L UNA R  DA  Y— INSECT— RA M 


119 


Eka-raj,  '  sole  ruler,'  '  monarch,'  seems  to  mean  no  more 
than  '  king.'  In  the  Rigveda1  the  term  is  used  metaphorically 
only.  But  it  is  found  with  the  literal  sense  in  the  Aitareya 
Brahmana,2  as  well  as  in  the  Atharvaveda.3 


1  viii.  37,  3. 
3  viii.  15. 


6  111.  4,  1. 

Cf.  Weber,  Rajasuya,  141 


Ekayana  denotes  some  object  of  study  in  the  Chandogya 
Upanisad.1  The  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  renders  it  '  doctrine 
{ay ana)  of  unity  '  (eka),  '  monotheism,'  while  Max  Miiller  prefers 
'ethics,'  and  Monier- Williams  in  his  Dictionary  'worldly 
wisdom.'2 


1  vn.  1,  2.  4 ;  2,  1  ;  7,  1. 

2  Max  Miiller  and  Monier- Williams 
thus    follow   Sankara's    interpretation 


as  niti-sastra,  'moral  teaching.'  Cf. 
Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  267,  484  ; 
Little,  Grammatical  Index,  43. 


Ekastaka. — That  Astaka  is  the  eighth  day  after  the  full 
moon  appears  clearly  from  the  Atharvaveda.1  Ekastaka,  or 
1  sole  Astaka.,'  must  denote  not  merely  any  Astaka,  but  some 
particular  one.  Sayana,  in  his  commentary  on  the  Atharva- 
veda,2 in  which  a  whole  hymn  celebrates  the  Ekastaka,  fixes 
the  date  meant  by  the  term  as  the  eighth  day  in  the  dark  half 
of  the  month  of  Magna  (January — February).  The  Ekastaka 
is  declared  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita3  to  be  the  time  for  the 
consecration  (dtksd)  of  those  who  are  going  to  perform  a  year- 
long sacrifice.    See  also  Masa. 


1  xv.    16,   2.     Cf.    Satapatha   Brah- 
mana, vi.  2,  2,  23 ;  4,  2,  10. 
-  iii.  10. 
:J  vii.  4,  S,   1.     Cf.  iii.  3,  8,  4  ;  iv.  3, 


11,  1;  v.  7,   2,  2;    Paiicavimsa  Brah- 
mana, v.  9,  4. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  365  ; 
Weber,  Naxatra,  2,  341,  342. 


Ejatka  is  the  name  of  an  insect  in  the  Atharvaveda.1 

1  v.  23,  7.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  98;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  262. 


Edaka  appears  to  denote  a  '  vicious  ram  '  in  the  Satapatha  * 
and  Jaiminiya2  Brahmanas. 

1  xii.  4,  1,  4;  cf.  ii.  5,  2,  15.  I  Oriental  Society ,  23,  332).    Cf.  Eggelingj 

2  i.   51,    4   (Journal  of  the  American   \  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  44,  178. 


i2o  DEER— SUN-HORSE— NAME  [  Enl 

Eni  denotes  the  '  female  antelope '  in  the  later  Samhitas,1 
perhaps  as  the  feminine  of  Eta. 

1  Av.  v.  14,  11  ;  Taittinya  Samhita,  I  iii.  14,  17  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv. 
v-    5.     15,     1;     Maitrayani    Samhita,    I  36;  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  82. 

Eta  in  the  plural  {etah)  denotes  the  steeds  of  the  Maruts, 
being  a  swift  species  of  deer,  which  are  mentioned  several 
times  in  the  Rigveda,1  and  the  skins  of  which  are  also  said  to 
be  worn  by  the  Maruts  on  their  shoulders.2  The  epithet  prthu- 
budhna,  once  applied  to  them  in  the  Rigveda,3  and  variously- 
interpreted  as  k  broad-hoofed,'4  '  broad-chested,'5  and  '  broad  in 
the  hinder  part,'6  seems  to  indicate  that  they  were  not  gazelles.7 

1  i.    165,    2  ;    169,    6.    7  ;    v.   54,    5 ;    1       4  By  Grassman  and  Zimmer. 


x.  77,  2. 

2  Rv.  i.  166,  10.   Cf.  Roth,  St.  Peters- 
burg Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  i.  169,  6. 


5  Griffith,    Hymns    of    the    Rigveda, 

1.  235- 

6  Monier- Williams,  Dictionary,  s.v. 

7  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  83. 


1.  Etasa  is  in  several  passages  of  the  Rigveda,1  according  to 
Roth2  the  name  of  a  protege  whom  Indra  helped  against  the 
sun-god  Surya.  But  in  all  these  passages  Etasa  seems  merely 
to  designate  the  horse  of  the  sun. 


i.  6f,  15;  iv.  30,  6;  v.  29,  5.^/r«>-jfl       8  MacdoneW,  Vedic  Mythology,  pp.  149, 


'2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  \   150. 


2.  Etasa  is  in  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana1  the  name  of  a  sage 
who  is  said  to  have  cursed  his  children  because  they  interrupted 
him  in  the  midst  of  a  rite ;  hence  the  Aitasayanas  (descendants 
of  Etasa)  are  declared  to  be  the  worst  of  the  Bhrgus.  The 
same  story  appears  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana,2  where,  how- 
ever, the  sage's  name  is  Aitasa,  and  the  Aitasayanas  are 
described  as  the  worst  of  the  Aurvas. 

1  xxx.  5. 

2  vi.    33.     Cf.    Hillebrandt,    Vedische  Mythologie,  2,  173. 

Edidhisuh-pati  is  a  term  occurring  only  in  the  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,1  where  the  commentator  Mahidhara  interprets  it  as 

1  xxx.  9. 


Aitareya  ]  CASTOR-OIL  PLANT— NAMES  121 

meaning  the  '  husband  of  a  younger  sister  married  before  the 
elder  sister.'  Though  this  sense  is  probably  correct,  the  form 
is  doubtless,  as  Delbriick2  points  out,  corrupt.   See  Didhisupati. 

2  Die  indogermanischen  Verwandschaftsnamen,  569,  n.  1. 

E  ran  da,  the  castor-oil  plant  (Ricinus  communis),  is  first 
mentioned  in  the  Sankhayana  Aranyaka  (xii.  8). 

Evavada  is  regarded  by  Ludwig1  in  a  very  obscure  passage 
of  the  Rigveda2  as  the  name  of  a  singer  beside  Ksatra,  Manasa, 
and  Yajata.  The  commentator  Sayana  also  interprets  the 
word  as  a  proper  name.  Roth,3  however,  considers  it  to  be  an 
adjective  meaning  '  truthful.' 

1  Translation    of    the    Rigveda,    3,    I       2  v.  44,  10. 
138.  3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


AI. 

AikadaSaksa  Manu-tantavya  appears  in  the  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana1 as  a  king  who  observed  the  rule  of  sacrificing  when  the 
sun  had  risen  (udita-homin),  and  as  a  contemporary  of  Nagarin 
Jana-sruteya. 

1  v.  30.     Cf.  Weber,  Indischc  Studien,  1,  223. 

Aiksvaka,  *  descendant  of  Iksvaku,'  is  the  patronymic  borne 
by  Purukutsa  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.1  Another  Aiksvaka 
is  Varsni,  a  teacher  mentioned  in  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad 
Brahmana.2  A  king  Hariscandra  Vaidhasa  Aiksvaka  is  known 
to  the  Aitareya  Brahmana,3  and  Tryaruna  is  an  Aiksvaka  in 
the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.4 

1  xiii.  5,  4,  5.  3  vii.  13,  16. 

2  i.  5,  4.  4  xiii.  3,  12. 

Aitareya,  perhaps  a  patronymic  from  Itara,  though  the 
commentator  Sayana1  regards  the  word  as  a  metronymic  from 

1  Cited  by  Aufrecht,  Aitareya  Brahmana,  3. 


122  NAMES— LEGENDISTS      [  AitaSa,  Aitasayana 

Itara,  is  an  epithet  of  Mahidasa  in  the  Aitareya  Aranyaka2  and 
the  Chandogya  Upanisad.3 


■  u.  i,  »;  3.  7- 

3  iii.  16,  7.  Cf.  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  1,  389.  The  form  Aitareyin 
occurs  in  the  Anupada  Sutra,  viii.  1  ; 


Asvalayana  Srauta  Sutra,  i.  3,  etc.  ; 
and  a  Mahaitareya  in  Asvalayana 
Grhya  Sutra,  iii.  4,  4,  etc. 


Aitasa,  Aitasayana.     See  EtaSa,  Etasayana.     The  Aitasa- 
pralapa,  or  *  Discourse  of  Aitasa,'  is  a  part  of  the  Atharvaveda.1 

1  xx.  129-132.     Cf.  Brhaddevata,  viii.  101,  with  Macdonell's  note. 


Aiti-hasika. — This  term  was  applied  to  the  people  who 
explained  the  Vedic  hymns  by  treating  them  as  legendary 
history  (Itihasa),  as  Sieg1  shows  by  the  passages  of  the 
Nirukta,2  where  their  views  are  opposed  to  those  of  the 
Nairuktas,  who  relied  rather  on  etymology.  Sieg3  also  seems 
right  in  finding  them  in  the  Naidanas  of  the  Nirukta  :4  it  is 
possible  that  their  textbook  was  called  the  Nidana. 


1  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  13  et  seq. 

2  ii.  16  ;  xii.  1,  etc. 


3  Op.  cit.,  29. 

4  vi.  9 ;  vii.  6. 


Aibhavata,  '  descendant  of  Ibhavant,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
PratidarSa.1 

1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xii.  8,  2,  3. 


Airavata,  'son  of  Iravant,'  is  the  patronymic  of  Dhrtarastra, 
as  a  snake  demon,1  in  the  Atharvaveda2  and  the  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana.3 


1  In  the  later  literature  Airavata  is 
the  elephant  of  Indra  :  perhaps  con- 
nected with  this  Vedic  snake  demon, 


as    naga    means    both    '  serpent  '    and 
■  elephant.' 


viii.  10,  29. 


xxv.  15,  3. 


Ailusa,  •  descendant  of  Ilusa,'  is  the  patronymic  of  Kavasa. 


Aisa-krta.    See  Sitibahu. 


Otu] 


NAMES— WOOF 


23 


Aisa-vlra. — The  Satapatha  Brahmana  once1  refers  to  the 
Aisa-viras  as  officiating  at  a  sacrifice,  with  the  implication  that 
they  were  bad  sacrificers.  Sayana  regards  the  word  as  a 
proper  name  ('  descendants  of  Esavira '),  denoting  the  members 
of  a  despised  family.  But  Roth  may  be  right  in  explaining 
the  word  both  in  the  passage  mentioned  above  and  elsewhere 
as  meaning  '  weak  '2  or  '  insignificant  man.'3 


xi.  2,  7,  32. 


2  In  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v. 

3  In  Bohtlingk's  Dictionary,  s.v. 
('  one  who  wishes  to  be  a  man,  but  is 
not').    Cf.  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ix.  5, 


1,  16 ;  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  i.  1,  where, 
however,  Lindner's  edition  reads  saisa 
viva  iva.  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien, 
1 ,  228 ;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the 
East,  44,  45. 


Aisumata,   *  descendant  of  Isumant,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
Trata  in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana.1 

1  Indische  Studien,  4,  372. 


O. 

Ogana  is  a  word  occurring  only  once,  as  a  plural,  in  the 
Rigveda,1  where  it  appears  to  indicate  persons  hostile  to  the 
seer  of  the  hymn,  and  apparently  opposed  to  the  Aryan  religion. 
Ludwig2  regards  the  term  as  the  proper  name  of  a  people,  but 
Pischel3  thinks  that  it  is  merely  an  adjective  meaning  'weak' 
(ogana  =  ava-gana),  as  in  Pali. 

1  x.  89,  15.  "2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  5,  209. 

3  Vedische  Sttcdien,  2,  191,  192. 


Otu  in  Vedic  literature1  denotes  the  'woof  in  weaving,  and 
corresponds  to  Tantu,  '  the  warp,'  the  roots  va,2  '  to  weave,' 
and  tan,3  *  to  stretch,'  from  which  these  two  terms  are  derived, 
being  used  in  parallel  senses.  In  the  process  of  weaving  a 
shuttle  (Tasara)  was  used.  The  '  weaver '  is  termed  vdya,4  and 
the  '  loom '  veman.5    A  wooden  peg  (Mayukha)  was  used  to 


1  Rv.  vi.  9,  2.   3 ;   Av.  xiv.   2,  51  ; 
Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  1,  1,4,  etc. 
3  Rv.  vi.  9,  2,  etc. 


3  Vajasaneyi     Samhita,     xix.     80 
Rv.  x.  130,  2 ;  Av.  x.  7,  43,  etc. 

4  Rv.  x.  26,  6,  etc. 

5  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xix.  83. 


124 


MESS  OF  GRAIN— PLAIT 


Odana 


stretch  the  web  on,  while  lead  was  employed  as  a  weight  to 
extend  it.6 

The  work  of  weaving  was  probably  the  special  care  of 
women.7  A  metaphor  in  the  Atharvaveda8  personifies  Night 
and  Day  as  two  sisters  weaving  the  web  of  the  year,  the 
nights  serving  as  warp,  the  days  as  woof. 


6  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xix.  80. 

7  Av.  x.  7,42;  xiv.2,51.  C/.Rv.i.92,3. 

8  x.    7,    42  ;    Taittiriya    Brabmana, 
".  5.  5.  3. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  254, 
255  ;  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  5,  465. 


Odana  is  a  common  expression1  denoting  a  mess,  usually 
of  grain  cooked  with  milk  (ksira-pakam  odanatri).2  Special 
varieties  are  mentioned,  such  as  the  '  milk-mess '  (ksiraudana),* 
the  '  curd-mess '  (dadhy-odana) ,4  the  '  bean-mess  '  (mudgaudana),5 
the  '  sesame-mess  '  (tilaudana)  ,6  the  'water-mess'  (udaudana),7 
the  '  meat-mess '  (mamsaudana)*  the  '  ghee-mess  '  (ghrtaudana),9 
etc. 


1  Rv.  viii.  69,  14,  etc.  ;  Av.  iv.  14, 
7,  etc. 

2  Rv.  viii.  77,  10. 

3  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  5,  3,  4  ; 
x*-  5,  7,  5 ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad, 
vi.  4,  13. 

4  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  4, 
14. 


5  Sankhayana  Aranyaka,  xii.  8. 

6  Ibid.  ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad, 
vi.  4,  15. 

7  Ibid. ,  vi.  4,  15. 

8  Ibid.,  vi.  4,  16;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, xi.  5,  7,  5 ;  Sankhayana  Aran- 
yaka, xii.  8. 

9  Sankhayana  Aranyaka,  xii.  8. 


Opasa  is  a  word  of  somewhat  doubtful  sense,  occurring  in 
the  Rigveda,1  the  Atharvaveda,2  and  occasionally  later.3  It 
probably  means  a  '  plait '  as  used  in  dressing  the  hair,  especially 
of  women,4  but  apparently,  in  earlier  times,5  of  men  also. 
The  goddess  Sinlvall  is  called  svaupasd,6  an  epithet  of  doubtful 
sense,  from  which  Zimmer7  conjectures  that   the  wearing  of 


Cf.  i.  173,  6  ;  viii.  14,  5 


1  x.  85, 
ix.  71,  1. 

2  vi.  138,  1.  2  ;  ix.  3,  8,  where  it  is 
applied  metaphorically  in  describing 
the  roof  of  a  house. 

3  PancavimSa  Brahmana,  iv.  1,  1. 

4  Av.  vi.  138,  1.  2. 

5  Rv.  i.  173,  6;  viii.  14,  5. 


6  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  1,  5,  3; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  7,  5  ;  Vaja- 
saneyi Samhita,  xi.  56.  The  reading 
is  uncertain.  Bloomfield  (see  below) 
assumes  sv-opaxa  to  be  the  correct  form 
('  having  a  fair  opaia '). 

7  Altindisches  Leben,  264. 


Osadhi ] 


PLANT 


125 


false  plaits  of  hair  was  not  unknown  in  Vedic  times.  What 
was  the  difference  between  the  braids  referred  to  in  the 
epithets  prthu-stuka,8  '  having  broad  braids,'  and  visita-stuka,9 
1  having  loosened  braids,'  and  the  Opasa  cannot  be  made  out 
from  the  evidence  available.  Geldner10  thinks  that  the  original 
sense  was  '  horn,'  and  that  when  the  word  applies  to  Indra11 
it  means  '  diadem.' 


8  Rv.  x.  86,  8. 

9  Rv.  i.  167,  5  (of  Rodasi). 
10  Vedische    Studien,    1,    131, 

Pancavim^a  Brahmana,  xiii.  4, 
dvy-opasah  is  used  of  cattle ; 
sense  may  be  figurative. 


quoting 
3 ,  where 
but  the 


11  Rv.  viii.  14,  5. 

Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda,  538,  539  ;  Whitney,  Translation 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  348. 


Osadhi. — Roughly  speaking,  the  vegetable  world  is  divided 
in  Vedic  literature1  between  Osadhi  or  Virudh  '  plants '  and 
Vana  or  Vrksa  '  trees.'  Osadhi  is  employed  in  opposition  to 
Virudh  to  denote  plants  as  possessing  a  healing  power  or  some 
other  quality  useful  to  men,  while  Virudh  is  rather  a  generic 
term  for  minor  vegetable  growths,  but  sometimes,2  when  occur- 
ring beside  Osadhi,  signifies  those  plants  which  do  not  possess 
medicinal  properties. 

A  list  of  the  minor  parts  of  which  a  plant  is  made  up  is  given 
in  the  later  Samhitas.3  It  comprises  the  root  {milla),  the 
panicle  (tfila),  the  stem  (kdnda),  the  twig  (valsa),  the  flower 
(puspa),  and  the  fruit  (phala),  while  trees4  have,  in  addition,  a 
corona  (skandha),  branches  {sdkha),  and  leaves  (parna).  The 
Atharvaveda5  gives  an  elaborate,  though  not  very  intelligible, 
division  of  plants  into  those  which  expand  (pra-strnatth),  are 
bushy  {stambinih),  have  only  one  sheath  (eka-sungdh),  are 
creepers    (pra-tanvatih),    have    many    stalks    (amsumatih),    are 


1  Rv.  x.  97  and  passim.  Osadhi- 
vanaspati  is  a  frequent  compound,  from 
the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (vi.  1,  1,  12) 
onwards.  The  medicinal  properties  of 
plants  account  for  the  epithet  '  of 
manifold  powers'  (nanci-virya)  applied 
to  them  in  Av.  xii.  1,2. 

2  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  3,  2. 


3  Ibid.,  vii.  3,  19,  1  ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxii.  28. 

4  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  3,  20,  1. 
Cf.  Rv.  i.  32,  5  ;  Av.  x.  7,  38. 

5  viii.  7,  4,  with  Whitney's  notes. 
Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, 579 ;  Henry,  Les  livres  VIII.  et 
IX.  de  l' Atharvaveda,  58  et  seq. 


126 


PLANT— NAMES 


[  Auksagandhi 


jointed  (kandinzk),  or  have  spreading  branches  (vi-sakhdh).  In 
the  Rigveda6  plants  are  termed  ■  fruitful '  (phalinih),  '  blossom- 
ing '  (puspavatih) ,  and  'having  flowers'  (pra-sfivanh). 

6  x-  97.  3-   *5-     Cf.   Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  57. 


AU. 

Auksa-gfandhi  ('  having  the  smell  of  bull's  grease  ')  appears 
in  the  Atharvaveda1  as  the  name  of  an  Apsaras,  beside  other 
names,  of  which  Guggfulu  and  Naladi  clearly  indicate  plants. 
This  name,  therefore,  presumably  also  denotes  some  sort  of 
fragrant  plant.  Auksa  in  the  same  Samhita2  means  'bull's 
grease  '  (from  uksan,  '  bull '). 


1  iv.  37.  3 

2  ii.  36,  7. 

Cf.   Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  69; 
Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 


324  ;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  211,  212,  and  on  Auksa, 
ibid.,  82,  83. 


Augra-sainya,  'descendant  of  Ugrasena,'  is  the  patronymic 
of  King  YuddhamSrausti  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana  (viii.  21). 


Audanya,  'descendant  of  Udanya  or  Odana,'  is  the  patro- 
nymic in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  of  Mundibha,  who  is 
credited  with  inventing  an  expiation  for  the  crime  of  slaying  a 
Brahmin.  In  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana2  the  name  appears  in 
the  form  of  Audanyava. 


xiu.  3,  5,  4. 


Dictionary,     s.v.     Odana  ;     Eggeling, 


iii.  9,   15,  3.     Cf.    St.    Petersburg   |  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  44,  341,  n.  1. 


Audamaya  is  Weber's1  reading  of  the  name  of  the  Atreya. 
who  was  Purohita  of  Ahga  Vairocana,  according  to  the 
Aitareya  Brahmana.2  Aufrecht,  however,  in  his  edition  more 
probably  takes  the  correct  form  of  the  name  to  be  Udamaya. 

1  Jndische  Studien,  1,  228. 

2  viii.  22.     Cf.  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  Udamaya. 


Aupamanyava  ]  PATRONYMICS  127 

Auda-vahi,  'descendant  of  Udavaha,'  appears  in  the  first 
two  Vamsas  (lists  of  teachers)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad1 
as  a  teacher  of  Bharadvaja. 

1  ii.  5,  20  ;  iv.  5,  26  (in  the  Madhyamdina  recension). 

Aud-umbarayana,  '  descendant  of  Udumbara,'  is  the  patro- 
nymic of  a  grammarian  in  the  Nirukta  (i.  1). 

Aud-dalaki,  '  descendant  of  Uddalaka,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
the  teacher  variously  called  Asurbinda1  or  Kusurubinda,2  and 
of  Svetaketu.3 


1  Jaiminlya  Brahmana,  i.  75  {Journal 
of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  23,  327). 

■  Sadvimsa  Brahmana,  i.  16  ;  Panca- 
vimsa  Brahmana,  xxii.  15,  10. 


3  Satapatha  Brahmana,  hi.  4,  3,  13  ; 
iv.  2,  5,  15.  He  is  perhaps  also  meant 
in  Katha  Upanisad,  i.  11. 


Aud-bhari,  '  descendant  of  Udbhara,'  is  the  patronymic  in 
the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (xi.  8,  4,  6)  of  Khandika,  teacher  of 
Ke&n. 

Aupa-jandhani,  'descendant  of  Upajandhana,'  is  the  patro- 
nymic of  a  teacher  mentioned  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad1 
as  a  pupil  of  Asuri,  and  also  2  as  a  pupil  of  Sayakayana. 

1  ii.  6,  3 ;  iv.  6,  3  (in  Vamsas). 

2  iv.  5,  27  (in  the  Madhyamdina  recension). 

Aupa-tasvini,  '  descendant  of  Upatasvina,'  is  the  patronymic 
of  Rama  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (iv.  6,  1,  7). 

Aupa-manyava,  'descendant  of  Upamanyu/  is  the  patro- 
nymic of  various  persons:  see  Kamboja,  Pracinai§ala,  Maha- 

sala.  The  best  known  bearer  of  the  name  is  the  grammarian 
who  disagreed  with  the  onomatopoetic  theory  of  the  derivation 
of  names,  and  who  is  mentioned  by  Yaska.1  An  Aupamanyavi- 
putra  occurs  in  the  Baudhayana  Srauta  Sutra2  as  a  teacher. 

1  i.  1  ;  ii.  2.  6.  11,  etc.  2  xxii.  1  et  seq. 


Ji 


128  PATRONYMICS  [  Aupara 

Aupara,  *  descendant  of  Upara,'  is  the  patronymic  of  Danda 
in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita  (vi.  2,  9,  4). 


Aupa-vesl,  *  descendant  of  Upavesa,'  is  the  patronymic  borne 
by  Aruna,  father  of  Uddalaka.1 

1  See  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxvi.  10,  and  Aruna. 

Aupasvati-putra,  '  son  of  a  female  descendant  of  Upa- 
svant '  (?),  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Papasaplputra  in  a  Vamsa 
(list  of  teachers)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.1 

1  vi.  5,  1  (only  in  the  Kanva  recension). 

Aupavi  ('  descendant  of  Upava ')  Jana-Sruteya  ('  descendant 
of  Janasruti '),  appears  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  and  the 
Maitrayani  Samhita2  as  a  sacrificer  who  used  to  offer  the 
Vajapeya  sacrifice  and  ascend  to  the  other  world. 

1  v.  1,  1,  5.  7. 

2  i.  4,  5.    Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  222,  223. 

Aupoditi,  '  descendant  of  Upodita,'  is  the  patronymic  applied 
in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita1  to  Tumifija,  and  in  the  Baudhayana 
Srauta  Sutra2  to  Gaupalayana,  son  of  Vyag-hrapad,  Sthapati 
('  general ')  of  the  Kurus.  In  the  form  of  Aupoditeya,  a  metro- 
nymic from  Upodita,  the  name  is  found  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana,3  where  the  Kanva  text  calls  him  Tuminja  Aupo- 
diteya Vaiyaghrapadya. 


1  i.  7,  2,  I. 

2  xx.  25. 

3  i.  Q,  3,  16. 


Cf.  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 
12,  271,  n.  2. 


Aurna-vabha,  *  descendant  of  tJrnavabhi.'  (1)  This  is  the 
name  of- a  pupil  of  Kaundinya  mentioned  in  a  Vams'a  (list  of 
teachers)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.1  (2)  A  teacher 
of  this  name  is  frequently  referred  to  in  the  Nirukta.  His 
explanations  in  two  passages 2  agree  with  those  of  the  Nairnktas 

1  iv.  5,  26  (Madhyamdina  recension).  2  vii.  15  ;  xii.  19. 


Aulundya  ] 


PATRONYMICS 


129 


or  etymological  school  of  interpreters  of  the  Rigveda.  In  other 
passages3  he  appears  rather  to  belong  to  the  school  of  the 
Aitihasikas,  who  relied  on  traditional  legends.  He  was  thus 
probably,  as  Sieg4  suggests,  an  eclectic. 


vi.  13  ;  xn.  1. 


4  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  13,  n.  1. 


Aurva,  '  descendant  of  Uru  or  Urva,'  appears  in  the  Rigveda1 
in  close  connexion  with  Bhrgu,  being  probably  a  Bhrgu 
himself.  As  in  one  passage  of  the  Aitareya  Brahmana,2  the 
descendants  of  Aitasa  are  called  the  worst  of  the  Aurvas,  while 
the  parallel  version  of  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana3  calls  them  the 
worst  of  the  Bhrgus,  the  Aurvas  must  have  been  a  branch  of 
the  larger  family  of  the  Bhrgus.  Aurva  himself  is  said  in  the 
Taittirlya  Samhita.4  to  have  received  offspring  from  Atri.  In 
the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana5  two  Aurvas  are  referred  to  as 
authorities.     See  also  Kutsa. 


1  Vlll.   102,  4. 

2  vi.  33. 

3  xxx.  5. 

4  vii.  1,  8,  1. 

5  xxi.    10,  6.     Hopkins,   Transactions 


of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and 
Sciences,  15,  54,  reads  urvau. 

Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie, 
2,  173,  n.  1. 


Aulana  is  a  word  occurring  in  a  single  passage  of  the 
Rigveda,1  where  it  may  possibly  be  a  patronymic  of  Samtanu 
as  a  *  descendant  of  Ula.'  Ludwig,2  however,  conjectures  that 
the  reading  should  be  '  Kaulana.'  Sieg3  regards  Aulana  as 
a  later  descendant4  of  Samtanu,  who  utilized  the  story  of 
Devapi's  rain-making  as  an  introduction  to  his  rain  hymn. 


166. 


1  x.  98,  II. 

2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3, 

3  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  141. 

4  Cf.  Say  ana  on  Rv.  x.  98,  11 :  Kuril- 


kula-jatah  Samtanavah,  '  a  descendant 
of  Samtanu,  born  in  the  family  of  the 
Kurus. ' 


Aulundya,    '  descendant   of  Ulunda,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
Supratita  in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana.1 


1  Indische  Studien,  4,  372. 


VOL. 


13° 


PATRONYMICS— METAL  POT— BIRD 


[  AuSija 


Augija,  '  descendant  of  Usij,'  is  a  patronymic  clearly  applied 
to  Kaksivant  in  the  Rigveda.1  It  is  also  applied  to  RjisVan,2 
but  Ludwig3  thinks  that  the  correct  reading  of  the  passage  in 
question  is  ausijasyarjisva,  l  Bjisvan,  son  of  Ausija.'  In  one 
verse4  Ausija  and  Kaksivant  are  both  mentioned,  but  in  such  a 
way  that  two  different  persons  must  apparently  be  meant.  In 
other  passages  where  the  patronymic  occurs  alone,  it  is  doubtful 
who  is  meant,  or  whether  a  proper  name  at  all  is  intended.5 
Kaksivant  Ausija  appears  also  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana6 
and  elsewhere. 


1  i.  18,  i. 

2  x.  99,  ii. 

3  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  143, 
149. 

4  Rv.  i.  112,  11. 

5  Rv.  i.  119,  9;  122,  4;  iv.  21,  6.  7; 


v.  41,  5;  vi.  4,  6.     Cf.  St.  Petersburg 
Dictionary,  s.v. 

6  xiv.  11,  16.  See  Hopkins,  Transac- 
tions of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts 
and  Sciences,  xv.  56,  n. ,  and  Kaksivant, 
n.  15. 


Austraksi,   '  descendant  of  Ustraksa,'  occurs  as  the  patro 
nymic  of  Sati  in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana.1 

1  Indische  Studicn,  4,  372.     Cf.  Weber,  Indian  Literature,  75. 


Kamsa,  a  word  denoting  a  '  pot  or  vessel  of  metal,'  occurs  in 
the  Atharvaveda  and  elsewhere.1 


1  Av.  x.  10,  5  ;  Aitareya  Brahmana, 
viii.    10  ;    Brhadaranyaka    Upanisad, 


vi.  3,  x,  etc.  ;  Nirukta,  vii.  23  ;  Sankha- 
yana  Aranyaka,  xii.  8. 


Kakara  occurs  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas1  as  the  name  of  a 
victim  at  the  horse  sacrifice  (Asvamedha).  It  probably  denotes 
some  '  sort  of  bird,'  as  rendered  by  the  commentator  Mahi- 
dhara.2 


1  Maitrayani    Samhita,    iii.    14,    1 ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xx.  24. 


2  On   Vajasaneyi    Samhita,    loc.    cit. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  94. 


Kakutha,  a  word  occurring  in  the  Maitrayani  Samhita.,1 
presumably  denotes  some  kind  of  animal.  According  to 
Bohtlingk,2  it  is  identical  with  Kakkata. 

1  iii.  14,  13.  2  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Kaksivant  ] 


CRAB— NAMES 


i3i 


Kakuha,  a  word  occurring  several  times  in  the  Rigveda,1  is 
understood  by  Roth2  to  designate  part  of  a  chariot,  perhaps  the 
seat.  Ludwig,3  again,  regards  it  in  one  passage4  as  the  proper 
name  of  a  Yadava  prince  who  took  spoil  from  Tirindira,  the 
Par£u,  but  this  view  is  hardly  probable.5  It  is,  on  the  whole, 
most  likely  that  the  word  always  means  '  chief,'  *  pre-eminent,' 
being  applied  as  an  epithet  to  horses,  chariots,  princes,  etc.6 
This  is  the  only  sense  given  by  Grassmann,7  and  later  adopted 
by  Roth.8 


1  i.  46,  3;   181    5 
iii.  54,  14  ;  v.  73,  7  ; 


i«4,3;  11.  34.  "I 
75,  4  ;  viii.  6,  48. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  2,  182  ; 
3,  160,  161 ;  5,  142. 

4  viii.  6,  48. 

5  Weber,  Episches  im  vedischen  Ritual, 
36,  37- 


6  So  certainly  in  Rv.  viii.  45,  14; 
ix.  67,  8  ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  3,  3, 
1.  2,  and  often  in  the  older  form 
kakubha. 

7  In  his  Lexicon,  s.v. 

8  In  Bohtlingk's  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Kakkata  denotes  the  '  crab  '  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas,1 
being  a  Prakritized  form  of  Karkata,  which  is  common  in  the 
later  literature.2  Roth,3  however,  takes  the  word  to  mean  a 
bird,  and  compares  Kakara.     See  also  Kakutha. 

1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  15,  1 
{where  Weber  has  katkata) ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxiv.  32. 


2  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  95. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Kaksa  is  the  name  of  two  men  mentioned  as  teachers  in  a    *vfaX 
Vamsa  (list  of  teachers)  of  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana. 
One  is  Kaksa  Varakya,  pupil  of  Prosthapada  Varakya,1  and 
the  other  Kaksa  Varaki2  or  Varakya,3  pupil  of  Daksa  Katya- 
yani  Atreya.     See  also  Urukaksa. 


in.  41, 


in.  41, 1. 


iv.  17,  I. 


'^/•Hi 


Kaksivant  is  the  name  of  a  Rsi  mentioned  frequently  in  the 
Rigveda,1  and  occasionally  elsewhere.2  He  appears  to  have 
been  a  descendant  of  a  female  slave  named  Usij.3  He  must 
have  been  a  Pajra  by  family,  as  he  bears  the  epithet  Pajriya,4 


1  i.  18,  1 ;  51,  13  ;  112,  11  ;  116,  7 ; 
117,  6;  126,  3;  iv.  26,  1;  viii.  9,  10; 
ix.  74,  8  ;  x.  25,  10 ;  61,  16. 

2  Av.  iv.  29,  5,  and  passages  noted 
below. 


3  Rv.  i.  18,  1 ;  perhaps  also  i.  112, 
11,  but  Ausija  may  there  be  a  separate 
name  (see  Auiija).  Cf.  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana,  xiv.  11,  16. 

4  Rv.  i.  116,  7  ;  117,  6. 

9—2 


132  KAKSIVANT— HERON  [  Kanka 

and  his  descendants  are  called  Pajras.5  In  a  hymn  of  the 
Rigveda6  he  celebrates  the  prince  Svanaya  Bhavya,  who 
dwelt  on  the  Sindhu  (Indus),  as  having  bestowed  magnificent 
gifts  on  him  ;  and  the  list  of  Narasamsas  ('  Praises  of  Heroes  ') 
in  the  Saiikhayana  Srauta  Sutra7  mentions  one  by  Kaksivant 
Ausija  in  honour  of  Svanaya  Bhavayavya.  In  his  old  age  he 
obtained  as  a  wife  the  maiden  Vrcaya.8  He  appears  to  have 
lived  to  be  a  hundred,9  the  typical  length  of  life  in  the  Vedas. 
He  seems  always  to  be  thought  of  as  belonging  to  the  past,  and 
in  a  hymn  of  the  fourth  book  of  the  Rigveda10  he  is  mentioned 
with  the  semi-mythical  Kutsa  and  Kavi  USanas.  Later,  also, 
he  is  a  teacher  of  bygone  days.11 

In  Vedic  literature  he  is  not  connected  with  Dirghatamas 
beyond  being  once  mentioned  along  with  him  in  a  hymn  of  the 
Rigveda.12  But  in  the  Brhaddevata 13  he  appears  as  a  son  of 
Dirghatamas  by  a  slave  woman,  Usij. 

Weber14  considers  that  Kaksivant  was  originally  a  Ksatriya, 
not  a  Brahmana,  quoting  in  favour  of  this  view  the  fact  that 
he  is  mentioned  beside  kings  like  Para  Atnara,  Vitahavya 
Srayasa,  and  Trasadasyu  Paurukutsya.15  But  that  these  are 
all  kings  is  an  unnecessary  assumption  :  these  persons  are 
mentioned  in  the  passages  in  question  undoubtedly  only  as 
famous  men  of  old,  to  whom  are  ascribed  mythical  sacrificial 
performances,  and  who  thus  gained  numerous  sons. 


5  Rv.  i.  126,  4. 

6  i.  126. 

7  xvi.  4,  5. 

8  Rv.  i.  51,  13. 

9  Rv.  ix.  74,  8. 

10  iv.  26,  1. 

11  Av.  iv.  29,  5  ;  xviii.  3, 15  ;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  i.  21,  6.  7  ;  Jaiminiya 
Upanisad  Brahmana,  ii.  6,  11. 

12  viii.  9,  10. 


13  iv.  11  et  seq. 

14  Episches  im  vedischen  Ritual,  22-25. 

15  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  6,  5,  3  ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxii.  3  ;  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana,  xxv.  16,  3.     Cf.  xiv.  11,  16. 

Cf.  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
M orgenlandischen  Gesellschaft,  42,  221, 
236,  n.  1  ;  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the 
Rigveda,  3,  102  ;  Geldner,  Rigveda, 
Kommentar,  23,  24. 


Kahka  is  the  name  of  a  bird,  usually  taken  to  mean  '  heron,'1 
but,  at  any  rate  in  some  passages,  rather  denoting  some  bird  of 
prey.2     It  first  appears  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas.3 

(kanka-cit,  an  altar  '  piled  in  the  form  of  a 
heron  ') ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  31  ; 


1  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  92. 

2  Roth,    St.  Petersburg  Dictionary 
s.v,    Cf.  Sankhayana  Aranyaka,  xii.  13 

3  Taittiriya    Samhita,    v.    4,    II,    J 


Maitrayani  Samhita,  hi.  14,  12  ;  Sama- 
veda,  ii.  9,  3,  6,  1. 


Kantakl-kari  ]  SCORPION-NA  ME— MA  T  1 33 

Kahkata  is  the  name  of  an  animal  mentioned  once  in  the 
Rigveda.1  According  to  Sayana  it  is  a  destructive  beast; 
perhaps,  as  Grassmann  renders  it,  a  '  scorpion.' 

1  i.  191,  1.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  98. 


Kaiikatlya  is  the  name  of  a  family  said  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana1  to  have  learned  from  Sandilya  the  piling  up  of  the 
sacrificial  fire  (agni-tayana).  In  the  Apastamba  Srauta  Sutra2 
a  Kankati  Brahmana,  no  doubt  the  textbook  of  the  school,  is 
referred  to.  It  may  have  been  identical  with  the  Chagaleya 
Brahmana,  cited  in  the  Baudhayana  Srauta  Sutra.3 


ix.  4,  4,  T7. 
xiv.  20,  4. 


3  xxv.  5.   Cf.  Caland,  Uber  das  rituelle 
Sutra  des  Baudhayana,  40. 


Kanka-parvan  ('  heron-jointed '  ?),  a  term  occurring  once  in 
the  Atharvaveda,1  is  applied  to  a  snake,  meaning  perhaps 
'  scorpion.'  As  the  Paippalada  recension  has  a  different  reading 
(ahga-parvanah) ,  the  passage  may  be  corrupt. 


1  vii.  56,  1.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches 
Leben,  94  ;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  426;  Bloomfield,  Hymns 


of   the    Atharvaveda,    553  ;    Bohtlingk, 
Dictionary,  s  v. 


Kata  denotes  a  '  mat,'  which  was  'made  of  reeds'  (vaitasa). 
The  maker  of  mats  from  reeds  (bidala-kdrl)  is  mentioned  in  the 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,2  and  the  process  of  splitting  reeds  for  the 
purpose  is  referred  to  in  the  Atharvaveda.3 


1  Taittiriya    Samhita.    v.    3,    12,    2. 
Cf.     Satapatha     Brahmana,     xiii.     3, 

1.  3- 

2  xxx.    8,    with    Mahidhara's    Com- 


mentary.     Bidala-kara  is  read  in  the 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  5,  1. 

3  vi.  138,  5. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  255. 


Kantaki-kari,  '  worker  in  thorns,'  is  one  of  the  victims  at 
the  human  sacrifice  (Purusamedha)  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.1 
No  doubt  the  thorns  were  cut  up  and  used  to  plait  mats  (Kata) 
or  to  stuff  cushions. 

1  xxx.  8.  The  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.4,  5,  1,  has  hantaka-kcira.  Cf.  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  255. 


134 


AN  ANCIENT  RSI—SOMA   VESSEL 


[  Kanva 


Kanva  is  the  name  of  an  ancient  Rsi  repeatedly  referred  to 
in  the  Kigveda  and  later.1  His  sons  and  descendants,2  the 
Kanvas,  are  also  often  mentioned,  especially  in  the  eighth 
book  of  the  Rigveda,  the  authorship  of  that  book,  as  well  as  of 
part  of  the  first,  being  attributed  to  this  family.  A  descendant 
of  Kanva  is  also  denoted  by  the  name  in  the  singular,  either 
alone3  or  accompanied  by  a  patronymic,  as  Kanva  Narsada4 
and  Kanva  Srayasa,5  besides  in  the  plural  the  Kanvas  Sausra- 
vasas.6  The  Kanva  family  appears  to  have  been  connected  with 
the  Atri  family,7  but  not  to  have  been  of  great  importance.8  In 
one  passage  of  the  Atharvaveda9  they  seem  to  be  definitely 
regarded  with  hostility. 


1  Rv.  i.  36,  8.  10.  11.  17.  19 ;  39,  7.  9 ; 
47,5;  112,5;  117.  18;  118,7;  139.9; 
v.  41,  4  ;  viii.  5,  23.  25  ;  7,  18  ;  8,  20  ; 
49,  10;  50,  10;  x.  71,  11  ;  115,  5;  150, 
5  ;  Av.  iv.  37,  1 ;  vii.  15,  1  ;  xviii.  3,  15  ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvii.  74  ;  Paiica- 
vimsa  Brahmana,  viii.  2,  2;  ix.  2,  6; 
Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xxviii.  8.  Kanva- 
vat  occurs  in  Rv.  viii.  6,  11;  52,  8; 
Av.  ii.  32,  3;  Kanva-mant  in  Rv.  viii.  2, 
22. 

2  As  Kanvah  (in  the  plural),  Rv.  i.  14, 
2.  5;  37,  1.  14;  44,  8;  46,  9;  47,  2. 
4-10  ;  49,  4  ;  viii.  2,  16 ;  3,  16 ;  4,  2.  3  ; 
5,  4;  6,  3.  18.  21.  31.  34.  47;  7,  32; 

8,  3 ;  9.  14 ;  32,  1 ;  33.  3 ;  34.  4 ;  as 

Kanvasya  sunavah,  Rv.  i.  45,  5 ;  as 
putrah,  viii.  8,  4.  8 ;  as  Kanvayanah, 
viii.  55,  4.  Kanva  is  found  in  viii.  1,8; 
2,  40  ;  4,  20  ;  7,  19  ;  9,  3.  9  ;  10,  2. 


3  E.g.,  Rv.  i.  48,  4;  viii.  34,  1,  and 
probably  elsewhere. 

4  Rv.  i.  117,  8;  Av.  iv.  19,  2;  Lud- 
wig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  15 

5  Taittiriya    Samhita,   v.    4,    7,    5 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxi.  8 ;  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  iii.  3,  9. 

6  Kathaka  Samhita,  xiii.  12.  There 
is  also  Vatsa  Kanva  in  Sankhayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  11,  20. 

7  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft,  42,  214. 

8  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  3, 
285.     Cf.  1,207,  438. 

9  Av.  ii.  25.  Cf.  Varttika  on  Panini 
iii.  1,  14;  Bergaigne,  Religion  Vedique, 
2,  465;  Hillebrandt,  op.  cit.,  1,  207; 
Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  no. 

Cf.  Oldenberg,  op.  cit.,  216  et  seq. ; 
Ludwig,  op.  cit.,  3,  105. 


Katha. — The  later  use  of  this  word1  in  the  sense  of  a  '  philo- 
sophical discussion '  appears  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad.2 

'  let   us  begin  a  discussion   regarding 
the  Udgitha.' 


1  Colebrooke,  Miscellaneous  Essays,  1, 

293- 

2  i.  8,  1 :  hantodalthe  katham  vadama, 


Kadru,  a  word  occurring  only  once  in  the  Rigveda,1  is 
interpreted  by  Ludwig2  as  the  name  of  a  priest,  but  it  more 
probably  means  a  Soma  vessel.3 

i    viii.  45,  26.  2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  162. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Kaparda  ]  POISON— MAIDEN— WORM— BRAID 


135 


Kanaknaka,  a  word  occurring  once  in  the  Atharvaveda,1 
either  denotes  a  poison  or  is  an  adjective  qualifying  kanda-visa, 
a  species  of  poison. 

1  x.  4,  22.     Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  I  Translation      of      the     Atharvaveda, 
of    the    Atharvaveda,    604  ;     Whitney,   I  578. 

Kana,  Kanya. — Both  these  words,  of  which  the  former  is 
very  rare,1  while  the  latter  is  the  normal  term  from  the  Rigveda  2 
onwards,  denote  *  maiden  '  or  *  young  woman.'  It  is  doubtful 
whether  Kanlnaka.  (accented  on  the  final  syllable)  has  this 
meaning,3  or  only  denotes  the  pupil  of  the  eye,4  which  is  the 
sense  of  kanlnaka  or  kanlnika  (both  accented  on  the  ante- 
penultimate) in  the  later  Samhitas  and  the  Brahmanas.  See 
also  Stri. 


1  Rv.  x.  61,  5,  etc. 

2  i.  123,  10;  161,  5;  hi.  23,  10,  etc. ; 
Av.  i.  14,  2;  xi.  5,  18;  xii.  I,  25, 
etc. 

3  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v.,  cites  in  this  sense  Rv.  iv.  32, 
23 ;    x.    40,    9 ;    Nirukta,  iv.   15 ;    but 


neither  of  the  Rv.  passages  is  at  all 
clear. 

4  See  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 401 ;  Keith,  Aitareya  Aranyaka, 
207.  Other  rare  forms  are  kanyana, 
Rv.  viii.  35,  5  ;  kanyala,  Av.  v.  5,  3  ; 
xiv.  2,  52. 


Kapana,  from  its  solitary  occurrence  in  the  Rigveda,1  appears 
to  mean  a  '  worm '  that  destroys  the  leaves  of  trees,  and  is  so 
interpreted  in  the  Nirukta.2 


54.6. 

4.      Cf.    Zimmer,    Altindisches 


Leben,  97  ;  Max  Muller,  Sacred  Books  of 
the  East,  32,  330. 


Kaparda,  '  braid,'  Kapapdin,  '  wearing  braids.'  These  words 
refer  to  the  Vedic  custom  of  wearing  the  hair  in  braids  or 
plaits.  Thus  a  maiden  is  said  to  have  her  hair  in  four  plaits 
(catns-kaparda),1  and  the  goddess  Siniva.li  is  described  as  '  wear- 
ing fair  braids  '  (su-kaparda).2  Men  also  wore  their  hair  in  this 
style,  for  both  Rudra3  and  Pusan4  are  said  to  have  done  so, 
while  the  Vasisthas5  were  distinguished  by  wearing  their  hair 
in  a  plait  on  the  right  (daksinatas-kaparda).  The  opposite  was 
to  wear  one's  hair  '  plain '  {pulasti).6     See  also  Opasa. 

1  Rv.  x.  114,  3.  5  Rv.  vii.  33,  1.     Cf  83,  8. 

2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xi.  56.  6  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  43. 

3  Rv.  i.  114,  1.  5;  Vajasaneyi  Sam-  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  264, 
hita,  xvi.  10.  29.  43.  48.  59.  265 ;  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  v.  462 ;  Max 

4  Rv.  vi.  55,  2  ;  ix.  67.  ix.  Muller,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32,  424. 


136 


MONKEY— FRANCOLINE  PARTRIDGE— NAMES     [  Kapi 


I.  Kapi,  '  monkey,'  occurs  only  once  in  the  Rigveda1  with 
reference  to  Vrsa-kapi,  the  '  Man-ape,'  in  the  dialogue  of  Indra 
and  Indrani  in  the  presence  of  Vrsakapi.  There  the  ape  is 
termed  the  '  tawny  '  Qiarita).  In  the  Atharvaveda2  the  monkey 
is  mentioned  several  times  as  hairy,  and  an  enemy  of  dogs. 
That  the  ape  was  tamed  appears  from  its  position  in  the 
Vrsakapi  hymn,  and  from  the  mention,  in  the  Taittiriya  Sam- 
hita,3 of  a  Mayu  as  belonging  to  the  forest.  See  also  Mayu, 
Markata,  and  Purusa  Hastin. 


1  x.  86,  5.  Cf.  Oldenberg,  Religion 
des  V.da,  174;  Geldner,  Vedische  Studien, 
2,  it.  et  seq.  ;  von  Schroeder,  Mysterium 
tind  Mimus,  304  et  seq.  ;  Schirmeisen, 
Die  Arischen  Gottergestalten,  218  et  seq.  ; 
Tilak,  Orion,  170-197. 


2  111.  9,  4;  iv.  32,  11;  vi.  49,  1. 
Cf.  also  Chandogya  Upanisad,  i.  6,  7 
(kapy-asa,  '  seat  of  an  ape  '). 

3  iv.  2,  10,  1.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altin- 
disches  Leben,  85,  86. 


2.  Kapi  is,  according  to  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
another  name  for  Lusa  Khargali  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita 
(xxx.  2),  but  the  name  appears  rather  to  be  LuSakapi. 


Kapihjala,  the  name  of  the  '  francoline  partridge  '  or  *  hazel- 
cock,'  is  found  in  all  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas,1  and  occasionally 
later.2 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  1,  1  ;  v.  5, 
16,  1  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  1  ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xii.  10 ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxiv.  20.  38. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  6,  3,  3  ; 


v.  5,  4,  4 ;  xiii.  5,  1,  13;  Jaiminiya 
Brahmana,  i.  154,  2  (Transactions  of  the 
Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences, 
15.  181). 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  91. 


Kapila  appears  in  the  Svetasvatara  Upanisad1  as  a  teacher, 
according  to  Weber2  and  Garbe,3  who  think  that  the  expres- 
sion kapila  rsih  there  refers  to  the  founder  of  the  Sankhya 
philosophy.     But  this  is  doubtful.4 


1  V.  2. 

2  Indische  Studien,  1,  24  et  seq. ;  5,  412  ; 
Indian  Literature,  236. 

3  Sankhya  Philosophie,  27  et  seq. ; 
Translation  of  the  Sahkhyatattvakau- 
mudi,  531. 

4  Max   Muller,   Sacred  Books  of  the 


East,  2,  xli,  and  Deussen,  in  his  trans- 
lation (Sechzig  Upanishads,  304),  do 
not  take  the  word  as  a  teacher's  name. 
The  latter  renders  kapila  rsih,  by  '  the 
.red  sage,'  as  referring  to  Hiranya- 
garbha. 


Kambala 


NA  MES—  PIGEON— BLA  NKET 


137 


Kapi-vana  Bhauvayana  is  mentioned  as  a  teacher  in  the 
Yajurveda  Samhitas1  and  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.2  A  rite 
called  Kapivana's  Dvyaha  ('ceremony  lasting  two  days')  is 
also  referred  to  in  the  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra.3 


1  Maitrayani     Samhita,     i.     4,     5  ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxxii.  2. 

2  xx.  13,  4. 

9  xxv.  2,  3.     Cf.  Asvalayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  x.  2. 


Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  i,  24  ; 
3,  473;  Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the 
Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences, 
15,  55,  n.  2 ;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische 
Mythologie,  2,  157. 


Kapota  is  the  name  of  a  bird,  probably  the  '  pigeon  '  (its 
sense  in  the  later  language),  occurring  from  the  Rigveda 
onwards.1  It  is  associated  in  some  passages2  with  the  owl 
(Uluka)  as  a  messenger  of  Nirrti  ('dissolution,'  'misfortune'). 
This  aspect  of  the  pigeon  as  a  bird  of  evil  omen  is  probably 
based  on  an  ancient  belief  which  is  also  found  beyond  the 
confines  of  India.3 


1  Rv.  i.  30,  4 ;  Av.  xx.  135,  12  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  4  ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  23.  38. 

2  Rv.  x.  165,  1-5  ;  Av.  vi.  29,  2. 


3  Cf.  Schrader,  Prehistoric  A  ntiquities, 

253. 

Cf   Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  89 ; 
St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Kabandha  Atharvana  is  mentioned  in  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad1  along  with  Sudhanvan  ArigiFasa,  as  a  teacher,  but 
is  semi-mythical.     His  son  was  Vicarin  Kabandhi. 

1  ah.  7,  i.     Cf.  also  Gopatha  Brah-   l  Mythologie,  2,  176,  n.  4  ;  Weber,  Indian 
mana,  i.  2,  9.  18 ;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische   \  Literature,  149. 


Kama-dyu  appears  once  in  the  Rigveda1  as  the  wife  of 
Vimada.  She  is  probably  identical  with  the  '  maiden  '  (yoscl) 
of  Purumitra,  no  doubt  his  daughter.  She  is  elsewhere2 
referred  to  in  connexion  with  Vimada,  who  appears  to  have 
taken  her  for  his  bride  against  the  will  of  her  father. 


x.  65,  12. 

i.  117,  20 ;  x.  39,  7. 


Cf 
310. 


Zimmer,     Altindisches      Leben, 


Kambala  denotes  in  the  Atharvaveda1  a  'woollen  coverlet 
or  '  blanket.' 

1  xiv.  2,  66.  67.     Cf.  Nirukta,  ii.  2. 


138 


THE  K  AM  BO  J AS— PORRIDGE 


[  Kamboja 


Kamboja. — Yaska,  in  the  Nirukta,1  refers  to  the  speech  of 
the  Kambojas  as  differing  from  that  of  the  other  Aryas.  The 
Kambojas  were  later  settled  to  the  north-west  of  the  Indus,  and 
are  known  as  Kambujiya  in  the  old  Persian  inscriptions.  A 
teacher,  Kamboja  Aupamanyava,  pupil  of  Madragura,  is 
mentioned  in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana.2  This  points  to  a  possible 
connexion  of  the  Madras,  or  more  probably  the  Uttara  Madras, 
with  the  Kambojas,  who  probably  had  Iranian  as  well  as  Indian 
affinities. 


1  ii.  2. 

2  Indische  Studien,  4,  372. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  102; 
Weber,  Indische  Strei/en,  2,  493  ;  3,  384  ; 
Indische  Studien,  10,  7 ;  Episches  im 
vedischen  Ritual,  45 ;  Max  Miiller,  Zeit- 
schrift    der    Deutschen    Morgenldndischen 


Gesellschaft,  7,  373.  On  the  relation  of 
Indian  and  Iranian,  see  also  Jacobi, 
Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1909, 
721  etseq.  ;  1910,  457  etseq.  ;  Oldenberg, 
ibid.,  1095  et  seq,  ;  Keith,  ibid.,  1100  et 
seq.  ',  Kennedy,  ibid.,  11 07  et  seq.  ;  and 
see  Parsu. 


Karanja,  a  word  which  in  the  Sutras  and  later  denotes  the 
tree  Pongamia  glabra,  occurs  only  twice  in  the  Rigveda1  as 
the  name  of  a  foe  of  Indra,  but  whether  a  demon  or  a  man2  is 
intended  remains  uncertain. 


1  i.  53,  8 ;  x.  48,  8. 

2  Zimmer,    Altindisches    Leben,    63  ; 
Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda, 


3,  149;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie, 
3,  292. 


Karambha  is  the  name,  from  the  Rigveda  onwards,1  of  a  kind 
of  porridge  made  of  grain  (Yava),  which  was  unhusked,  parched 
slightly,  and  kneaded.2  It  was  the  especial  sacrificial  portion  of 
Pusan,  no  doubt  in  his  capacity  of  an  agricultural  deity. 
Karambha  was  also  made  of  barley  (Upavaka)3  or  of  sesame 
(Tirya).4 


1  Rv.  i.  187,  16 ;  iii.  52,  7 ;  vi.  56,  1  ; 
57,  2 ;  viii.  102,  2  ;  Av.  iv.  7,  2.  3  ; 
vi.  16,  1  ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  1,  10, 
2 ;  vi.  5,  11,  4,  etc. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  5,  2,  14 ; 
iv.  2,  4,  18.  Cf.  Schrader,  Prehistoric 
Antiquities,  317  ;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books 
of  the  East,  12,  395,  n.  1. 


3  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xix.  22. 

4  Av.  iv.  7,  3,  but  see  Bloomfield, 
Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  377;  Whit- 
ney, Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda, 

155. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  270. 


Karkari  ]  SNAKE— MANURE— JUJUBE— LUTE  139 

Karikrata  denotes,  according  to  Zimmer,1  a  snake  in  the 
Atharvaveda.2 

1  Altindisches  Leben,  95 

2  x.  4,  13.     The  Paippalada  version  has  Kanikrada. 

Karira,  the  name  of  a  leafless  shrub,  Capparis  aphylla,  or  its 
fruit,  first  appears  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita.1 

1  ii.  4,    9,   2  ;    Kathaka   Samhita,   xi.    11;    xxxvi.    7;    Satapatha   Brahmana, 
ii.  5,  2,  11. 


Karisa  denotes  '  dry  cow  dung  '  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.1 
The  Atharvaveda2  shows  that  the  value  of  the  natural  manure 
of  animals  in  the  fields  was  appreciated. 

1  ii-  1,  1 1  7-  2  Av.  iii.  14,  3.  4  ;  xix.  31,  3. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  236. 

i.  Karkandhu  is  the  ordinary  word  for  'jujube,'  the  tree 
(Zizyphus  jujuba)  and  the  fruit,  from  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas 
onwards.1  The  berry  is  red  (rohita).2  Compare  Kuvala  and 
Badara,  which  denote  the  fruit. 


1  Kathaka  Samhita,  xii.  10 ;  Maitra- 
yani  Samhita,  iii.  11,  2;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xix.  23.  91  ;  xxi.  32  ;  xxiv.  2  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  5,  4,  10 ;  xii.  7, 


2.  9 1  9>    x»  5.  etc.  ;    Jaiminiya  Brah- 
mana, ii.  156,  5. 

2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  2. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  242. 


2.  Karkandhu  is  only  the  name  borne  by  a  protege  of  the 
Asvins  in  the  Rigveda  (i.  112,  6).  Its  identity  with  the  word 
for  jujube  indicates  that  the  latter,  though  not  otherwise 
mentioned  there,  was  known  at  the  time  of  the  Rigveda. 

Karkari,  a  musical  instrument,  probably  the  Mute,'  occurs 
from  the  Rigveda  onwards.1  The  Maitrayani  Samhita2 
mentions  cattle  branded  on  the  ears  with  a  mark  resembling 
a  lute  (karkari-karnyah). 

1  Rv.  ii.  43,  3  ;  Av.  iv.  37,  4.  Cf.  I  2  iv.  2,  9.  Cf.  Delbriick,  Gurupuja- 
xx.  132,  3.  8.  I  kaumudi,  48,  49. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  289. 


140 


EAR-ORNAMENT— SMITH 


KarkI 


KarkI  may  denote  in  one  passage   of  the  Atharvaveda1   a 
1  white  cow,'  according  to  the  suggestion  of  Roth.2 


1  iv.  38,  6.  7.    Cf.  Bloomfi-eld,  Hymns 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  414. 


2  St.     Petersburg     Dictionary     and 
Bohtlingk's  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Karna-gobhana  denotes  an  '  ornament  for  the  ear'  in  the 
Rigveda,1  apparently  for  the  use  of  men.  Some  deity  is  called 
'gold-eared'  in  another  passage  of  the  Rigveda.2  Hopkins3 
considers  the  use  of  ear-rings  later  than  that  of  necklets  and 
wristlets. 


1  viii.  78,  3. 

2  i.  122,  14. 


See  also  i.  64,  10. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  262 


3  Journal    of    the    American    Oriental 
Society,  17,  35. 


Karna-Sravas  Angirasa  is  mentioned  in  the  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana  (xiii.  11,  14)  as  a  seer  of  Samans  or  chants,  the 
same  tale  being  told  of  him  as  of  Davasu. 


Karmara,  the  '  smith,'  is  several  times  mentioned  with 
approval  in  the  Vedic  Samhitas.1  In  the  Atharvaveda2  smiths 
appear  with  fishermen  (dhivdnah)  and  chariot-builders  (ratha- 
kdrdh),  all  being  classified  as  clever  workers  (manisinah) : 
possibly  a  quasi-caste  of  smiths  was  already  developing  from 
the  guild  organization  that  probably  existed.3 

Little  is  known  of  the  smith's  methods  of  work  and  of  his 
tools.  No  doubt  he  smelted  (dhmd)  the  ore  in  the  fire ;  hence 
he  is  called  dhmatr,  the  'smelter.'4     Mention  is  also  made  of 


1  Rv.  x.  72,  2  ;  Av.  iii.  5,  6  ;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  xvii.  13;  Maitrayanl  Samhita, 
ii-  9.  5;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  27; 
xxx.  7.  Cf.  karmara,  Rv.  ix.  112,  2; 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  3,  1. 

2  iii.  5,  6.  The  exact  sense  of  the 
passage  is  doubtful.  Zimmer,  Altin- 
disches Leben,  252 ;  Bloomfield,  Hymns 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  144;  and  Whitney, 
Translation   of  the  Atharvaveda,   92, 


take  the  reference  to  be  to  *  skilled 
chariot  -  makers  '  {dhiva.no  ratha-kdrdh) 
and  '  clever  smiths,'  but  this  is  perhaps 
less  likely.  The  commentator  interprets 
dhivdnah  as  '  fishermen  '  (in  the  later 
language  dhivara  means  both  a  '  clever 
man  '  and  a  '  fisherman  '). 

3  Cf.  Fick,  Die  sociale  Gliederung,  182. 

4  Rv.  v.  9,  5. 


Kalasa  ] 


FISH—TRENCH—SPARRO  W—JAR 


141 


his  bellows  of  birds'  feathers.5  He  made  metal  vessels  (gharma 
ayasmaya)Q  to  be  put  on  the  fire:  even  the  Soma  cup  could 
occasionally  be  made  of  hammered  metal  (ayo-hata).7 

5  Rv.  ix.  112,  2.  Cf.  Zimmer,  op.  cit.,  252,  253 ;  Weber, 

6  Rv.  v.  30,  15.  Indische  Studien,   17,   196  et   seq.  ;    Uber 

7  Rv.  ix.  1,  2.  den  Rajasuya,  19  et  seq. 


Karvara,  a  word  found  in  one  passage  of  the  Atharvaveda,1 
seems  to  mean  some  kind  of  fish2  caught  by  a  fisherman 
(paufijistha). 


x.  4,  19. 

Zimmer,    Altindisches    Leben,    96; 


Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, 578. 


Karsu,   a   rare  word   found   in   the    Satapatha   Brahmana,1 
denotes  a  '  furrow '  or  '  trench.' 

1  i.  8,  1,  3  ;  xiii.  8,  3,  10.     Cf.  Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  283. 


Kalavinka,   a  name    of   the    '  sparrow,'    is    found    in    the 
Yajurveda  Samhitas,1  and  occasionally  later.2 


1  Taittinya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  1,  2; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  1 ;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  xii.  10  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xxiv.  20.  31. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  6,  3,  4  ; 


v-  5>  4'  5  !  Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  ii.  154, 
3  (Transactions  of  the  Connecticut  Academy 
of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15,  181).  Cf. 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  91. 


Kalasa  is,  from  the  Rigveda  onwards,1  a  common  word  for 
'pot'  or  'jar,'  probably  either  formed  of  a  gourd  or  made  of 
clay  (unburnt  or  baked),  as  we  know  that  both  kinds  of  pot 
were  in  use.2  The  wooden  Soma  tub  (drona-kalasa)  is  frequently 
referred  to  in  the  ritual.     See  also  Ko£a. 


1  Rv.  i.  1 17,  12  ;  iii.  32,15;  iv.  27,  5 ; 
32,  19,  etc.;  Av.  iii.  12,  7;  ix.  1,  6; 
4,  15;  xviii.  4,  13,  etc.  In  Rv.  x.  32,  9, 
the  word,  according  to  the  St.  Peters- 
burg Dictionary,  is  used  as  a  proper 
name,  but  the  passage  is  very  doubtful. 

2  Av.  iv.  17,  4 ;  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
i.  1,8,  1;  iv.  1,  5,  4;  v.  1,  7,  2;  Vaja- 


saneyi Samhita,  i.  22  ;  xi.  59.  Cf. 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  253  ;  Eggel- 
ing,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  26,  257 ; 
Oertel,  Transactions  of  the  Connecticut 
Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15,  185, 
n.  3  ;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie, 
1,  183  et  seq. 


142 


FRA  CTION—SNA  KE—NA  MES 


[  Kala 


Kala  denotes  a  fractional  part,  normally  '  one-sixteenth,'  in 
the  Rigveda1  and  later.2  It  is  often  mentioned  in  connexion 
with  Sapha,  '  one-eighth.' 


*■  viii.  47,  17. 

2  Av.  vi.  96,  3 ;  xix.  57,  1 ;  Taittiriya 
Samhita,  vi.  1,  io,  1  ;  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  iii.    7,   7  ;   Satapatha  Brah- 


mana,  iii.  3,  3,  1 ;  xii.  8,  3,  13,  etc.  ; 
Nirukta,  xi.  12.  Cf.  Hopkins,  Journal 
of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  16,  278  ; 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  259. 


i.  Kali.     See  Aksa. 


2.  Kali  occurs  in  the  Rigveda,  twice  in  the  singular1  as  the 
name  of  a  protege  of  the  Asvins,  and  once  in  the  plural.2 
The  persons  meant  in  the  latter  passage  seem  to  be  different 
from  the  former  one.  The  Kalis  are  once  mentioned  in  the 
Atharvaveda3  beside  the  Gandharvas.4 


1  i.  112,  15;  x.  39,  8. 

2  viii.  66,  15. 

3  x.  10,  13. 

4  These  Kalis  may  be  connected  with 
dicing,  as  in  the  Atharvaveda  the 
Apsarases,  the  wives  of  the  Gandharvas, 


are  fond  of  dice,  and  bestow  luck  at 
play.     See  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology, 

P.  135- 

Cf.  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  17,  89  ;  Ludwig,  Trans- 
lation of  the  Rigveda,  3,  163. 


Kalpa  in  the  Taittiiiya  Aranyaka  (ii.   io)  seems  to  denote 
Kalpa  Sutra. 


Kalmasa-griva  ('  speckled-neck ')  is  the  name  of  a  snake  in 
the  Atharvaveda.1 

1  iii.    27,   5  (where  the   Paippalada   1       Cf.    Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  94, 
recension    has    hdmam-)  ;    xii.    3,    59.       95. 
Cf.  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  10,  2. 


Kalyana  is  the  name,  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,1  of  an 
Aiigirasa  who  saw  the  Aurnayava  Saman. 

1  xii.  11,  10.     Cf.  Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and 
Sciences,  15,  68,  n.  2. 


Kava§a  ]  CORSELET— AN  ANCIENT  PUROHITA 


H3 


Kavaca  denotes  a  '  corselet '  or  '  breastplate  '  in  the  Atharva- 
veda1  and  later.2  There  is  nothing  to  show  whether  it  was 
made  of  metal,  but  that  it  was  so  is  quite  possible  (see 
Varman).  The  Atharvaveda3  refers  to  a  '  corselet-strap ' 
(kavaca-pdsa),  which  may  point  to  a  linen  corselet  such  as  those 
known  to  Herodotus.4 


1  Av.  xi.  10,  22  (kavacin). 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  2,  2,  7; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  19,  2 ;  Nirukta, 
v.  25  (kavaca) ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
xiii.  1,  6,  3  ;  4,  1,  5  ;  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana, iii.  48 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xvi.  45  {kavacin). 


3  xi.  10,  22. 

4  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, 129,  and  Whitney,  Translation  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  659,  seem  to  recognize 
coats  of  mail  only. 


Kavasa  is  mentioned  in  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda1  as  one  of 
those  whom,  together  with  the  Druhyu  king,  Indra  overthrew 
for  the  Trtsus.  The  Anukramam  (Index)  also  attributes  to 
him  the  authorship  of  several  hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  including 
two  (x.  32.  33)  that  deal  with  a  prince  Kurus>avana  and  his 
descendant  Upamas>avas.  There  seems  no  reason  to  doubt 
this  attribution,  which  is  accepted  by  both  Zimmer2  and 
Geldner.8  The  former  holds  that  Kavasa  was  the  Purohita  of 
the  joint  tribes  named  Vaikarna,  in  whom  he  sees  the  Kuru- 
Krivi  (Pancala)  peoples,  and  that  Kavasa  in  that  capacity  is 
mentioned  in  the  Rigveda  as  representative  of  those  peoples. 
He  also  suggests  that  the  language  of  Rigveda  x.  33,  4  is  best 
explained  by  the  reduced  position  in  which  the  Kuru-Krivis 
found  themselves  on  their  defeat  by  the  Trtsus.  Ludwig,4  on 
the  other  hand,  thinks  that  Kavasa  was  the  priest  of  the  five 
peoples.  Geldner5  holds  that  Kavasa  was  the  Purohita  of 
Kurusravana,  by  whose  son,  Upamasravas,  he  was  ill-treated, 
and  that  he  composed  Rigveda  x.  33  to  deprecate  the  anger  of 
his  royal  master.     Hopkins6  thinks  that  he  was  a  king. 

In  the    Brahmanas   of  the    Rigveda7  mention    is   made  of 

7  Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  19  ;  Kausr- 
taki  Brahmana,  xii.  1.  3. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  3,  459; 
Lanman,    Sanskrit    Reader,   386,    387 ; 


1  vii.  18,  12. 

2  Altindisches  Leben,  127. 

3  Vedische  Studien,  2,  150. 

4  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  139. 

5  Loc.  cit. 

6  Journal    of   the    American    Oriental 
Society,  15,  261,  263. 


Pargiter,  Journal  of  the  Royal    Asiatic 
Society,  1910,  50. 


144 


ANIMALS— CUSHION— NAMES— TORTOISE         [  Kasa 


Kavasa  Ailusa,  who  was  a  Brahmana  born  of  a  female  slave, 
and  was  reproached  on  this  ground  by  the  other  Rsis.  He  is 
possibly  identical  with  the  Kavasa  of  the  Rigveda. 

Kasa  is  the  name  of  an  unknown  animal  mentioned  as  a 
victim  at  the  horse  sacrifice  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas.1 

1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  17,  1  ;  I  38.  Cf.  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  7. 
18,  1;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  26;  |       Cf.  Zimmer,  A Itindisches  Leben,  84. 

Kaslka  is  the  name  of  an  animal  mentioned  once  in  the 
Rigveda,1  and  interpreted  as  '  weasel '  by  the  commentator 
Sayana.  Fick2  suggests  that  the  meaning  is  'pole -cat.' 
Geldner3  takes  it  as  '  female  ichneumon.' 


1  i.  126,  5. 

2  Bezzenberger,  Beitrdge,  3,  165 ; 
Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  247. 
Cf.    Zimmer,    Altindisches   Leben,    84 ; 


Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  17,  57. 

3  Rigveda,  Glossar,  44. 


KaSipu  denotes  a  '  mat '  or  '  cushion  '  made,  according  to  the 
Atharvaveda,1  by  women  from  reeds  (nada),  which  they  crushed 
for  the  purpose  by  means  of  stones.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana2  refers  to  a  mat  as  made  of  gold. 


1  vi.  138,  5. 


xm.  4,  3,  I. 


Kasu  is  the  name  of  a  prince  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda  with 
the  patronymic  Caidya,  or  descendant  of  Cedi,  as  a  generous 
patron  of  the  singer,  who  praises  the  liberality  of  the  Cedis. 
Neither  this  king  nor  the  Cedis  appear  again  in  Vedic 
literature. 

1  viii.  5,  37.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  129. 

Ka6o-ju  occurs  once  in  the  Rigveda  (i.  112,  14)  either  as  a 
proper  name  or  as  an  epithet  of  Divodasa.  The  sense  of  the 
word  is  quite  uncertain. 

Ka£yapa,  a  word  denoting  *  tortoise,'  occurs  in  the  Atharva- 
veda1 and  often  later.2 


1  iv.  20,  7. 

2  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  18  ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  37 ;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  vii.  5,  1,  5  ;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  ii.  6. 


Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  18,  86 ; 
Bloomfield,  American  Journal  of  Phil- 
ology, 17,  403. 


Kahoda  Kau§Itaki  ]    NAMES— WORM— SNAKE— PROP  145 

Ka£yapa  is  the  name  of  a  sage  who  is  mentioned  only  once 
in  the  Rigveda,1  but  is  a  common  figure  in  the  later  Samhitas.2 
He  is  always  of  a  mythical  character,  as  belonging  to  the  distant 
past.  According  to  the  Aitareya  Brahmana,3  he  anointed  King 
Visvakarman  Bhauvana,  and  in  the  Upanisads4  he  is  mentioned 
as  a  Rsi.  The  Kasyapas  appear  in  connexion  with  Janam- 
ejaya  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana.5 


1  ix.  114,  2. 

2  Samaveda,  i.  1,2,  4,  10  ;  4,  2,  3,  2 
(but  in  these  passages  the  St.  Peters- 
burg Dictionary,  s.v.,  accepts  the  sense 
of  a  divine  being,  identical  with  Praja- 
pati)  ;  Av.  i.  14,  4 ;  ii.  33,  7;  iv.  20,  7 ; 
29>  3 1  37>  1  '>  Maitrayani  Samhita, 
iv.  2,  9 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  iii.  62. 


3  viii.  21  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
xiii.  7,  1,  15. 

4  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  2.  6 ; 
Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  iv.  3,  1  (in  a 
quotation). 

5  vii.  27.  Cf.  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift 
der  Deutschen  M  orgenldndischen  Gesell- 
schaft,  42,  235,  n.  1. 


Ka£yapa  Naidhruvi  is  mentioned  as  a  teacher  in  the  last 
Vamsa  (list  of  teachers)  of  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.1 

1  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  4,  33  (Madhyamdina=vi.  5,  3,  Kanva). 

Kaskasa  designates  a  kind  of  worm  in  the  Atharvaveda.1 
1  v.  23,  7.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  98. 

Kasarnila  is  the  name  of  a  kind  of  snake  in  the  Atharvaveda.1 
It  occurs  also  in  the  form  Kasarnira,  personified  as  the  seer 
Kasarnira  Kadraveya  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita.2 


1  x.    4,    5,    where    the    Paippalada 
recension  has  kvasarmila. 

2  i.  5,  4,  1.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches 


Leben,   98  ;    Bloomfield,   Hymns  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  607. 


Ka-stambhi  denotes  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  a  piece  of 
wood  used  as  a  prop  for  the  end  of  a  wagon-pole  to  rest  on. 

1  i.  1,  2,  9.  Cf.  Caland  and  Henry,  L'Agnistoma,  49;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of 
the  East,  12,  14,  n.  1. 

Kahoda  Kausltaki1  or  Kausitakeya2  is  mentioned  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana,1  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,2  and  the 
Sahkhayana  Aranyaka,1  as  a  teacher,  contemporary  with  Yajiia- 
valkya.     Cf.  Kahodi. 

1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  4,  3,  1  ;  Sahkhayana  Aranyaka,  xv. 

2  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  iii.  5,  1. 

VOL.  I.  10 


146 


TREE-NAMES— KATHA  SCHOOL— LUTE    [  Kakambira 


Kakambira  is  the  name  in  the  Rigveda x  of  a  useful  tree  of 
some  kind. 

1  vi.  48,  17.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  62. 

Kaksa-seni    is    the    patronymic   ('  son    of    Kaksasena ')   of 
Abhipratarin  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana  (xiv.  i,  12). 

Kakslvata.     See  Nodhas. 


Kathaka,  the  name  of  the  recension  of  the  Black  Yajurveda 
belonging  to  the  school  of  the  Kathas,  is  mentioned  in  the 
Nirukta1  of  Yaska  and  in  the  Anupada  Sutra.2  The 
Samhita  which  bears  the  name  has  been  in  part  edited  by 
L.  v.  Schroeder.3 


*  x.  4. 

2  iii.  11 ;  vii.  n. 

3  Two  volumes  have  so  far  appeared, 
the  first  containing  i-xviii,  the  second 
xix-xxx.  Cf.  Indische  Studien,  i,  44; 
3,  451 ;  von  Schroeder,  Kathaka  Sam- 


hita, 1900, 1909  ;  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  49,  145- 
171 ;  Die  Tubinger  Katha-Handschriften, 
Vienna,  1898 ;  Zwei  Handschriften  der 
K.K.  Hofbibliothek  in  Wien  mit  Frag- 
mented des  Kathaka,  Vienna,  1896. 


Kanthe-viddhi  ('  descendant  of  Kantheviddha ')  is  mentioned 
as  a  teacher  in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana.1 

1  Indische  Studien,  4,  382. 


Kanda-vina,  the  name  of  a  musical  instrument,  a  kind  of 
lute  made  out  of  joints  of  reed,  which  is  mentioned  as  used  at 
the  Mahavrata  ceremony  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita..1 


1  xxxiv.  5  (Indische  Studien,  3,  477). 
Cf.  Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  iv.  2,  6; 


Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xiii.  3,   16 
Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xvii.  3,  12. 


Kandviya   is   mentioned   as   an    Udgatr    in    the    Jaiminfya 
Upanisad  Brahmana  (iii.  10,  2). 


Kanva.     See  Kanva :  among  others,  Devatithi,  Medhatithi, 
Vatsa,  were  prominent  members  of  the  Kanva  family. 


Kanina  ]  NAMES  147 

Kanvi-putra  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Kapiputra  in  the 
last  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.1 

1  vi.  5,  1  (Kanva  recension). 


Kanvayana  ('  descendant  of  Kanva  ')  and  Kanvyayana 
('  descendant  of  Kanvya ')  are  patronymics  occurring  in  the 
Rigveda1  and  the  Sadvimsa  Brahmana2  respectively. 

1  viii.  55,  4. 

2  Indische  Stuclien,  1,  38 ;  Sayana  on  Rv.  i.  51,  1  ;  viii.  2,  40. 

Katyayani.     See  Daksa. 

Katyayani  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  two  wives  of  Yajna- 
valkya  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.1 

1  ii.  4,  1  ;  iv.  5,  1.  2.  A  Katya  I  Sutra,  ii.  15  et  seq.  See  Weber,  Indian 
appears    in    the    Baudhayana    Srauta   |  Literature,  138. 

Katyayani-putra,  '  son  of  Katyayani,'  is  mentioned  in  the 
last  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad1 
as  a  pupil  of  Gotamiputra  and  of  KauSikiputra.  A  Jatu- 
karnya  Katyayaniputra  is  named  as  a  teacher  in  the  Sahkh- 
ayana  Aranyaka.2 

1  vi.  5,  1,  Kanva.  2  viii.  10.  Cf.  Weber,  Indian  Literature,  138. 

Kanandha  is  mentioned  in  the  Baudhayana  Srauta  Sutra 
(xxi.  10)  as  son  of  VadhryaSva. 

Kanlta  is  the  patronymic  ('son  of  Kanita')  in  the  Rigveda1 
of  Ppthusravas. 

1  viii.  46,  21.  24.     Cf.  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  11,  23. 

Kanina  in  the  Atharvaveda1  apparently  denotes  the  '  son  of 
a  maiden.'     See  Pati. 

1  v.  5,  8.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  334. 

10 — 2 


148 


POISON— NAMES 


Kandavisa 


Kanda-visa  in  the  Atharvaveda  (x.  4,  22)  denotes  some  kind 
of  poison.    Cf.  Kanaknaka. 

Kapatava  Su-nitha  is  mentioned  in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana1 
as  a  pupil  of  Sutemanas  Sandilyayana. 

1  Indische  Studien,  4,  383. 

Kapileya. — The  Kapileyas  and  the  Babhravas  are  mentioned 
in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana1  as  descendants  of  Devarata  Vai£va- 
mitra,  the  adoptive  name  of  SunahSepa. 

1  vii.  17.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  216,  n.,  433. 

Kapl-putra  ('  son  of  Kapi ')  is  mentioned  in  the  last  Vamsa 
(list  of  teachers)  of  the  Kanva  recension  of  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad  (vi.  5,  1)  as  a  pupil  of  Atreylputra. 


Kapeya  ('  descendant  of  Kapi ').  The  Kapeyas  are  men- 
tioned as  priests  of  Citraratha  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita1  and 
the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.2     See  also  Saunaka. 


1  xiii.  12. 

2  xx.    12,  5. 


Cf.    Hopkins,  Transac- 
tions of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts 


and  Sciences,   15,   52,   53  ;   Hillebrandt, 
Vedische  Mythologie,  2,  157. 


Kapya  ('  descendant  of  Kapi ')  is  the  patronymic  of  Sanaka 
and  Navaka,  two  obviously  fictitious  persons  who  served  at 
the  Sattra  ('  sacrificial  session ')  of  the  Vibhindukiyas  in  the 
Jaiminiya  Brahmana.1  It  is  also  the  patronymic  of  Pataiicala 
in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.2     See  also  Kai^orya. 

1  iii.  233. 

2  iii.  3,  1  ;  7,  1.     Cf.  Weber,  Indian  Literature,  126,  137. 

Kabandhi  ('  descendant  of  Kabandha ')  is  the  patronymic  of 
Vicarin  in  the  Gopatha  Brahmana  (i.  2,  9.  18). 

Kama-pri  ('  descendant  of  Kamapra  ')  is  the  patronymic  of 
Marutta  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana  (viii.  21).  In  the  St. 
Petersburg  Dictionary  it  is  suggested  that  the  reading  in  this 
passage  should  be  kamapre,  *  fulfilling  desires,'  as  an  epithet  of 
the  sacrifice  (yajne). 


Karaskara  ] 


TOWN  OF  KAMPlLA— NAMES 


149 


Kamalayana  ('  descendant  of  Kamala ')  is  the  patronymic  of 
Upakosala  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad  (iv.  10,  i). 


Kampila. — In  one  passage  of  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas1  the 
epithet  Kamplla-vasini  is  applied  to  a  woman,  perhaps  the 
king's  Mahisi  or  chief  wife,  whose  duty  it  was  to  sleep  beside 
the  slaughtered  animal  at  the  horse  sacrifice  (Asvamedha). 
The  exact  interpretation  of  the  passage  is  very  uncertain,  but 
both  Weber2  and  Zimmer3  agree  in  regarding  Kampila  as  the 
name  of  the  town  known  as  Kampilya  in  the  later  literature, 
and  the  capital  of  Pancala  in  Madhyadesa. 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.   4,   19,    1 
Maitrayani     Samhita,      iii.     12,     20 
Kathaka  Samhita,  Asvamedha,  iv.  8 
Vajasaneyi   Samhita,    xxiii.    18 ;    Tait- 
tiriya Brahmana,  iii.  9,  6 ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  xiii.  2,  8,  3. 

2  Indische    Studicn,    1,    184  ;     Indian 
Literature,  114,  115. 


3  Altindisches  Leben,  36,  37.  So  also 
Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda, 
3,  204 ;  von  Schroeder,  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  I,  xxi ;  Indiens  Liter atur  und 
Cultur,  164  ;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of 
the  East,  44,  321,  322. 


Kamboja  ('  native  of  Kamboja  ')  Aupamanyava  ('  descendant 
of  Upamanyu ')  is  mentioned  as  a  teacher  in  the  Vamsa 
Brahmana.1 

1  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  4,  372  ;   Episches  im   vedischen  Ritual,  45  ;    Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  102. 


Karapaeava  is  the  name  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana1  of  a 
place  on  the  Yamuna. 


1  xxv.  10,  23.  Cf.  Asvalayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  xii.  6 ;  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
xiii.  29,  25  ;  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra, 


xxiv.   6,   10 ;    Weber,  Indische  Studien, 
1,  34. 


Karaskara  is  the  name  of  a  people  mentioned  in  the  Baudha- 
yana  Srauta  Sutra1  and  the  Apastamba2  and  Hiranyakesi3 
Sutras. 


1  xx.     13     (14).      Cf.     Baudhayana 
Dharma  Sutra,  i.  2,  14. 

2  xxii.  6,  18. 

3  xvii.  6.     Cf.  Buhler,  Sacred  Boohs 


of  the  East,  14,  148  ;  Caland,  Zeiischrift 
der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischcn  Gescll- 
schaft,  56,  553. 


i5o  POET  [  Kari 

Kari  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  victims  of  the  human  sacrifice 
(Purusamedha)  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,1  and  is  there  dedi- 
cated to  '  laughter.'  The  commentator  Mahidhara2  interprets 
the  word  as  '  worker '  (kar ana-silo),  but  the  St.  Petersburg 
Dictionary  suggests  that  it  means  a  ' jubilant'  person  (as 
derived  from  the  root  kr,  l  to  praise  *). 

1  xxx.  6.  20 ;   Taittirlya  Brahmana,   I       2  On  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  loc.  cit. 
iii.  4,  2,  i.  I 

Kariradi  is  the  name  of  persons  mentioned  in  the  Jaiminiya 
Upanisad  Brahmana  (ii.  4,  4)  as  holding  a  special  view  of  the 
Udgitha  (Samaveda  Chant). 

Karu,  'poet,'  is  a  word  almost  confined  to  the  Rigveda.1 
There  is  evidence  that  the  poet  was  regarded  as  a  professional 
man,  just  as  much  as  the  physician  (Bhisaj).2  The  poets,  no 
doubt,  mainly  lived  at  the  courts  of  princes  amid  their  re- 
tainers,3 though  they  would  probably  also  sing  the  praises  of  rich 
merchants.  There  was  probably  no  essential  connexion  between 
the  priest  and  the  poet.  Though  the  priest  was  often  a  poet, 
yet  poetry  can  hardly  have  been  restricted  to  the  priestly  caste. 
Indeed,  at  the  horse  sacrifice  (Asvamedha)  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana4  expressly  requires  that  one  of  the  singers  of  pane- 
gyrics should  be  a  Rajanya,  while  the  other  was  a  Brahmana, 
both  singing  verses  of  their  own  composition.  The  Anukra- 
mani  (Index)  in  several  cases5  attributes  hymns  of  the  Rigveda 
to  princes;  and  even  though  this  may  often  be  merely  the 
same  sort  of  procedure6  as  has  made  Sudraka  the  author  of 
the  Mrcchakatika,  or  Harsa  of  the  Ratnavali,  and  has  given 
us  royal  teachers  of  the  Brahman  doctrine,7  still  the  Indian 
tradition  evidently  saw  nothing  odd  in  the  idea  of  non- 
Brahmanas   as   poets.     Most   of  the   non-sacred   poetry   has, 


1  i.  14S,  2  ;  165,  12  ;  177,  5  ;  178,  3  ; 
ii.  43.  1  I  "I-  33.  8  ;  39,  7  ;  v.  33,  7  ; 
vii.  27  ;  68,  9  ;  72,  4,  etc.  ;  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  i.  8,  7 ;  Gopatha  Brahmana, 
i.  2,  21. 

2  ix.  112,  3. 

3  vii.  73,  1. 

*  xiii.  1,  5.  1  :  4.  3.  5- 


5  E.g.,  x.  92  is  attributed  to  Saryata 
Manava. 

6  See  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  3,  202. 

7  Weber,  Episches  im  vedischen  Ritual, 
20,  n.  4,  sees  in  Av.  xx.  a  recension 
of  Ksatriya  character.  He  also  finds 
Ksatriyas  in  Visvamitra  and  Kaksivant, 
but  hardly  with  reason.     Cf.  Varna. 


Kar§marya  ] 


FILTER— IRON— GO  A  L—TREE 


151 


however,  disappeared,  for  the  epic  is  a  product,  as  it  stands, 
of  a  later  period.     See  also  Rsi. 


Karotara  appears  to  denote  in  the  Rigveda,1  and  occasionally 
later,2  a  '  filter '  or  '  sieve '  for  purifying  the  liquor  called  Sura. 


1  i.  116,  7. 

2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xix.   16.   82  ; 
Satapatha    Brahmana,    xii.    9,    1,    2; 


Kausitaki  Brahmana,  ii.  7.     Cf.  Zim- 
mer,  Altindisches  Leben,  280. 


Karoti  is  mentioned  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (ix.  5,  2, 15) 
as  a  place,  or  perhaps  a  river,  where  Tura  Kavaseya  made  a 
fire-altar — that  is,  as  a  seat  of  the  fire-cult  par  excellence. 

Karsakeyi-putra  ('  son  of  Karsakeyi ')  is  the  name  of  a  man 
mentioned  in  the  last  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers)  of  the  Brhada- 
ranyaka  Upanisad.  In  the  Kanva  (vi.  5,  2)  recension  he  is  a 
pupil  of  Pracmayogrlputra ;  in  the  Madhyamdina  (vi.  4,  33) 
recension  his  teacher's  name  is  Prainiputra  Asurivasin. 


Karsnayasa  ('  black  metal '),  a  word  found  in  the  Upanisads,1 
must  clearly  mean  i  iron.'     See  Ayas. 


1  Chandogya  Upanisad,   iv.    17,   7 ; 
vi.   1,    5;   JaiminTya   Upanisad   Brah- 


mana, iii.   17,  3.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altin- 
disches Leben,  52. 


Karsman,  a  word  meaning  literally  '  furrow,'  and  found  only 
in  the  Rigveda,1  is  the  designation  of  the  goal  in  the  chariot 
race.  The  competitor  probably  turned  round  it  and  came  back 
to  the  starting-place.2 

1  i.  116,  17  ;  ix.  36,  1  ;  74,  8. 

2  Av.  ii.  14,  6.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  291,  292. 


Karsmarya  is  the  name  of  a  tree  (Gmelina  arbor ea)  which 
is  often  alluded  to  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita.,1  the  Maitrayani 
Samhita.,2  and  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.3 


v.  2,  7,  3.  4;  vi.  2,  1,  5. 
iii.  2,  6  ;  7,  9. 


iii.  4,  1,  6; 


17;  iv.  3.  3,  6; 


vii.  4,  1,  37.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches 
Leben,  62. 


152 


TIME— STARS 


[  Kala 


Kala,  the  generic  expression  for  'time,'  first  occurs  in  the 
Rigveda,1  where,  however,  it  is  used  only  once,  in  the  late 
tenth  book.  It  is  known  to  the  Atharvaveda,2  where  Kala  has 
already  developed  the  sense  of  time  as  fate.  The  word  is 
frequent  in  the  Brahmanas,3  superseding  the  earlier  use  of  Rtu. 
The  more  general  division  of  time  is  into  '  past '  (bhuta), 
'  present '  (bhavat),  and  '  future  '  (bhavisyat).4  For  other  divisions 
see  Ahan,  Masa,  Samvatsara. 


x.  42,  9. 

xix.  53.54- 

Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.   7,  3,  3 


ii.  4,  2,  4 ;  iii.  8,  3,  36;  vii.  2,  2,  21, 
etc. 

4  E.g.,  Sahkhayana  Aranyaka,  vii.  20. 


Kalaka  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  victims  at  the  horse 
sacrifice  (Asvamedha)  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas,1  variously 
identified  with  a  bird2  or  a  chameleon.3 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  15,  1 ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  16;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  35. 

2  Mahidhara  on  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
loc.  cit. 


3  Sayana  on  Taittiriya  Samhita,  loc. 
cit.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben, 
99. 


Kala-kaiija. — In  the  Atharvaveda1  mention  is  made  of  the 
Kalakanjas  as  being  in  the  sky.  Both  Roth2  and  Zimmer3 
hold  that  some  constellation  is  meant.  But  as  the  defeat  of 
the  Kalakanjas  is  one  of  Indra's  exploits,4  it  is  doubtful  whether 
any  stress  can  be  laid  on  that  interpretation  of  the  passage  in 
the  Atharvaveda.  Whitney5  suggests  that  the  three  stars  of 
Orion  are  meant,  Bloomfield6  that  the  galaxy  or  the  stars  in 
general  are  intended. 


1  vi.  80,  2. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Altindisches  Leben,  353. 

4  Kathaka  Samhita,  viii.  1.  Cf.  also 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  6,  9  ;  Taittiriya 
Brahmana,  i.  1,  2,  4-6;  Kausltaki 
Upanisad,  iii.  1. 

6  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  341. 


6  Hymns  of  the  A  tharvaveda,  500 ; 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
15,  163-169. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  410, 
414  et  seq.  ;  3,  465  ;  Oertel,  Journal 
of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  19, 
121. 


Kasi,  Kasya  ]     PA  TRONYMIC—GRA  SS— PEOPLE  OF  KASI         i  53 


Kavaseya  ('  descendant  of  Kavasa ')  is  the  constant  patro- 
nymic of  Tura.  The  Kavaseyas  are  also  mentioned  as  teachers 
of  philosophical  points  in  the  Rigveda  Aranyakas.1 


1  Aitareya     Aranyaka,     iii.     2, 
Sankhayana  Aranyaka,  viii.  11. 


6  ;    I       Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1 ,  391,  n.  ; 
I  2,  418  ;  Keith,  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  257. 


Kavya  ('  descendant  of  Kavi ')  is  the  constant1  patronymic  of 
USanas.  In  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana  it  is  also  applied  to 
Idhat2  and  Uksnorandhra.3 


1  Rv.  i.  51,  11  ;  83,  5;  121,  12 
vi.  20,  11  ;  viii.  23,  17  ;  Av.  iv.  29,  6 
Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  8,  5,  etc. 

2  xiv.  9,  16. 


3  xiii.  9,  19. 

Cf.  Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the  Con- 
necticut Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15, 
48,  49. 


Ka£a. — Roth1  finds  this  word,  which  denotes  a  species  of 
grass  (Saccharum  spontaneum)  used  for  mats,  etc.,  in  one  passage 
of  the  Rigveda,2  but  the  reading  is  uncertain.  The  word  has 
this  sense  in  the  Taittiriya  Aranyaka.3 

1  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


x.  100,  10. 


vi.  9,  1. 


Kagi,  Kagya. — The  name  Kasi  denotes  (in  the  plural1)  the 
people  of  Kasi  (Benares),  and  Kasya,  the  king  of  Kasi.  The 
Satapatha  Brahmana2  tells  of  Dhrtarastra,  king  of  Kasi,  who 
was  defeated  by  Satanika  Satrajita,  with  the  result  that  the 
Kasis,  down  to  the  time  of  the  Brahmana,  gave  up  the  kindling 
of  the  sacred  fire.  Satrajita  was  a  Bharata.  We  hear  also  of 
AjataSatru  as  a  king  of  Kasi;3  and  no  doubt  Bhadrasena 
Ajatagatrava,  a  contemporary  of  Uddalaka,  was  also  a  king  of 
Kasi. 

The  Kasis  and  Videhas  were  closely  connected,  as  was 
natural  in  view  of  their  geographical  position.  The  compound 
name  Kasi-Videha  occurs  in  the  Kausitaki  Upanisad;4  in  the 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad5  Gargi  describes  Ajatasatru  as  either 
a  Kasi  or  a  Videha   king.      The  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra6 


1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  5,  4, 
19.  21.  The  plural  occurs  also  in 
the  Paippalada  recension  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda,  v.  22,  14. 

2  xiii.  5,  4,  19. 


3  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  1,1 
iii.  8,  2  ;  Kausitaki  Upanisad,  iv.  1. 

4  Kausitaki  Upanisad,  loc.  cit. 

5  iii.  8,  2. 

6  xvi.  29,  5. 


154  THE  PEOPLE  OF  KASl  [  KaSi,  KaSya 

mentions  one  Purohita  as  acting  for  the  kings  of  Kaii,  Kosala, 
and  Videha;  and  the  Baudhayana  Srauta  Sutra7  mentions  Kasi 
and  Videha  in  close  proximity.  Weber,8  indeed,  throws  out 
the  suggestion  that  the  Kasis  and  the  Videhas  together  con- 
stitute the  Usmaras,  whose  name  is  very  rare  in  Vedic 
literature. 

As  Kosala  and  Videha  were  in  close  connexion,  Kasi  and 
Kosala  are  found  combined  in  the  compound  name  Kasi- 
Kausalyas  of  the  Gopatha  Brahmana.9 

Though  Kasi  is  a  late  word,  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  town 
is  older,  as  the  river  Varanavati  referred  to  in  the  Athar- 
vaveda10  may  be  connected  with  the  later  Varanasi  (Benares). 

It  is  significant  that  while  the  Kasis,  Kosalas,  and  Videhas 
were  united,  any  relations  which  the  Kuru-Pancala  peoples 
may  have  had  with  them  were  hostile.  It  is  a  fair  conclusion 
that  between  these  two  great  groups  of  peoples  there  did  exist 
some  political  conflict  as  well  as  probably  a  difference  of  culture 
in  some  degree.  The  Satapatha  Brahmana,11  in  the  story  of  the 
advance  of  Aryan  civilization  over  Kosala  and  Videha,  preserves 
a  clear  tradition  of  this  time,  and  a  piece  of  evidence  that  in 
the  Kuru-Pancala  country  lay  the  real  centre  of  the  Brahmana 
culture  (see  also  Kuru-Pancala).  That  the  Kosala- Videhas 
were  originally  settlers  of  older  date  than  the  Kuru-Pancalas 
is  reasonably  obvious  from  their  geographical  position,  but  the 
true  Brahmana  culture  appears  to  have  been  brought  to  them 
from  the  Kuru-Pancala  country.  It  is  very  probable  that  the 
East  was  less  Aryan  than  the  West,  and  that  it  was  less 
completely  reduced  under  Brahmin  spiritual  supremacy,  as  the 
movement  of  Buddhism  was  Eastern,  and  the  Buddhist  texts12 
reveal  a  position  in  which  the  Ksatriyas  rank  above  Brahmanas. 
With  this  agrees  the  fact  that  the  later  Vedic  texts13  display 

7  xxi.  13.  I   Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  12,  xlii  et  seq., 

8  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  212,    1    104,  n.  1. 


2X3. 

9  i-  2,  9. 

10  iv.  7.  1.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches 
Leben,  20  ;  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the 
Atharvavcda,  376. 

11  i.  4,  1,  10  et  seq.  Cf.  Weber, 
Indische  Studien,  1,  170  et  seq.  ;  Eggeling, 


12  See  Fick,  Die  sociale  Gliederung, 
chap.  iv. 

13  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xxii.  4, 
22  ;  Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  viii.  6, 
28.  See  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  10, 
99  ;  Fick,  op.  cit.%  140,  n.  1  ;  and  cf. 
Magadha. 


Ka§tfia  ]  NAMES— RACE-COURSE  155 

towards  the  people  of  Magadha  a  marked  antipathy,  which 
may  be  reasonably  explained  by  that  people's  lack  of  orthodoxy, 
and  which  may  perhaps  be  traced  as  far  back  as  the  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita.14  It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  the  Kosala-Videhas 
and  Kasis  actually  were  merely  offshoots  of  the  tribes  later 
known  as  the  Kuru-Pancalas,  and  that  they  by  reason  of 
distance  and  less  complete  subjugation  of  the  aborigines  lost 
their  Brahminical  culture.  This  hypothesis,  however,  appears 
less  likely,  though  it  might  be  supported  by  a  literal  inter- 
pretation of  the  legend  of  the  Aryan  migration  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana.15 


14  xxx.  5.  22.     See  Magadha. 

15  Cf.  Eggeling,  loc.  cit.,  104,  n.  1. 


Asiatic  Society,  1908,  837,  1143;  Keith, 
ibid.,  831,   1 138;    Oldenberg,   Buddha, 


Cf.    Grierson,  Journal    of   the  Royal       402  et  seq. 

Kasyapa  ('descendant  of  Kasyapa')  is  a  common  patro- 
nymic,1 and  is  applied  specially  to  Rgyas>ng,a,  Devataras 
Syavasayana,  Susa  Vahneya. 

1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  vii.  5,  i,  5  ;  Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  ii.  18  ;  x.  1,  8,  etc. 

Kasyapi-balakya-mathari-putra  ('  son  of  Kasyapi,  Balakya, 
and  Mathari ').  This  curious  name  is  given  in  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad1  to  a  teacher,  pupil  of  Kautslputra. 

1  vi.  4,  31  (Madhyamdina  recension). 

Kasayana  is  mentioned  in  the  second  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers) 
of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  as  a  teacher,  pupil  of  Saya- 
kayana  according  to  the  Kanva  (iv.  6,  2),  of  Saukarayana 
according  to  the  Madhyamdina  recension  (iv.  5,  27). 

Kastha  seems  to  have  the  sense  in  the  Rigveda1  of  '  course ' 
for  a  chariot  race.  It  also  means  in  the  Rigveda2  and  later3 
1  goal,'  either  like  the  Karsman  the  turning  place,  or  the  final 
goal  (paramd  kastha). 


1  i-  37,  10  ;  65,  3  ;  iv.  58,  7  ;  vi.  46, 1  ; 
vii-  93.  3  ;  viii.  80,  8  ;  ix.  21,  7. 

2  x.  102,  9,  is  perhaps  so  to  be  taken. 


Aitareya  Brahmana,  iv.  7 ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  xi.  5,  7,  2,  etc. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  291, 


3  Av.  ii.  14,  6;  Taittiriya  Samhita,    |   292;  Max  Miiller,  Sacred  Books  of  the 
i«  6,  9,  3  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  ix.  13  ;      East,  32,  77. 


i56 


COUGH— TREE— BIRD— GAMBLER 


[  Kas 


Kas,  Kasa,  Kasa,  Kasika. — All  these  four  forms1  of  the  same 
word  denote  '  cough,'  which  is  mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda 
as  accompanying  a  headache,2  as  a  symptom  in  fever  (Takman), 
and  as  an  independent  disease.4 


1  Kas :  Av.  i.  12,  3  ;  v.  22,  10 ; 
Kasa  :  Av.  v.  22,  1 1  (probably) ;  Kasa  : 
Av.  vi.  105,  1  et  seq.  ;  Kasika  :  Av.  v.  22, 
12  ;  xi.  2,  22. 

2  Av.  i.  12,  3. 


v.  22,  10. 
vi.  105. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  385  ; 
Grohmann,  Indische  Studien,  9,  394  ; 
Jolly,  Median,  89. 


Kahodi   ('  descendant    of    Kahoda ')   is   the    patronymic   of 
Argfala  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita  (xxv.  5). 


Kimsuka  is  the  name  of  a  tree  (Butea  frondosa)  mentioned 
in  the  wedding  hymn  of  the  Rigveda,1  the  bridal  car  being 
described  as  adorned  with  its  blossoms  (su-kimsuka). 


1  x.  85,  20.    Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches 
Leben,  62.     Sayana  thinks  the  meaning 


is  that  the  car  is  made  of  the  wood  of 
the  tree. 


Kiki-dlvi  denotes  some  kind  of  bird,  perhaps  the  blue  jay.1 
According  to  the  commentator,  it  means  'partridge  '  (tittiri)  in 
the  Taittiriya  Samhita.2 


1  Roth,   St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v.     See  Rv.  x.  97,  13. 

2  v.  6,  22,  1. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,   92  ; 
Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  251. 


Kitava,  '  the  gambler,'  is  frequently  referred  to  in  the  Rig- 
veda1 and  later.2  A  father  is  represented  as  chastising  his  son 
for  gambling.3  The  gambler  seems  at  times  to  have  fallen, 
along  with  his  family,  into  servitude,  presumably  by  selling 
himself  to  pay  his  debts.4  Technical  names5  for  different  sorts 
of  gamblers  given  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas  are  Adinava-darsa, 


1  ii.  29,  5;  v.  85,  8;  x.  34,  3.  7.  10. 
11.  13. 

2  Av.  vii.  50,  1  ;  109,  3  ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxx.8. 18.  22  ;  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana,  ii.  19,  etc. 

3  Rv.  ii.  29,  5.     Cf.  Pitr. 


4  Rv.  x.  34.  Cf.  perhaps  the  bhakta- 
dasa,  'slave  for  hire,'  of  the  Manava 
Dharma  Sastra,  viii.  415  ;  Fick,  Die 
sociale  Gliedcrung,  197. 

5  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  3,  3, 1  et  seq.  ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  18. 


Kirata  ]        APE— WATER-PLANT— MOUNTAINEERS 


157 


Kalpin,  Adhi-kalpin,  and  Sabha-sthanu.  None  of  these  can  be 
safely6  explained,  though  the  last  has  usually7  been  taken  as  a 
satirical  name  derived  from  the  gambler's  devotion  to  the  dicing 
place  (Sabha),  '  pillar  of  the  dicing  hall.'  The  first  literally 
means  '  seeing  ill-luck,'8  and  may  refer  to  the  quickness  of  the 
dicer  to  note  an  error  on  the  part  of  his  antagonist,  or  to  his 
eagerness  to  see  the  defeat  of  his  rival. 


6  Cf  Weber,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  18,  282 ; 
Zimmer,  Altindisch.es  Leben,  284. 

7  So  Mahidhara  on  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 


hita,  xxx.    18  ;   Sayana  on  Taittinya 
Brahmana,  iii.  4,  16,  I. 

8  Cf.    Roth,     St.    Petersburg     Dic- 
tionary, s.v. ;  Weber,  loc.  cit. 


Kim-purusa,  lit.  *  what  sort  of  man,'  appears  in  the  Brah- 
manas1  to  designate  the  '  ape,'  which  is  a  mimic  man.  Possibly 
the  same  sense  should  be  seen  in  the  passage  of  the  Vaja- 
saneyi Samhita,2  where  it  occurs,  and  where  Roth3  assumes  it 
to   refer   to   a   contemptible   man.      Max    Muller4    renders   it 


savage. 

1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  8  ;  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,  i.  2,  3,  9  ;  vii.  5, 
2,  32. 

2  xxx.  16;  Taittinya  Brahmana,  iii. 
4,  12,  1. 


3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

4  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  420. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  9,  246; 
Omina  und  Portenta,  356 ;  Eggeling, 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  12,  51,  n.  3. 


Kiyambu  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  water-plants  which  are  to 
grow,  according  to  a  funeral  hymn  in  the  Rigveda,1  on  the  place 
where  the  body  of  the  dead  was  burned.  The  word  seems  to 
mean  '  having  some  water,'  possibly  by  popular  etymology.2 


1  x.  16,  i3  =  Av.  xviii.  3,  6. 

2  Cf.  Sayana  on  Rv.,  loc.  cit.,  and  on 
Taittinya  Aranyaka,  vi.  4,  1,  2,  where 
Kyambu  is  the  form. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  62  ; 
Bloomfield,  Proceedings  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  October,  1890,  xl. 


i.  Kirata  is  a  name  applied  to  a  people  living  in  the  caves 
of  the  mountains,  as  appears  clearly  from  the  dedication  of  the 
Kirata  to  the  caves  (guhd)  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,1  and 
from  the  reference  in  the  Atharvaveda2  to  a  Kirata  girl  (kaira- 
tika),  who  digs   a   remedy   on   the   ridges   of  the  mountains. 


1  xxx.  16;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  12,  1. 


x.  4,  14. 


i58 


TWO  PRIESTS— WHITE  LEPROSY 


[  Kirata 


Later3  the  people  called  Kiratas  were  located  in  Eastern  Nepal, 
but  the  name  seems  to  have  been  applied  to  any  hill  folk,  no 
doubt  aborigines,  though  the  Manava  Dharma  Sastra4  regards 
them  as  degraded  Ksatriyas. 


3  Lassen,  Indische  Alterthumskunde,  i2, 

530,  534- 

4  x.  44. 

Cf.   Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  32  ; 


Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3, 
207 ;  V.  Smith,  Journal  of  the  Royal 
Asiatic  Society,  1909,  258,  n.  1  ;  Levi, 
Le  Nepal,  2,  77. 


2.  Kirata. — In  the  story  of  Asamati  there  appear,  as  the  two 
priests  who  are  opposed  to  the  Gaupayanas,  Kirata  and  Akuli 
according  to  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,1  or  Kilata  and  Akuli 
according  to  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.2  No  doubt  the  name  is 
chosen,  not  as  that  of  a  historic  person,  but  as  a  suitable 
designation  of  a  hostile  priest ;  for  it  is  probably  identical  with 
the  name  of  the  mountaineers  described  in  the  preceding  article. 


1  xiii.  12,  5  (where  the  text  reads 
kirata-kulyau).  Bohtlingk,  Dictionary, 
s.v.,  takes  the  word,  with  Sayana,  as 
an  adjective,  kirata-kula,  '  of  the  family 
of  Kirata.'  The  reading  in  the  Brhad- 
devata  (vii.  86)  is  kiratdkuli. 

2  i.   1,  4,    14  (where  the  text  reads 


MlatakuU).  Cf.  also  Satyayanaka  Brah- 
mana apud  Sayana  on  Rv.  x.  57,  1  ; 
60,  1  ;  Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  iii.  167  ; 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
18,  41  et  seq.  ;  Hopkins,  Transactions  of 
the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and 
Sciences,  15,  48,  n.  1. 


Kilata  is  the  form  of  the  name  2.  Kirata  that  appears  in  the 
Satapatha,  Satyayanaka,  and  Jaiminiya  Brahmanas.1 

1  See  note  2  under  the  preceding  article. 


Kilasa  is  the  name  of  a  disease,  '  white  leprosy,'  in  the  Athar- 
vaveda1  and  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  etc.2  It  resulted  in  the 
appearance  of  grey  (palita)  and  white  (sukla,  sveta)  spots  all 
over  the  skin.  Haug  gave  the  same  sense  to  alasa  in  the 
Aitareya  Brahmana,3  but  this  is  doubtful.  The  fern.  Kilasi  is 
taken  by  Max  Miiller  to  mean  a  '  spotted  deer '  in  one  passage 
of  the  Rigveda.4 


1  i>  23,  24. 

2  xxx.  21  ;  Pancavimsa  Brahmana, 
xiv.  3,  17;  xxiii.  n,  n  ;  Taittirlya 
Aranyaka,  v.  4,  12.  Cf.  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  391  ;  Bloomfield, 
Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  266;  Jolly, 


Medicin,  98 ;  Hopkins,  Transactions  of 
the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and 
Sciences,  15,  68. 

3  vi.  33,  5. 

4  v.  53,  1. 


KlrSa]  THE  KIKATA  TRIBE— WORM— PLOUGHMAN— POET  159 

KIkata. — The  name  of  this  people  occurs  only  in  one  passage 
of  the  Rigveda,  where  they  appear  as  hostile  to  the  singer  and 
as  under  the  leadership  of  Pramaganda.  Yaska2  declares  that 
Kikata  was  the  name  of  a  non- Aryan  country,  and  later8 
KIkata  is  given  as  a  synonym  of  Magadha.  Hence  Zimmer4 
concludes  that  the  Kikatas  were  a  non-Aryan  people  living  in 
the  country  later  known  as  Magadha.  Weber5  holds  that  this 
people  were  located  in  Magadha,  but  were  Aryan,  though  at 
variance  with  other  Aryan  tribes,  perhaps  because  of  heretical 
tendencies,  for  Magadha  was  later  a  seat  of  Buddhism.  But 
the  identification  is  uncertain,  and  is  doubted  by  Oldenberg6 
and  Hillebrandt.7 


1  in-  53.  14. 

2  Nirukta,  vi.  32. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

4  Altindisches    Leben,    31,    118.      Cf. 


5  Indische    Studien,     1,    186;    Indian 
Literature,  79,  n.  *, 

6  Buddha,  402,  403;  Rgveda-Noten,  1, 
253. 


Geldner,  Rigveda,  Kommentar,  58.  7  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  14-18. 

Kita  is  the  name  of  a  species  of  worm  mentioned  in  the 
Atharvaveda,1  and  frequently  in  the  Upanisads.2 

1  ix.  4,  16.  I   10,    2 ;    vii.    2,    1  ;    7,    1  ;    Kausitaki 

2  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  1, 19  ;    I   Upanisad,  i.  2,  etc. 

2,  14  ;  Chandogya  Upanisad,  vi.  9,  3  ;  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  98. 

Kinasa,  a  name  of  the  ploughman  or  cultivator  of  the  soil,  is 
found  in  the  Rigveda1  and  the  later  Samhitas.2     See  Krsi. 


1  iv.  57,  8. 

2  Av.  iv.  ii,  10 ;  vi.  30,  1  ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  11  ;  Taittiriya 
Brahmana,  ii.  4,  8,  7. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  237  ; 
Weber,  Indische  Studien,  18,  45 ;  Hop- 
kins, Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  17,  86,  n. 


KIri  is  in  the  Rigveda1  a  regular  designation  of  the  'poet.' 
Cf,  Rsi. 

1  i.    31.    13;    ii.    12,    6;    v.    52,    12   |   Rigveda,  Glossar,  46;   Pischel,   Vedische 
{kirinah ;  Max  Miiller,  Sacred  Books  of  j   Studien,  1,  223. 
the  East,  32,  317).     But   see  Geldner,   j 

Klp£a,  the  name  of  some  kind  of  animal,  or  perhaps  bird,  is 
mentioned  in  the  list  of  victims  for  the  horse  sacrifice  (Asva- 
medha)  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita.1 
1  v.  5,  20,  i.   Cf,  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  99  ;  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


i6o 


SWEET  DRINK— POET— COCK— A  TEACHER       [  Kilala 


Kilala,  a  word  denoting  a  '  sweet  drink,'  is  found  in  all  the 
later  Samhitas,1  but  not  in  the  Rigveda.  As  the  Sura-kara, 
*  maker  of  Sura,'  is  dedicated  in  the  list  of  victims  in  the  human 
sacrifice2  (Purusamedha)  to  Kilala,  it  must  have  been  a  drink 
of  somewhat  the  same  nature  as  the  Sura  itself,  possibly,  as 
Zimmer3  suggests,  a  kind  of  rum. 


1  Av.  iv.  ii,  10;  26,  6;  27,  5; 
vi.  69,  1  ;  x.  6,  25  ;  xii.  1,  59  ;  Tait- 
tiriya  Brahmana,  ii.  6,  12,  13  ;  Maitra- 
yani  Samhita,  ii.  7,   12;  iii.    11,  3.  4  ; 


Vajasaneyi   Samhita,    ii.    34 ;    iii.    43 
xx.  65  ;  xxx.  11,  etc. 

2  Vajasaneyi     Samhita,      xxx.      11 
Taittiriya  Brahmana.  iii.  4,  9,  1. 

3  Altindisches  Leben,  281. 


Kigmfla  denotes,  according  to  Bohtlingk,1  a  certain  disease 
in  the  Paippalada  recension  of  the  Atharvaveda.2 


1  Dictionary,  s.v. 


xix.  8,  4. 


Kista   in  two  passages  of  the  Rigveda1  means  'poet,'  like 
Klri. 

1  i.  127,  7  ;  vi.  67,  10.     Cf.  Yaska,  Nirukta,  iii.  15. 

Kukkuta,  '  cock,'  occurs  in  the  Yajurveda1  only.2 

1  Vajasaneyi    Samhita,   i.    16.      Cf.   I       a  It     is     common     in      the      later 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  91.  |   language. 


Kutaru  is,  according  to  the  commentator  Mahidhara,1 
synonymous  with  Kukkuta,  '  cock.'  The  word  is  found  in  the 
Yajurveda  Samhitas  only.2 


1  On  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  23. 

2  Taittiriya    Samhita,   v.    5,    17,    1 ; 
MaitrayanI  Samhita,   i.    I,   6;  iii.    14, 


4.  20 ;  iv.  1,  6  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xxiv.  23,  39. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  93. 


Kunda-payin  ('  drinking  from  a  jug ')  is  the  name  of  a  teacher 
mentioned  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana1  and  in  the  Sutras.2 


xxv.  4,  4. 


6;  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xxiv.  4, 


9  Asvalayana   Srauta  Sutra,   xii.   4,   I   21. 


Kutsa  ]       PATRONYMIC— ANIMAL— ANCIENT  HERO 


161 


Kunda-payya  ('  descendant  of  Kundapayin ')  is  a  patronymic 
connected  with  a  man  named  Spngavrs  in  one  passage  of  the 
Rigveda.1 


1  viii.  17,  13.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Transla- 
tion of  the  Rigveda,  3,  161  ;  Hopkins, 


Journal  of  the  A  merican  Oriental  Society, 
17,  90. 


Kundnjaci  is  the  name  of  an  animal  of  unknown  character 
occurring  in  the  lists  of  victims  at  the  horse  sacrifice  (Asva- 
medha)  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas.1  The  word  also  occurs  in 
one  passage  of  the  Rigveda,2  in  which  a  bird  would  seem  to  be 
intended,  though  Sayana  interprets  it  as  meaning  'with 
crooked  flight '  {kutila-gatya).  In  his  commentary  on  the 
Taittiriya  Samhita3  he  takes  the  word  to  denote  the  house- 
lizard  (grha-godhikd). 

1  Taittiriya   Samhita,   v.   5,    16,    1  ;  a  i.  29,  6. 

Maitrayanl  Samhita,  iii.  14,  18  ;  Vaja-  3  v.  5,  16,  1. 

saneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  37.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  89. 

Kutsa  is  the  name  of  a  hero  frequently  mentioned  in  the 
Rigveda,  which,  however,  gives  practically  no  information 
about  him,  for  he  was  no  doubt  already  a  figure  of  the  mythic 
past.  He  is  several  times1  called  Arjuneya,  'descendant  of 
Arjuna,'  and  is  usually2  associated  with  Indra  in  the  exploit  of 
defeating  the  demon  Susna  and  winning  the  sun.  He  is  said3 
to  have  defeated  Smadibha,  Tugra,  and  the  Vetasus,  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  he  is  several  times4  mentioned  with  Atithig'va  and 
Ayu  as  being  vanquished  by  Indra,  his  defeat  in  one  passage5 
being  attributed  to  Turvayana.  Elsewhere6  he  appears  with 
Atithigva  as  a  friend  of  Indra's.  In  the  later  literature  he  is 
seldom7  mentioned  except  in  connexion  with  the  myth  of  his 
binding  Indra,  which  is  found  in  the  Brahmanas,8  and  which  is 
based  on  an  obscure  verse  in  the  Rigveda.9 


1  Rv.  iv.  26,  1  ;  vii.   19, 


via.   i, 


11. 


2  Rv.  i.  63,  3  ;  121,  /g;  174,  J}j 
*75>  4  J  iv.  30,  4  ;  v.  29,  f\  vi.  20,  5  ; 
vii.  19,  2  ;  x.  99,  9.  9- to 

3  Rv.  x.  49,  4." 

4  Rv.  i.  53,  10  ;  ii.  14,  7  ;  viii.  53,  2. 
Cf.  iv.  26,  1/ 

5  Rv.  i.  53,  10. 

VOL.  I. 


6  Rv.  i.  51,  6;  vi.  26,  3. 

7  E.g.,  Av.  iv.  29,  5;  Paricavirnsa 
Brahmana,  xiv.  11,  26. 

8  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  ix.  2,  22  ; 
Satyayanaka  in  Sayana  on  Rv.  x.  38, 
5  ;  Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  i.  228;  Oertel, 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
18,31. 

9  x.  38,  5- 

II 


1 62 


NAMES— KABUL  RIVER 


[  Kutsa  Aurava 


The  Kutsas,  or  descendants  of  Kutsa,  are  mentioned  in  one 
hymn  of  the  Rigveda.10 


10  vn.  25,  5. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3, 113,  148;  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift 
der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesell- 
schaft,  42,  210,  211  ;  Hillebrandt, 
Vedische  Mythologie,  3,  284  et  seq.,  who 


suggests  that  perhaps  two  Kutsas — one 
a  friend  of  Indra,  and  the  other  a  foe 
—  may  be  distinguished  ;  Geldner, 
Vedische  Studien,  3,  171  ;  Hopkins, 
Transactions  of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of 
Arts  and  Sciences,  15,  57,  n.  1. 


Kutsa  Aurava  ('  son  of  Uru ')  is  mentioned  in  the  Paiica- 
vimsa  Brahmana1  as  having  murdered  his  domestic  priest 
(purohita),  Upagu  Sausravasa,  because  the  father  of  the  latter 
insisted  on  paying  homage  to  Indra.  This  fact  may  be  com- 
pared with  the  hostility  to  Indra  of  Kutsa  according  to  certain 
passages  of  the  Rigveda.2 


1  xiv.  6,  8. 

2  See  Kutsa. 

Cf.  Hillebrandt,   Vedische  Mythologie, 


3,  284  ;  Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the 
Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences, 
15>  57  5  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  10,  32. 


Kunti. — The  Kuntis  are  referred  to  in  an  obscure  and  corrupt 
passage  of  the  Kathaka  Samhita1  as  having  defeated  the 
Pancalas. 

1  xxvi.  9.  See  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  3,  471,  and  cf.  perhaps  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  iv.  2,  6. 

Kubera  Varakya  is  mentioned  in  a  list  of  teachers  in  the 
Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana  (iii.  41,  1)  as  a  pupil  of 
Jayanta  Varakya. 

Kubha  is  the  name  of  a  river  mentioned  twice  in  the  Rigveda,1 
and  no  doubt  identical  with  the  modern  Kabul  river,  the 
Greek  Kco(prjv. 

1  v-  53.  9  >  x-  75>  6.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  14;  Ludwig,  Translation 
of  the  Rigveda,  3,  200. 


Kubhra   is   the   name   of   some   animal    in   the   Maitrayani 
Samhita  (ii.  5,  3). 


Kumbhinasa  ]    LOTUS— HAIR  ORNAMENT— SPEECH— POT."*  163 

Ku-muda  is  the  name  of  a  plant  mentioned  with  other  water 
plants  in  one  passage  of  the  Atharvaveda.1  It  is  no  doubt  the 
white  water-lily  (Nymphcea  esculenta),  being  the  name  of  that 
plant  in  post-Vedic  Sanskrit  also. 

1  iv.  34,  5.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  70. 

Kumba  is  mentioned  with  Opa§a  and  Kurira  as  an  ornament 
of  women's  hair  in  the  Atharvaveda.1  Geldner2  thinks  that, 
like  those  two  words,  it  originally  meant  *  horn,'  but  this  is 
very  doubtful.  Indian  tradition3  simply  regards  the  term  as 
denoting  a  female  adornment  connected  with  the  dressing  of 
the  hair. 


1  vi.  138,  3. 

2  Vedisch  e  Studien ,  1 ,  131. 

3  Sayana  on  Av.  vi.  138,  3. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  265; 


Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
538)  539 ;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  348 ;  Caland,  tjber  das 
rituelle  Sutra  des  Baudhayana,  59. 


Kumbya  or  Kumvya  is  a  word  mentioned  after  Re,  Yajus, 
Saman,  and  Gatha  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  to  denote 
a  form  of  speech.  In  the  Aitareya  Aranyaka2  it  appears  as 
one  of  the  forms  of  measured  speech  together  with  Re  and 
Gatha.  The  precise  meaning  of  the  term  is  unknown.  Weber3 
suggests  the  sense  '  refrain.' 


1  xi.  5,  7,  10. 

2  ii.  3.  6. 

3  Indische  Studien,  10,  in,  n. 


Cf.  Keith,  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  221  ; 
Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  44, 
101. 


Kumbha  is  a  word  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  Rigveda,1 
as  well  as  later,2  and  denotes  a  '  pot.'  Usually  no  doubt  made 
of  clay,  it  was  easily  broken.3     See  also  Ukha. 


1  i.  116,  7  ;  117,  6  ;  vii.  33,  13,  etc. 

2  Av.  i.  6,  4  ;  iii.  12,  7,  etc.  ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xix.  87,  etc. 


3  Rv.  x.  89,  7. 

Cf.  Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities, 
367. 


Kumbhi-nasa  ('  pot-nosed ')  is  the  name  of  an  animal 
mentioned  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the  horse  sacrifice  (Asva- 
medha)  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita.1  Possibly  some  sort  of 
snake  is  meant,  as  in  the  later  literature. 

1  v.  5,  14,  1.    Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  95  ;  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

II — 2 


1 64  HEAD  ORNAMENT  [  Kuyavax 

Kuya-vac  ('  evil-speaking ')  appears  in  one  passage  of  the 
Rigveda1  to  denote  a  demon  slain  by  Indra,  probably  as  a 
personification  of  the  barbarian  opponents  of  the  Aryans.  The 
expression  mrdhra-vdc  ('  speaking  insultingly  ')  is  similarly  used 
of  barbarians  in  the  Rigveda.2 

i  i.  174,  7.  2  v.  29,  10  ;  32,  8.     See  Dasyu. 


Kurira,  like  Opasa  and  Kumba,  denotes  some  sort  of  female 
head  ornament  in  the  description  of  the  bride's  adornment  in 
the  wedding  hymn  of  the  Rigveda1  and  in  the  Atharvaveda.2 
According  to  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas,3  the  goddess  Simvali  is 
described  by  the  epithets  su-kaparda,  su-kunra,  sv-opasd,  as 
wearing  a  beautiful  head-dress. 

According  to  Geldner,4  the  word  originally  meant  '  horn '; 
but  this  is  uncertain,  as  this  sense  is  not  required  in  any 
passage  in  which  the  term  occurs.5 

1  x.  85,  8.  I  (  =  Vaitana    Sutra,    xi.    22),   cited    by 

2  vi.  138,  3.  I  Geldner,  is  quite  vague. 

3  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  1,  5,  3  ;  I  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  265  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  7,  5;  Vaja-  j  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
saneyi  Samhita,  xi.  56.  |  539  ;     Whitney,    Translation    of    the 

4  Vedische  Studien,  1,  131,  132.  I  Atharvaveda,  348  ;    Caland,   Uber  da$ 

5  Gopatha     Brahmana,     i.  3,     211  rituelle  Sutra  des  Baudhayana,  59. 


Kurlrin  ('having  a  Kurira')  is  a  word  occurring  in  an 
ambiguous  passage  of  the  Atharvaveda,1  in  which  it  may  be 
taken  either  as  a  noun  meaning  a  '  crested  animal,'  perhaps  as 
Zimmer2  suggests  the  'peacock,'  or  as  an  epithet  of  the  word 
Aja,  'goat,'  in  which  case  it  might  mean  'horned.'  But  even 
in  the  latter  alternative  a  metaphorical  application  of  the  word 
seems  sufficient,  just  as  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana3  Opasa 
is  used  of  the  horns  of  cattle,  and  thus  renders  unnecessary 
the  adoption  of  Geldner's4  view  that  the  original  meaning  of 
Kurira  is  '  horn.' 


1  V.   31,   2. 

2  Altindisches  Leben,  91. 

3  xiii.  4,  3. 

4  Vedische  Studien,  1,  130. 


Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 457,  539  ;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  18,  285;  Whitney,  Translation 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  279. 


Kuril  ] 


THE  KURU  PEOPLE 


165 


Kuru. — The   Kurus   appear  as  by  far  the   most   important 
people  in  the  Brahmana  literature.     There  is  clear  evidence 
that  it  was  in  the  country  of  the  Kurus,  or  the  allied  Kuru- 
Paiicalas,  that  the  great    Brahmanas  were  composed.1     The 
Kurus  are  comparatively  seldom  mentioned  alone,  their  name 
being  usually  coupled  with  that  of  the  Pancalas  on  account  of 
the  intimate  connexion  of  the  two  peoples.    The  Kuru-Pancalas 
are  often  expressly  referred  to  as  a  united  nation.2     In  the  land 
of  the    Kuru-Pancalas  speech  is  said   to   have   its   particular 
home  ;3    the   mode   of  sacrifice   among  the   Kuru-Pancalas  is 
proclaimed  to  be  the  best  ;4  the  Kuru-Pancala  kings  perform 
the  Rajasuya  or  royal  sacrifice  ;5  their  princes  march  forth  on 
raids  in  the  dewy  season,  and  return  in  the  hot  season.6     Later 
on  the  Kuru-Pancala  Brahmins  are  famous  in  the  Upanisads.7 
Weber8   and   Grierson9  have  sought  to  find  traces  in  Vedic 
literature  of  a  breach  between  the  two  tribes,  the  latter  scholar 
seeing  therein  a  confirmation  of  the  theory  that  the    Kurus 
belonged  to  the  later  stream  of  immigrants  into  India,  who 
were  specially  Brahminical,  as  opposed  to  the  Pancalas,  who 
were  anti-Brahminical.     In  support  of  this  view,  Weber  refers 
to  the  story  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita.10  of  a  dispute  between 
Vaka  Dalbhya  and  Dhrtarastra  Vaicitravlrya,   the  former 
being  held  to  be  by  origin  a  Pancala,  while  the  latter  is  held 


1  For  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana, 
cf.  Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the  Con- 
necticut Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15, 
49,  50,  with  Weber,  Indian  Literature, 
67,  68  ;  for  the  Aitareya  Brahmana  and 
the  Sankhayana  Brahmana,  Weber, 
loc.  cit.,  45  ;  for  the  Aitareya  and 
Sankhayana  Aranyakas,  Keith,  Journal 
of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1908,  387; 
for  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,  Weber, 
loc.  cit.,  132,  Transactions  of  the  Berlin 
Academy,  1895,  859.  The  Jaiminiya 
Brahmana  refers  repeatedly  to  the 
Kuru-Pancalas,  whose  name  also  occurs 
in  the  late  and  confused  Gopatha 
Brahmana.  For  the  Taittiriya  Brah- 
mana, see  i.  8,  4,  1.  2,  and  for  the 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iv.  2,  6. 

2  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana,  iii. 
7,  6;  8,  7;  iv.  7,  2  ;  Kausitaki  Upani- 


sad, iv.  1 ;  Gopatha  Brahmana,  1.  2,  9  ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  x.  6 ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xi.  3,  3  (Kanva  recension). 

3  Satapatha    Brahmana,    iii.    2,    3, 

15. 

4  Ibid.,  i.  7,  2,  8 ;  cf.  Kuru-vajapeya  in 
Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  3,  15  ; 
Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  viii.  11,  18. 

5  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  5,  2,  3.  5. 

6  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  1.  8,  4,  1.  2. 

7  Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  ii.  78  ;  Jaimi- 
niya Upanisad  Brahmana,  iii.  30,  6  ; 
iv.  6,  2;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad, 
iii.  1,  1  ;  9,  20,  etc. 

8  Indische  Studien,  3,  470  ;  Indian 
Literature,  114. 

9  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society, 
1908,602-607;  837-844. 

10  x.  6.  Cf.  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books 
of  the  East,  12,  xli. 


1 66  THE  KURU-PANCALAS  [  Kuru 

to  be  a  Kuru.  But  there  is  no  trace  of  a  quarrel  between 
Kurus  and  Pancalas  in  the  passage  in  question,  which  merely 
preserves  the  record  of  a  dispute  on  a  ritual  matter  between  a 
priest  and  a  prince :  the  same  passage  refers  to  the  Naimisiya 
sacrifice  among  the  Kuru- Pancalas,  and  emphasizes  the  close 
connexion  of  the  two  peoples.11  Secondly,  Weber  conjectures 
in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita 12  that  Subhadrika  of  Kampila  was 
the  chief  queen  of  the  king  of  a  tribe  living  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  clan,  for  whose  king  the  horse  sacrifice  described 
in  the  Samhita  was  performed.  But  the  interpretation  of  this 
passage  by  Weber  is  open  to  grave  doubt  ;13  and  in  the  Kanva 
recension  of  the  Samhita14  a  passage  used  at  the  Rajasuya 
shows  that  the  Kuru- Pancalas  had  actually  one  king.  More- 
over, there  is  the  evidence  of  the  Satapatha  Brahmana15  that 
the  old  name  of  the  Pancalas  was  Krivi.  This  word  looks  very 
like  a  variant  of  Kuru,  and  Zimmer16  plausibly  conjectures  that 
the  Kurus  and  Krivis  formed  the  Vaikarna17  of  the  Rigveda, 
especially  as  both  peoples  are  found  about  the  Sindhu  and  the 
Asikni.18 

The  Kurus  alone  are  chiefly  mentioned  in  connexion  with 
the  locality  which  they  occupied,  Kuruksetra.  We  are  told, 
however,  of  a  domestic  priest  (Purohita)  in  the  service  of  both 
the  Kurus  and  the  Srnjayas,19  who  must  therefore  at  one  time 
have  been  closely  connected.20  In  the  Chandogya  Upanisad 
reference  is  made  to  the  Kurus  being  saved  by  a  mare  (asvd),21 
and  to  some  disaster  which  befel  them  owing  to  a  hailstorm.22 
In  the  Sutras,  again,  a  ceremony  (Vajapeya)  of  the  Kurus  is 
mentioned.23  There  also  a  curse,  which  was  pronounced  on  them 
and  led  to  their  being  driven  from  Kuruksetra,  is  alluded  to.24 

11  See   Keith,  Journal   of   the  Royal  |       13  Keith,  loc.  cit.,  835. 

Asiatic    Society,    1908,   831-836  ;    1138-  j       iy  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  4,  4,  5. 
1 142.  a0  Cf.  Weber,  Indian  Literature,  123. 

12  xxiii.  18.  2l  iv.   17,  9:    for  asva   Bohtlingk  in 

13  Eggeling,  Sacred  Boohs  of  the  East,  j   his  edition   reads  aksna,  followed  by 


44,  322. 


ture,  114,  note  *. 


IB 


xiii.  5,  4,  7. 


Little,  Grammatical  Index,  1. 
22  i.  10,  1. 
2:1  Sahkhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  3, 

*3- 


16  Altindisches  Leben,  103.  24  Ibid.,    xv.    16,    11.      Cf.   Weber, 

17  vii.  18,  11.  j   Indian  Literature,  136. 


Kuru  ] 


THE  KURUS  AND  ALLIED  TRIBES 


167 


This  possibly  adumbrates  the  misfortunes  of  the  Kauravas  in 
the  epic  tradition. 

In  the  Rigveda  the  Kurus  do  not  appear  under  that  name  as 
a  people.  But  mention  is  made  of  a  prince,  Kurusravana 
('  Glory  of  the  Kurus  ^y25  and  of  a  Pakasthaman  Kaurayana.26 
In  the  Atharvaveda27  there  occurs  as  a  king  of  the  Kurus 
Pariksit,  whose  son,  Janamejaya,  is  mentioned  in  the  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana28  as  one  of  the  great  performers  of  the  horse 
sacrifice. 

It  is  a  probable  conjecture  of  Oldenberg's29  that  the  Kuru 
people,  as  known  later,  included  some  of  the  tribes  referred  to 
by  other  names  in  the  Rigveda.  Kurusravana,  shown  by  his 
name  to  be  connected  with  the  Kurus,  is  in  the  Rigveda  called 
Trasadasyava,  '  descendant  of  Trasadasyu,'  who  is  well  known 
as  a  king  of  the  Purus.  Moreover,  it  is  likely  that  the  Trtsu- 
Bharatas,  who  appear  in  the  Rigveda  as  enemies  of  the  Purus, 
later  coalesced  with  them  to  form  the  Kuru  people.30  Since  the 
Bharatas  appear  so  prominently  in  the  Brahmana  texts  as  a 
great  people  of  the  past,  while  the  later  literature  ignores  them 
in  its  list  of  nations,  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that 
they  became  merged  in  some  other  tribe.  Moreover,  there  is 
evidence  that  the  Bharatas  occupied  the  territory  in  which  the 
Kurus  were  later  found.  Two  of  them  are  spoken  of  in  a  hymn 
of  the  Rigveda 31  as  having  kindled  fire  on  the  Drsadvati,  the 
Apaya,  and  the  Sarasvati — that  is  to  say,  in  the  sacred  places 
of  the  later  Kuruksetra.  Similarly,  the  goddess  Bharati 
(*  belonging  to  the  Bharatas ')  is  constantly  mentioned  in  the 
AprI  ('  propitiatory ')  hymns  together  with  Sarasvati.32  Again, 
according  to  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,  one  Bharata  king  was 
victorious  over  the  Kasis,33  and  another  made  offerings  to 
Ganga  and  Yamuna,34  while  raids  of  the  Bharatas  against  the 
Satvants  are  mentioned  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana.35    Nor  is  it 


25  Rv.  x.  33,  4. 

26  Rv.  viii.  3,  21. 

27  xx.  127,  7  et  seq. ; 

28  xiii.  5,  4. 

29  Buddha,  403,  404. 

30  Ibid.,  406-409. 


Khila,  v.  10. 


31 


m.  23. 


32  Cf.  Scheftelowitz,  Die  Apokryphen 
dcs  Rgveda,  145. 

33  xiii.  5,  4,  11. 
3*  Ibid.,  21. 

35  Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  25  (cf. 
Haug's  edition,  2,  128,  n.  3);  Olden- 
berg,  Buddha,  407,  note  *. 


i68 


THE  KURU-PANCALA   COUNTRY 


[Kuru 


without  importance  that  the  Bharatas  appear  as  a  variant  for 
the  Kuru-Pancalas  in  a  passage  of  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.,36 
and  that  in  the  list  of  the  great  performers  of  the  horse  sacrifice 
the  names  of  one  Kuru  and  two  Bharata  princes  are  given 
without  any  mention  of  the  people  over  which  they  ruled, 
while  in  other  cases  that  information  is  specifically  given.37 

The  territory  of  the  Kuru-Pancalas  is  declared  in  the  Aitareya 
Brahmana  to  be  the  middle  country  (MadhyadeSa).38  A  group 
of  the  Kuru  people  still  remained  further  north — the  Uttara 
Kurus  beyond  the  Himalaya.  It  appears  from  a  passage  of 
the  Satapatha  Brahmana  that  the  speech  of  the  Northerners — 
that  is,  presumably,  the  Northern  Kurus — and  of  the  Kuru- 
Pancalas  was  similar,  and  regarded  as  specially  pure.39  There 
seems  little  doubt  that  the  Brahminical  culture  was  developed 
in  the  country  of  the  Kuru-Pancalas,  and  that  it  spread  thence 
east,  south,  and  west.  Traces  of  this  are  seen  in  the  Vratya 
Stomas  (sacrifices  for  the  admission  of  non  -  Brahminical 
Aryans)  of  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,40  and  in  the  fact  that  in 
the  Sahkhayana  Aranyaka  it  is  unusual  for  a  Brahmin  to  dwell 
in  the  territory  of  Magadha.41  The  repeated  mention  of  Kuru- 
Pancala  Brahmins  is  another  indication  of  their  missionary 
activity.42 

The  geographical  position  of  the  Kuru-Paiicalas  renders  it 
probable  that  they  were  later  immigrants  into  India  than  the 
Kosala-Videha  or  the  KaSis,43  who  must  have  been  pushed 

36  xi.  3,  3.     See  note  14;  Oldenberg 
Buddha,  408,  409. 


37  Oldenberg,  409,  note  *. 

38  viii.  14.     Cf.  Oldenberg,  392,  393. 

39  iii.  2,  3,  15.  This  is  the  sense 
which  it  appears  to  bear,  as  the  Kuru- 
Pancalas  can  hardly  be  reckoned  as 
being  northerly  (Oldenberg,  395),  and 
theKausitaki  Brahmana,  vii.  6  (Indische 
Studien,  2,  309)  is  independent  evidence 
for  the  pure  speech  of  the  north. 
Cf.  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 
12,  xlii.,  n.  ;  Weber,  Indian  Literature, 
45;  Indische  Studien,  1,  191. 

40  xvii.  1,  1.  See  also  Av.  xv.  with 
Whitney's  and  Lanman's  notes;  Weber, 
Indische  Studien,  1,  33  et  seq. ;  Indian 
Literature,  67,  78,  80. 


41  vii.   13 
400,  note  * ; 


Cf.  Oldenberg,  Buddha, 
;   Weber,  Indian  Literature, 
112,  n.  126. 

42  See  e.g.  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi. 
4,  1,  2,  and  note  6. 

43  This  is  recognized,  e.g.,  by  Olden- 
berg, Buddha,  9,  391,  398,  399;  Lanman, 
Sanskrit  Reader,  297,  etc.  The  narra- 
tive of  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  4, 
1,  10  et  seq.  (Weber,  Indische  Studien, 
1,  170),  rather  implies  that  the  Kosala- 
Videhas  are  offshoots  of  the  Kuru- 
Pancalas,  but  Oldenberg  and  Mac- 
donell  (Sanskrit  Literature,  214  interpret 
this  as  referring  to  the  spread  of 
Vedic  tradition  and  culture,  not  of 
nationality. 


Kuruk§etra  ]     THE  SACRED  LAND  OF  THE  KURUS 


169 


into  their  more  eastward  territories  by  a  new  wave  of  Aryan 
settlers  from  the  west.  But  there  is  no  evidence  in  Vedic 
literature  to  show  in  what  relation  of  time  the  immigration  of 
the  latter  peoples  stood  to  that  of  their  neighbours  on  the  west. 
It  has,  however,  been  conjectured,44  mainly  on  the  ground  of 
later  linguistic  phenomena,  which  have  no  cogency  for  the 
Vedic  period,  that  the  Kurus  were  later  immigrants,  who, 
coming  by  a  new  route,  thrust  themselves  between  the  original 
Aryan  tribes  which  were  already  in  occupation  of  the  country 
from  east  to  west.  Cf.  also  Krtvan.  For  other  Kuru  princes 
see  Kauravya. 


44  C/.Grierson,  Languages  of  India,  52 
et  seq. ;  Journal  of  the  Royal  A  sialic  Society, 
1908,  837  et  seq.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 
probably  an  error  to  assume  that  the 
Bharatas  were  originally  situated  far 
west  of  Kuruksetra,  and  that  the  main 
action  of  the  Rigveda  was  confined  to 
the  Panjab.  When  Vasistha  celebrates 
the  crossing  of  the  Vipas  and  Sutudri 
(Rv.  iii.  33),  he  probably  came  from 
the  east,  as  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien, 
2,  218,  points  out,  and  not  from  the 
west.  Adopting  the  ordinary  view, 
Hopkins,  India,  Old  and  New,  52,  finds 
it  necessary  to  suggest  that  Yamuna  is 
only  another  name  in  the  Rv.  for 
the  Parusni.  But  the  necessity  for 
this  suggestion,  which  is  not  in  itself 
plausible,  disappears  when  it  is  realized 
that  the  Bharatas  held  a  territory 
roughly  corresponding  to  Kuruksetra, 
and    bounded    on    the    east    by    the 


Yamuna.  On  the  other  hand,  Hille- 
brandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  142,  143, 
places  the  Kurus  near  the  Arjikiya  in 
Kasmlr,  which  puts  them  too  far  north. 
So  also  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  103, 
and  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 

12,  xlii.  It  seems  probable  that  the 
Kurus  were  at  a  very  early  period 
widely  scattered  to  the  north  of  the 
Himalaya,  in  Kuruksetra,  and  about 
the  Sindhu  and  Asikni. 

Cf.  Oldenberg,  Buddha,  400  et  seq.  ; 
Macdonell,  Sanskrit  Literature,  152-157  ; 
von  Schroeder,  Indiens  Literatur  unci 
Cultur,  164  et  seq.  ;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  1,  187  et  seq.  ;  Indian  Literature, 
114,  135,  136;  Rhys  Davids,  Buddhist 
India,  27  ;  Pargiter,  Journal  of  the  Royal 
Asiatic  Society,  1908,  333  et  seq.;  Hopkins, 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 

13,  205,  n. 


Kuru-ksetra  ('  land  of  the  Kurus  ')  is  always  regarded  in  the 
Brahmana  texts1  as  a  particularly  sacred  country.  Within  its 
boundaries  flowed  the  rivers  DrsadvatI  and  Sarasvati,  as  well 
as  the  Apaya.2     Here,  too,  was  situated  Saryanavant,3  which 


1  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xxv.  10  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  iv.  1,  5,  13  ; 
xi.  5,  1,  4 ;  xiv.  1,  1,  2  ;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  vii.  30  ;  Maitrayani  Sam- 
hita,  ii.  1,  4;  iv.  5,  9 ;  Jaiminiya 
Brahmana,  iii.  126  {Journal  of  the 
American    Oriental    Society,    11,    cxlvi) ; 


Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  16,  11, 
etc. 

2  Cf.   Rv.  iii.   23  ;   Pischel,    Vedische 
Studien,  2,  218. 

3  See  Pischel,  loc.  cit.,  and  cf.  Arji- 
kiya. 


I  JO 


NAMES  OF  PATRONS— WORM 


[  Kurunga 


appears  to  have  been  a  lake,  like  that  known  to  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana  by  the  name  of  Anyatah-plaksa.4  According  to 
Pischel,  there  was  also  in  Kuruksetra  a  stream  called  Pastya,5 
which  he  sees  in  certain  passages  of  the  Rigveda.  The  boun- 
daries of  Kuruksetra  are  given  in  a  passage  of  the  Taittirlya 
Aranyaka6  as  being  Khandava  on  the  south,  the  Turghna  on 
the  north,  and  the  Parinah  on  the  west.  Roughly  speaking,  it 
corresponded  to  the  modern  Sirhind. 


4  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  5, 

5  Pischel,  loc.  cit.,  219. 


i,4- 


6  v.  i,  1.  These  places  cannot  be 
further  identified.    See  also  Maru. 

Cf.  von  Schroeder,  Indiens  Literatur 
und  Cultur,  164,  165 ;  Max  Miiller,  Sacred 


Boohs  of  the  East,  32,  398,  399;  Weber, 
Indische  Studien,  1,  78,  79 ;  Macdonell, 
Sanskrit  Literature,  174.  Eggeling,  Sacred 
Books  of  the  East,  12,  xli.,  seems  to  place 
Kuruksetra,  as  lying  between  the 
Yamuna  aud  Ganga,  too  far  east. 


Kurunga  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1  as  a  prince  and  a 
patron.  Ludwig2  suggests  that  he  was  a  king  of  the  Anus, 
but  for  this  theory  there  seems  no  good  ground.  As  the 
Turvasas  are  mentioned  in  the  same  verse,  he  may  possibly 
have  been  one  of  their  kings.  The  name  suggests  a  connexion 
with  the  Kurus,  and  it  may  be  noted  that  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana3  the  Turvasas  are  connected  with  the  Pancalas 
(Krivis). 


1  viii.  4,  19;  Nirukta,  vi.  22. 

2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  160.    |  404 


Kuru-sravana  Trasadasyava  is  alluded  to  as  dead  in  a  hym 
of  the  Rigveda,1  which  refers  also  to  his  son  Upamasravas,  an 
his  father  Mitratithi.     In  another  hymn2  he  is  mentioned  as 
still  alive.     His  name  connects  him  on  the  one  hand  with  the 
Kurus,  and  on  the  other  with  Trasadasyu  and  the  Purus. 


36. 


x-  33.  4-    Cf.  Brhaddevata,  vii.  35, 
x.  32,  9.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation 


of  the  Rigveda,  3,  165  ;  Geldner, 
Vedische  Studien,  2,  150,  184 ;  Lanman, 
Sanskrit  Reader,  386. 


xi.  5, 4, 16.    See  Oldenberg,  Buddha, 


: 


Kururu,    apparently   the   name    of  a   species   of    worm, 
mentioned  twice  in  the  Atharvaveda.1 


1  ii.  31,  2  ;  ix.  2,  22.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  98. 


}— FA  MILY— POTTER—  A  XE 

Kurkura   is   an   onomatopoetic   name   for   the   dog   in   the 
Atharvaveda.1     See  also  Svan. 

1  vii.  95,  2.     Cf.  Zimraer,  Altindisches  Leben,  233. 


Kula,  Kula-pa. — As  an  uncompounded  word,  Kula  does  not 
occur  before  the  period  of  the  Brahmanas.1  It  denotes  the 
'  home '  or  *  house  of  the  family,'  and  by  metonymy  the  family 
itself,  as  connected  with  the  home.  The  Kula-pa  (lit.  ■  house 
protector  '),  or  chief  of  the  family,  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda2 
as  inferior  to  and  attendant  on  the  Vrajapati  in  war,  the  latter 
being  perhaps  the  leader  of  the  village  contingent  of  the  clan. 
In  the  Atharvaveda3  a  girl  is  ironically  called  Kulapa,  because 
she  is  left  without  a  husband  in  the  world,  and  has  only  Yama 
(the  god  of  death)  for  a  spouse. 

The  use  of  the  term  Kula  points  clearly  to  a  system  of 
individual  families,  each  no  doubt  consisting  of  several  members 
under  the  headship  of  the  father  or  eldest  brother,  whose  Kula 
the  dwelling  is.  As  distinct  from  Gotra,  Kula  seems  to  mean 
the  family  in  the  narrower  sense  of  the  members  who  still 
live  in  one  house,  the  undivided  family.  Cf.  Grha,  Grama, 
Jana,  Vis. 


1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  1,  2,  22  ; 
ii.1,4,  4;  4,  i,  14;  xi.  5,3,  11  ;  8,  1,3; 
xiii.  4,  2,  17  ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad, 
i-  5»  32  ;  Chandogya  Upanisad,  iii.,  13, 
6,  etc. 

2  x.  179,  2. 


3  i.  14,  3.  Cf.  Whitney,  Translation 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  15  ;  Bloomfield, 
Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  252,  correcting 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  314. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  op.  cit.,  162. 


Kulala,  the  word  denoting  a  'potter,'  occurs  in  the   Sata- 
rudriya,  or  litany  to  Rudra  in  the  Yajurveda.1 


1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  27.     Cf. 
kulala  -  krta,     '  made    by    a    potter,' 


Maitrayani     Samhita, 
Kaulala. 


and 


Kuliga,  '  axe,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda  as  used  for  the 
making  of  chariots,1  and  also  in  warfare,2  while  the  Atharvaveda 
refers  to  its  employment  in  cutting  down  trees.3 


1  iii.  2,  1. 

2  i-  3*.  5- 


11.  12,  3. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  252. 


172     NAMES  OF  ANIMALS— ARROW-NECK— BEANS  [  Kulikaya 

Kulikaya  is  the  form  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita1  of  the  name 
of  an  animal,  apparently  a  kind  of  fish,  as  explained  by  Mahi- 
dhara  in  his  commentary,  which  is  called  Kulipaya  in  the 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,2  and  Purikaya  in  the  Atharvaveda,3 
variants  probably  due  to  the  faulty  tradition  of  an  unfamiliar 
name. 

1  v.  5,  13,  i.  hita,  iii.  14,  2.    See  Whitney,  Transla- 

2  xxiv.  21.  35.  tion  of  the  Atharvaveda,  624. 

3  xi.  2,  25.     The  commentator  reads  j       Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  96. 
Pulikaya,  as  in  the  Maitrayani  Sam- 

Kulika  is  the  name  of  a  bird  mentioned  in  the  list  of  victims 
at  the  horse  sacrifice  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.1  The  Maitra- 
yanI Samhita2  has  Pulika  instead. 

1  xxiv.  24.  Cf.      Zimmer,      Altindisches      Leben, 

2  hi.  14.  5-  I  94- 

Kulunga  is  the  name  of  an  animal,  perhaps  a  gazelle,  men- 
tioned in  the  list  of  victims  at  the  horse  sacrifice  in  the  Yajur- 
veda.1 

1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  11,  1  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.   14,  9.  13  (with  the 
variant  Kulahga) ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  27.  32. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  83. 

Kulmala  seems,  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  the  Maitrayani  Samhita,2 
and  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,3  to  denote  the  neck  of  an  arrow 
in  which  the  shaft  is  fixed. 

1  iv.  6,  5;  v.  18,  15.  2  iii.  8,  1.  2.  3  iii.  4,  4,  14. 

Kumala-barhis  is  mentioned  in  the  Paiicavimsa  Brahmana 
(xv.  3,  21)  as  the  seer  of  a  Saman  or  Chant. 

Kumara  Harita  is  mentioned  in  the  first  Vamsa  (list  of 
teachers)  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad1  as  a  pupil  of  Galava. 

1  ii.  5,  22  (Madhyamdina  =  ii.  6,  3,  Kanva). 

Kulmasa,  a  word  mentioned  by  the  Chandogya  Upanisad1 
in  the  plural,  is  interpreted  by  the  commentator  as  'bad 
beans '  (kutsita  mdsdh),  a  version  adopted  by  Bohtlingk  in  his 


Kusika  ]     WATERCOURSE— JUJUBE— SACRED  GRASS  173 


Dictionary.2     Little3   renders  it   'sour   gruel'    in   accordance 
with  the  Nirukta.4 


2  Cf.   Bhagavata  Purana,   v.  9,   12, 
where  it  is  glossed  'worm-eaten  beans.' 


3  Grammatical  Index,  52. 
M.4. 


Kulya  in  two  passages  of  the  Rigveda,1  according  to  Muir,2 
possibly  refers  to  artificial  watercourses  flowing  into  a  reservoir 
(hrada).     See  Avata. 

1  iii.  45,  3  ;  x.  43,  7.  2  Sanskrit  Texts,  5,  465,  466. 

Kuvaya.     See  Kvayi. 


Kuvala  is  a  name  of  the  jujube  fruit  (Zizyphus  jujuba) 
occurring  frequently  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas1  and  Brah- 
manas2  in  connexion  with  Karkandhu  and  Badara.  See  also 
Kola. 


1  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  11,  2; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xix.  22,  89  ; 
xxi.  29  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xii.  10. 


2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  5,  4,  10 
xii.  7,  1,  2  ;  2,  9 ;  9,  1,  5,  etc. 

Cf,  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  242. 


Kusa,  a  word  later  denoting  the  '  sacred  grass '  (Poa  cyno- 
suroides),  is  taken  by  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  to  mean 
simply  '  grass '  in  the  passages  of  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  in 
which  it  occurs. 


1  ii.  5,  2,  15  ;  iii.  1,  2,  16  ;  v.  3,  2,  7, 
etc.  Kusa  and  Kusi  occur  in  Maitra- 
yani Samhita,  iv.  5,  7  ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,    iii.    6,    2,    9 ;     Taittiriya 


Brahmana,  i.  5,  10,  1.  2.  7,  apparently 
denoting  pins  of  wood  or  metal,  used 
as  a  mark  in  a  special  mode  of  recita- 
tion. 


Ku-£ara  is  mentioned  with  Sara  and  other  grasses  in  one 
hymn  of  the  Rigveda1  as  affording  lurking  places  for  serpents. 

1  i.  191,  3.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  72. 

Kusika  is  the  probably  mythical  forefather1  of  the  Kusikas, 
and  especially  the  father  of  the  most  important  member  of 
that  family,  ViSvamitra.2     The  Kusikas  are  repeatedly  referred 


1  Nirukta,  ii.  25. 


Rv.  iii.  33,  5. 


174        THE  KUSIKAS— NAMES— SEA-CROW   [  Kusri  Vajasravasa 

to  in  the  third  Mandala  of  the  Rigveda,3  and  figure  in  the 
legend  of  Sunahsepa  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana.4  They  were 
clearly  a  family  of  priests  who  attached  themselves  to  the 
service  of  the  princes  of  the  Bharatas.  They  were  especially 
devoted  to  the  worship  of  Indra ;  hence  he  is  styled  Kausika 
even  in  the  Rigveda.5 

Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  pp.  62,  63. 
Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  38 ; 
Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  I2,  342  et  seq.  ; 
Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda, 
3,  1 01,  121  ;  Macdonell,  Sanskrit  Litera- 
ture, 155 ;  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der 
Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft, 
42,  209. 


3  iii.  26,  1  ;  29,  15  ;  30,  20  ;  33,  5  ; 
42,  9;  50,  4;  53,  9.  10. 

4  vii.  18  ;  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
xv.  27. 

5  i.  10,  11,  with  Sayana's  note. 
Cf.  Mai  tray  ani  Samhita,  iv.  5,  7  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii.  3,  4, 
19 ;     Taittirlya    Aranyaka,    i.     12,   4 ; 


Kugri  Vaja-£ravasa  appears  as  a  teacher  concerned  with  the 
lore  of  the  sacred  fire  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,1  and  in  the 
last  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad2 
he  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Vajas>avas.  It  is  not  clear 
whether  he  is  identical  with  the  Kusri  of  the  last  Vamsa  of  the 
Brhadaranyaka3  in  the  Kanva  recension,  and  of  the  Vamsa  in 
the  tenth  book  of  the  Satapatha,4  who  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil 
of  Yajfiavacas  Rajastambayana. 

1  x.  5,  5,  1.  is  accented  Kusri,  but  in  x.  5,  5,  1,  as 

2  vi.  4,  33  (Madhyamdina  =  vi.  5,  3,  Kusri;  no  stress  can,  however,  be  laid 
Kanva).  I   on  this.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien, 

3  vi.  5,  4  (Kanva  only).  1,   70;    Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the 

4  x.  6,  5,  9.    In  the  Vamsas  the  name  East,  12,  xxxiii. 

Ku-sanda  is  mentioned  with  Sanda  as  a  priest  at  the  snake 
festival  described  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.1 

1  xxv.    15,  3.    Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,   1,   34;    Latyayana   Srauta   Sutra, 
x.  20,  10. 

1.  Kusitaka  denotes,  according  to  the  commentary  on  the 
one  passage  of  the  Taittirlya  Samhita1  in  which  it  is  found, 
the  sea  crow  (samudra-kaka). 

1  v.  5,  13,  1.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  72. 

2.  Kusitaka  Sama-£ravasa  is  mentioned  in  the  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana1  as  the  Grhapati,  or  householder  at  a  sacrificial 
session,  of  the  Kausitakis. 

1  xvii.  4.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  34. 


Kustfoa  ]     INSECT— MEDICINAL  PLANT— FRACTION 


175 


Kusumbhaka  seems  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda1  to  mean 
a  poisonous  insect,  Kusumbha  in  the  Atharvaveda2  clearly 
having  the  sense  of  a  poison  bag.  Sayana  renders  it  as 
1  ichneumon  '  (nakula) . 


1  i.  191,  16.  The  sense  of  '  poison- 
bag '  is  possible  in  i.  191,  15,  and  is 
accepted  there  by  Bohtlingk  in  his 
Dictionary. 


2  ii.  32,  6.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches 
Leben,  99 ;  Griffith,  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda, 
x.  257- 


I.  Kustha  is  the  name  of  a  plant  {Costus  speciosus  or  arabicus)1 
which  is  prominent  in  the  Atharvaveda.2  It  grew  especially  on 
the  mountains,  along  with  the  Soma,  on  the  high  peaks  of  the 
Himalaya  (Himavant)  where  the  eagles  nest,  and  was  thence 
brought  east  to  men.3  Like  Soma,  it  is  said  to  have  grown  in 
the  third  heaven  under  the  famous  Agvattha  tree,  where  the 
gods  were  wont  to  assemble,  and  thence  it  was  brought  in  a 
golden  ship.4  As  a  remedy,  it  held  the  highest  place  among 
herbs,  being  called  by  the  auspicious  names  Nagha-mara  and 
Nagha-risa,  and  styled  the  offspring  of  Jivala  and  Jivala,  the 
'lively'  ones.5  It  cured  headache  (sirsdmaya),  diseases  of  the 
eyes,  bodily  affliction,6  but  especially  fever — hence  called  *  fever- 
destroyer  '  (takma-ndsana) — and  consumption  (Yaksma).  From 
its  general  properties  it  was  also  named  '  all-healing '  (visva- 
bhesaja).7  Its  aromatic  qualities  were  apparently  known,  as  it 
is  classed  with  *  salve  '  (An j  ana)  and  ■  nard '  (Nalada).8 


1  Or  Saussurea  auriculata,  Hillebrandt, 
Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  65. 

2  v.  4  ;  vi.  102  ;  xix.  139. 

3  v.  4,  1.  2.  8  ;  xix.  39,  1. 

4  v.  4,  3-6 ;  vi.  75,  1.  2  ;  xix.  39,  6-8. 

5  v.  4,  1  ;  xix.  39,  4. 

6  v.  4,  10. 


7  xix.  39,  9. 

8  vi.  102,  3. 

Cf.  Grohmann,  Indische  Studien,  9, 
420  et  seq. ;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben, 
63,  64  ;  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 415,  680 ;  Whitney,  Translation 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  227,  228. 


2.  Kustha. — In  one  passage  of  the  Maitrayani  Samhita1 
there  is  a  series  of  fractions,  Kala,  Kustha,  Sapha,  Pad,  which 
appear  to  denote  one-sixteenth,  one-twelfth,  one-eighth,  and 
one-fourth  respectively. 


111.  7, 


7.     Cf.  Bohtlinglj,  Dictionary,  s.v. 


176 


USURER— A  RITUAL  AUTHORITY 


[  Kusldin 


Kusidin  is  a  designation  of  the  '  usurer  '  found  in  the  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana1  and  the  Nirukta,2  and  often  in  the  Sutras. 
Jolly,3  referring  doubtless  to  the  expression  kusida  apratltta,4  '  a 
loan  not  yet  repaid,'  occurring  in  connexion  with  an-rna,  '  free 
from  debt,'  appears  to  be  right  in  taking  Kusida  to  have  the 
sense  of  '  loan  '  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita.  The  rate  of  interest 
on  loans  is  not  specified  before  the  Sutra  period.5     Cf.  Rna. 


1  xin.  4,  3,  n. 

2  vi.  32. 

3  Recht  und  Sitte,  98,  99. 


4  111.  3,  8,  1.  2. 

5  E.g.,  Gautama  Sutra,  xii.  29  et  seq. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  259. 


Kusurubinda  Auddalaki  appears  as  an  authority  on  ritual 
matters  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,1  the  Taittiriya  Samhita,2 
the  Jaiminiya  Brahmana,3  and  the  Sadvimsa  Brahmana.4  He 
may  have  been  the  brother  of  Svetaketu,  as  suggested  by 
Weber.6 


1  xxii.  15,  I.  10. 

2  vii.  2,  2,  1. 

3  i.  75  {Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  23,  327),  where  the  reading 
seems  to  be  Asurbinda. 


4  i.  16.  See  Weber,  Indische  Studien, 
1,  39.  The  name  is  there  read  as  Ku- 
surubindu  ;  in  the  Sankhayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  xvi.  22,  14  it  is  Kusurabindu. 

5  Indische  Studien,  5,  61,  n. 


Kuhu.     See  Masa. 


Kucakra  is  a  word  occurring  only  once  in  an  obscure  verse 
of  the  Rigveda,1  where  Zimmer2  suggests  that  it  has  the  sense 
of  the  wheel  by  which  water  is  raised  from  a  well.  Much 
more  probable  is  the  interpretation  of  Roth,3  who  understands 
it  to  mean  the  female  breast. 


1  x.  102,  II. 

2  Altindisches  Leben,  157.  Cf.  Geldner, 
Vedische  Studien,  2,  14. 


St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Kuta,  a  word  found  in  the  Rigveda,1  the  Atharvaveda,2  and 
the  Brahmanas,3  is  of  doubtful  signification.     On  the  whole, 


1  x.  102,  4. 

2  viii.  8,  16. 

3  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vi.  24  ;  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,   hi.    8,    1,    15;    Jai- 


miniya Brahmana,  i.  49,  9 ;  50,  2 
[Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
19,  114). 


Kurca 


TWIG— PIT— CART-POLE— GRASS  SEAT 


177 


the  most  probable  sense  is  hammer,4  which  suits  every  passage 
adequately.  The  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  renders  it  '  horn,' 
which  is  the  sense  accepted  by  Whitney5  for  the  Atharvaveda 
passage  where  it  occurs.     Geldner6  thinks  that  it  means  *  trap.' 


4  So  Bloomfield,  Zeitschrift  der 
Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft , 
48,  546  ;  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  585. 

5  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
505- 


6  Vedische  Studien,  1,  138;  2,  7.  Cf. 
von  Bradke,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  46,  458 ; 
Kuhn's  Zeitschrift,  34,  156;  Weber, 
Indische  Studien,  9,  222. 


Kudi,  written  also  Kuti  in  the  manuscripts,  occurs  in  the 
Atharvaveda1  and  the  Kausika  Sutra2  denoting  a  twig — identi- 
fied by  the  scholiast  with  Badari,  the  jujube — which  was  tied 
to  the  bodies  of  the  dead  to  efface  their  traces,  presumably 
in  order  to  render  the  return  of  the  spirit  to  the  old  home 
difficult. 


1  V.    19,   12. 

2  Bloomfield's  edition,  xliv.  Cf. 
Bloomfield,  American  Journal  of Philology, 
II>   355;   I2»  4X6 ;    Roth,  Festgruss  an 


Bohtlingk,  98 ;  Whitney,  Translation 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  254 ;  Macdonell, 
Vedic  Mythology,  p.  165. 


Kupa  occurs  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later  literature2  denoting 
an  artificial  hollow  in  the  earth,  or  pit.  In  some  cases  they 
must  have  been  deep,  as  Trita  in  the  myth  is  said  to  have 
fallen  into  one  from  which  he  could  not  escape  unaided.3 


1  i.  105,  17. 

2  Av.  v.  31,  8  ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, iii.  5,  4,  1 ;  iv.  4,5,3;  vi.  3,  3, 
26,  etc.  ;  Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  i.  184, 


etc.     The  adjective  kupya,  '  being  in  a 
hole,'   occurs  frequently  in   the  later 
Samhitas. 
3  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  67. 


Kubara  in  the  Maitrayani  Samhita  (ii.  1,  11)  and  Kuban 
in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (iv.  6,  9,  11.  12)  and  the  Kausitaki 
Brahmana  (xxvii.  6)  denote  the  pole  of  a  cart. 


Kurca  is  found  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita.1  and  later2  de- 
noting a  bundle  of  grass  used  as  a  seat.  In  one  passage  of  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana3  a  golden  Kurca  is  referred  to. 


1  yn.  5,  8,  5. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  5,  3,  4.  7 


VOL.  I. 


Brhadaranyaka    Upanisad,   ii.    11, 
Aitareya  Aranyaka,  v.  1,  4. 


xm.  4,  3,  1. 


178 


TORTOISE— CHAMELEON— COCK 


[  Kurma 


Kurma,  the  'tortoise,'  is  mentioned  frequently  in  the  later 
Samhitas1  and  Brahmanas,2  but  nothing  is  said  of  its  charac- 
teristics.    See  also  KaSyapa. 


1  Av.  ix.  4,  1 6 ;  f  aittiriya  Sam- 
hita, ii.  6,  3,  3 ;  v.  2,  8,  4.  5 ;  7, 
13,  1  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  15,  3; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  34,  etc. 


2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  6,  2,  3 
vi.  1,  1,  12,  etc. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  A  Itindisches  Leben,  95 
Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  153. 


Kugamba  Svayava  Latavya  is  mentioned  in  the  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana1  as  a  priest.  His  name  apparently  means2  Kusamba,3 
of  the  Latavya  clan,  son  of  Svayu. 


1  viii.  6,  8. 

2  The  form  is  peculiar,  as  Kusamba 
would  be  expected. 


3  Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the  Con- 
necticut Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15, 
55,  n.  2. 


Krkalasa  denotes  the  '  chameleon '  mentioned  in  the  list  of 
sacrificial  victims  at  the  horse  sacrifice  in  the  Yajurveda1  and 
later.2  The  female  chameleon,  Krkalasi,  is  also  referred  to  in 
the  Brahmanas.3     See  Godha  and  Sayandaka. 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  19,  1  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  21  ;  Vaja- 
saneyi Samhita,  xxiv.  40. 

2  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  i.  5,  22. 


3  Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  i.  221  (Journal 
of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  18,  29)  ; 
Satyayanaka  in  Sayana  on  Rv.  viii.  91. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  95. 


Krka-vaku,  the  'cock,'  being  named  in  the  Atharvaveda1 
with  sheep,  goats,  and  other  domesticated  animals,  was  pre- 
sumably tamed.2  In  the  4ist  of  victims  at  the  horse  sacrifice 
in  the  Yajurveda,3  it  appears  as  dedicated  to  Savitr :  Yaska4 
explains  this  by  the  fact  that  it  declares  the  time  of  day 
(kalanuvada).  The  commentator  Mahidhara5  explains  the 
name  by  tamra-cuda,  '  red-crested.'  It  is  of  course  onomato- 
poetic  ('  calling  kyka  ').6     See  also  Kukkuta. 


1  V.   31,  2.       Cf.  X.  I36,  10. 

2  Cf. ,  however,  Sayana  on  Taittiriya 
Samhita,  v.  5,  18,  1,  who  says  that  it  is 
a  '  forest '  Kukkuta. 

3  Taittiriya  Samhita,  loc.  cit. ;  Maitra- 
yani Samhita,  iii.  14,  15  ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxiv.  35. 


4  Nirukta,  xii.  3. 

5  On  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  loc.  cit. 

6  Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities, 
251  ;  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  18, 
285. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  91. 


Krmi  ]  DAGGER— THE  KRTVAN  TRIBE— WORM 

Krta.     See  2.  Aksa  and  2.  Yuga. 


179 


Krti. — From  one  passage  in  the  Rigveda,1  where  the  Maruts 
are  described  as  having  Krtis,  Zimmer2  concludes  that  the 
word  means  a  dagger  used  in  war.  But  there  is  no  evidence 
that  Krti  was  ever  a  human  weapon.     See  Asi. 


1  i.  168,  3. 

2  A  Itindisches  Lcben,  301. 


Cf.  Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  221. 


Krttikas.     See  Naksatra. 


Krtvan. — In  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda1  the  word  Krtvan  in 
the  plural  is  mentioned  with  the  Arjikas  and  the  five  peoples. 
Pischel2  thinks  that  it  means  a  people,  and  Sayana  expressly 
says  that  the  Krtvans  designate  a  country.3  The  name  in  that 
case  would  point  to  some  connexion  with  the  Kurus  or  Krivis. 
Hillebrandt,4  however,  thinks  that  the  word  is  an  adjective 
which  qualifies  Arjikas  and  designates  this  people  as  magicians, 
being  applied  to  them  by  an  opponent.  In  favour  of  this  view, 
he  quotes  Hiouen  Thsang's  statement5  that  the  neighbouring 
kings  held  the  base  Kasmirians  in  such  scorn  as  to  refuse  all 
alliance  with  them,  and  to  give  them  the  name  of  Ki-li-to,  or 
Krtyas.  He  suggests  that  the  Arjikas  settled  in  Kasmlr  in 
ancient  times  already  had  the  same  evil  reputation  as  their 
successors  in  later  days. 


IX. 


65. 23. 


2  Vedische  Studien,  2,  209. 

3  Krtvdna  iti  desabhidhdnam. 

4  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  136,  137. 


5  Cunningham,  Ancient  Geography  of 
India,  93. 

Cf.     Roth, 
tionary,  s.v. 


St.     Petersburg     Dic- 


Krpa  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda,1  along  with  Rusama  and 
Syavaka,  as  a  protege  of  Indra. 

1  viii.  3,  12  ;  4,  2.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  162. 

Krmi,  '  worm.'    In  the  later  Samhitas,1  and  especially  in  the 
Atharvaveda,2  worms    play   a    considerable   part.     They   are 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  u,  1  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  n  ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  30  ;  Mantra  Brah- 
mana,  ii.  7;  Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  iv.  36; 


Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  4,  1,  2;  and 
cf.  Rv.  i.  191. 


u.  31.  32;  v.  23. 


12- 


180  WORM— FUEL— AN  ANCIENT  SAGE         [  Krmuka 

regarded  as  poisonous,  and  are  spoken  of  as  found  in  the 
mountains,  in  forests,  in  waters,  in  plants,  and  in  the  human 
body.  In  accordance  with  widespread  primitive  ideas,  they 
are  considered  to  be  the  causes  of  disease  in  men  and  animals. 
The  Atharvaveda  contains  three  hymns2  as  charms  directed 
against  them.  The  first  of  these  hymns  is  of  a  general  character, 
the  second  is  meant  to  destroy  worms  in  cattle,  and  the  third  is 
intended  to  cure  children  of  worms.  When  found  in  men, 
worms  are  said  to  have  their  place  in  the  head  and  ribs,3  and 
to  creep  into  the  eyes,  nose,  and  teeth.4  They  are  described  as 
dark  brown,  but  white  in  the  fore  part  of  the  body,  with  black 
ears,  and  as  having  three  heads.5  They  are  given  many  specific 
names :  Alandu,  Ejatka,  Kaska§a,  Kita,  Kururu,  Nilang*u, 
Yevasa,  Vagrha,  VrksasarpI,  Saluna,  Savarta,  Sipavitnuka, 
Stegra. 


3  Av.  ii.  31,  4. 

4  Av.  v.  23,  3. 

5  Av.  v.  23,  4  et  seq. 


Sprachforschung,    13,    49    et    seq.',    113 
et    seq.  ;     Bloomfield,    Hymns    of    the 
Atharvaveda,  313  et  seq. ;  Weber,  Indische 
Cf.   Zimmer,   Altindisches   Leben,  98,    \   Studien.  13,  199;  Whitney,  Translation 
393  ;  Kuhn,  Zeitschrift  fur  vergleichende   i   of  the  Atharvaveda,  73. 


Krmuka  is  the  name  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita1  and  the  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana2  of  a  species  of  wood  used  for  fuel.3 

1  xix.  10.  3  Ibid.     (Kramuha     as     applied     to 

2  vi.  6,  2,  11.  I   samidh). 


Kr£a  is  mentioned  with  Samvarta  as  a  pious  sacrificer  to 
Indra  in  one  of  the  Valakhilya  hymns  of  the  Rigveda1  and  in 
another2  as  a  speaker  of  truth,  while  a  third  is  traditionally3 
ascribed  to  his  authorship.  He  seems  also  to  be  mentioned 
with  Sayu  as  a  protege  of  the  Asvins  in  another  hymn  of  the 
Rigveda,4  but  here  the  word  may  merely  denote  the  'feeble 


man.'6 

1  viii.  54,  2. 

5  Roth,   St.   Petersburg  Dictionary, 

•  viii.  59,  3. 

s.v. 

3  Indische  Studien,  I,  293,  n. 

Cf.     Ludwig,     Translation     of    the 

4  x.  40,  8. 

Rigveda,  3,  132,  164. 

Kr§i  ]  PEARL— PLOUGHING  181 

KrSana,  'pearl.'  In  the  Rigveda  pearls  are  mentioned  as 
adorning  the  car  of  Savitr1  as  well  as  being  used  for  the  adorn- 
ment of  a  horse.2  Hence  the  horse  is  spoken  of  as  the  '  pearled 
one  '  (krsanclvant).3  The  Atharvaveda4  also  refers  to  pearls,  and 
mentions  that  'pearl  shell '  (safikhah  krsanah)  won  from  the  sea  was 
used  as  an  amulet.5    The  Nighantu6  renders  the  word  as  '  gold.' 

6  i.  2.  Cf.  Sama  Mantra  Brahmana, 
i,  6,  22. 


x  1-35.4- 

2  x.  68,  i. 

3  i.  126,  4.     Cf.  krsanin,  vii.  18,  23. 


x.  I,  7. 

iv.  10,  1.  3. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  53, 
54 ;  Lanman  in  Whitney,  Translation 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  161. 


Krganu  appears  in  the  Rigveda  as  a  mythological  personage.1 
In  one  verse,2  however,  Roth3  sees  in  this  word  the  name  of 
a  bowman,  but  there  seems  no  reason  to  dissociate  this  passage 
from  the  rest. 

1  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  pp.  74,    j       2  i.  112,  21. 
ii2,  137;  Hillebrandt,   Vedische  Mytho-    j       3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s. v.,  4. 
logie,  1,  448. 

Krsi,  '  ploughing.'  The  cultivation  of  the  soil  was  no  doubt 
known  to  the  Indians  before  they  separated  from  the  Iranians, 
as  is  indicated  by  the  identity  of  the  expressions  yavam  krs  and 
sasya  in  the  Rigveda  with  yao  karesh  and  hahya  in  the  Avesta, 
referring  to  the  ploughing  in  of  the  seed  and  to  the  grain 
which  resulted.1  But  it  is  not  without  significance  that  the 
expressions  for  ploughing  occur  mainly  in  the  first2  and  tenth3 
books  of  the  Rigveda,  and  only  rarely  in  the  so-called  '  family  ' 
books  (ii.-vii.).4  In  the  Atharvaveda  Prthi  Vainya  is  credited 
with  the  origination  of  ploughing,5  and  even  in  the  Rigveda 
the  Asvins  are  spoken  of  as  concerned  with  the  sowing  of  grain 
by  means  of  the  plough.6  In  the  later  Samhitas  and  the 
Brahmanas  ploughing  is  repeatedly  referred  to.7 

1  Zimmer,   Altindisches   Leben,    235  ;  5  viii.  10,  24.            6  i.  117,  21. 
Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  7  Krsi  is  found,  e.g. ,  in  Av.  ii.  4,  5  ; 
Society,  17,  85.  viii.  2,  19  ;  10,  24  ;  x.  6,  12;  xii.  2,  27, 

2  Forms  of  the  root  krs,  '  to  plough,'  etc.;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  1,  11,  1, 
occur  in  Rv.  i.  23,  15  ;  176,  2.  etc.  ;  MaitrayanI  Samhita,  i.  2,  2  ;  iii.  6, 

3  Rv.  x.  34,  13  ;  117,  7.  In  x.  146,  6,  8  ,  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  iv.  10  ;  ix.  22  ; 
akrsivala,  'not  agricultural,'  occurs.  xi  v.  19.  21,  etc.  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
Cf.  x.  101,  4.  vii.   2,   2,   7;    viii.   6,   2,  2  ;   Taittiriya 

*  Krs  is  also  found  in  viii.  20,  19 ;  22,  Brahmana,  iii.  1,  2,  5,  etc.  In  Av. 
6;  in  the  family  books  only  in  iv.  57,  ,  vi.  116,  1,  karsivana  denotes  a 
4,  and  as  vi-krs  in  iv.  57,  8.  '  plougher.'     See  also  Karsman. 


182  AGRICULTURE  [  Kr§i 

Even  in  the  Rigveda8  there  is  clear  proof  of  the  importance 
attached  to  agriculture.  In  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana9  the 
Vratyas,  Hindus  without  the  pale  of  Brahminism,  are  de- 
scribed as  not  cultivating  the  soil. 

The  plough  land  was  called  Urvara  or  Ksetra ;  manure 
(Sakan,  Kari§a)  was  used,  and  irrigation  was  practised  (Khani- 
tra).  The  plough  (Langala,  Sira)  was  drawn  by  oxen,  teams  of 
six,  eight,  or  even  twelve  being  employed.10  The  operations  of 
agriculture  are  neatly  summed  up  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana11 
as  '  ploughing,  sowing,  reaping,  and  threshing '  (krsantah, 
vapantah,  lunantah,  mrnantah).  The  ripe  grain  was  cut  with 
a  sickle  (Datra,  Srni),  bound  into  bundles12  (Parsa),  and  beaten 
out  on  the  floor  of  the  granary  (Khala).13  The  grain  was  then 
separated  from  the  straw  and  refuse  either  by  a  sieve  (Titau) 
or  a  winnowing  fan  (Surpa).14  The  winnower  was  called 
Dhanyakrt,15  and  the  grain  was  measured  in  a  vessel  called 
Urdara.16 

The  Rigveda  leaves  us  in  doubt  as  to  the  kind  of  grain 
grown,  for  Yava  is  a  word  of  doubtful  signification,  and  Dhana 
is  also  vague.  In  the  later  Samhitas17  things  are  different. 
Rice  (Vrlhi)  appears,  Yava  means  barley,  with  a  species 
styled  Upavaka.  Beans  (Mudga,  Masa),  sesamum  (Tila),  and 
other  grains  (Anu,  Khalva,  Godhuma,  Nivara,  Priyangu, 
Masura,  Syamaka)  are  mentioned,  while  cucumbers  (Urvaru, 
Urvaruka)  were  known.  It  is  uncertain  whether  fruit  trees 
(Vrksa)  were  cultivated,  or  merely  grew  wild  ;18  but  frequent 
mention  is  made  of  the  jujube  (Karkandhu,  Kuvala,  Badara). 

The  seasons  for  agriculture  are  briefly  summed  up  in  a 
passage  of  the  Taittiriya  Samhita  :19  barley  ripened  in  summer, 
being  no  doubt   sown,  as  in  modern    India,   in  winter;    rice 


8  x.  34,  13;  117,  7.  Cj.  Hopkins, 
India,  Old  and  New,  208. 

9  xvii.  1. 

10  Av.  vi.  91,  1 ;  Kathaka  Samhita, 
xv.  2.     Cf.  Rv.  viii.  6,  48  ;  x.  101,  4. 

11  i-  6,  1,  3. 

12  viii.  78,  10;  x.  101,  3;   131,  2. 

13  Rv.  x.  48,  7. 

14  Rv.  x.  71,  2  ;  Av.  xii.  3,  19.  The 
technical  terms  are  tusair  vi-vic,  Av. 
xi.  1,  12  ;  palavan  apa-vic,  xii.  3,  19. 


15  Rv.  x.  94,  13. 

16  Rv.  ii.  14,  11.     See  also  Sthivi. 

17  See  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xviii.  12, 
for  a  list. 

18  The  pulling  of  ripe  fruit  is  referred 
to  in  Rv.  iii.  45,  4.  Cf.  pakva  sakha, 
Rv.  i.  8,  8 ;  vrksa  pakva,  Rv.  iv.  20,  5  ; 
Av.  xx.  127,  4.  But  that  does  not 
prove  arboriculture. 

19  vii.  2,  10,  2. 


Kr§na  ] 


na  ]    AGRICULTURAL  SEASONS— PEOPLE— ANTELOPE    183 

ripened  in  autumn,  being  sown  in  the  beginning  of  the  rains ; 
beans  and  sesamum,  planted  at  the  time  of  the  summer  rains, 
ripened  in  the  winter  and  the  cool  season.  There  were  two 
harvests  (Sasya)  a  year  according  to  the  Taittiriya  Samhita ; 20 
the  winter  crop  was  ripe  by  the  month  of  Caitra  (March-April) 
according  to  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana.21 

The  farmer  had  plenty  of  trouble  of  his  own  :  moles  destroyed 
the  seed,  birds  and  various  kinds  of  reptiles  (Upakvasa,  Jabhya, 
Tarda,  Patahga)  injured  the  young  shoots,  excessive  rain  or 
drought  might  damage  the  crops.  The  Atharvaveda  contains 
spells  to  prevent  these  evils.22 

20  v.  1,  7,  3.  I       22  See  Av.  vi.  50.  142;  vii.  11. 

21  xix.  3.  Cf.  Keith,  Sahkhayana  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  235- 
Aranyaka,  8i,  n.  1.                                       I   243. 

Krsti  denotes  '  people '  in  general  from  the  Rigveda1  onwards. 
Its  common  and  regular  use  in  this  sense  appears  to  show  that 
the  Aryans,  when  they  invaded  India,  were  already  agricul- 
turists, though  the  employment  of  the  words  referring  to 
ploughing  mentioned  under  Krsi  indicates  that  not  all  of  the 
people  devoted  themselves  equally  to  that  occupation.  Indra 
and  Agni  are  par  excellence  the  lords  of  men  (Krsti).2  Some- 
times the  word  is  further  defined  by  the  addition  of  an  adjective 
meaning  '  belonging  to  mankind,'  'of  men'  (manuslh,3  mdnavlh).4 

Special  mention  is  frequently5  made  of  the  'five  peoples' 
(pafica  krstayah).  The  exact  sense  of  this  expression  is  doubtful. 
See  Panca  Janasah. 


1  i.  52,  11  ;  ioo,  10 ;  160,  5  ;  189,  3  ; 
iii.  49,   1 ;  iv.   21,  2,  etc.  ;  Av.  xii.   I, 

3-4- 

2  i.  177,  1 ;  iv.  17,  5 ;  vii.  26,  5 ; 
viii.  13,  9  (Indra) ;  i.  59,  5 ;  vi.  18,  2 ; 
vii.  5,  5  (Agni). 


3  Rv.  i.  59,  5  ;  vi.  18,  2. 

4  Av.  iii.  24,  3. 

5  Rv.  ii.  2,  10  ;  iii.  53,  16 ;  iv.  38,  10  ; 
x.  60,  4  ;  119,  6  ;  178,  3  ;  Av.  iii.  24,  2  ; 
xii.  i,  42. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  141. 


i.  Krsna  ('black')  denotes  a  dark-coloured  animal  or  bird. 
In  some  passages,1  as  the  context  shows,  an  antelope  is  certainly 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  2,  6,  5  ; 
vi.  1,3,  1 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  1, 
4,  1 ;  iii.  2,  1,  28.  So  krsna-visana, 
'horn  of  the  black  antelope,'  ibid., 
iii.   2,    1,    18.  28;   2,  20;   iv.   4,    5,   2; 


v.  4,  2,  5  ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  1, 
3,  7.  See  also  the  Asvamedha  passages, 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  17;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  36  (cf.  ii.  1). 


1 84 


ANCIENT  SAGES 


Krsna 


meant.     In  a  few  others2  a  bird  of  prey  seems  indicated.     See 
also  Krsnajina. 

2  Rv.  x.  94,  5  ;  Av.  xi.  2,  2  ;  Sankhayana  Aranyaka,  xii.  27. 

2.  Krsna  appears  as  the  name  of  a  seer  in  one  hymn  of  the 
Rigveda.1  Tradition  assigns  to  him  or  to  Visvaka,  son  of 
Kisna  (Kdrmi),  the  authorship  of  the  following  hymn.2  The 
word  Krsniya  may  be  a  patronymic3  formed  from  the  same 
name  in  two  other  hymns  of  the  Rigveda,4  where  the  Asvins 
are  said  to  have  restored  Visnapu  to  Visvaka  Krsniya.  In  that 
case  Krsna  would  seem  to  be  the  grandfather  of  Visnapu.  This 
Krsaa  may  be  identical  with  Krsna  Angirasa  mentioned  in  the 
Kausitaki  Brahmana.5 


1  viii.  85,  3.  4. 

2  viii.  86. 

3  i.  116,  23  ;  117,  7. 

4  As  a  patronymic,  it  would  be  an 
isolated  formation  (cf.  however  Pajriya), 


instead  of  Karsnya.  Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic 
Grammar,  228a  and  200.  5  xxx.  9. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  108  ;  Macdonell,  Vedic  Myth- 
ology, p.  52. 


3.  Krsna  Devaki-putra  is  mentioned  in  the  Chandogya 
Upanisad1  as  a  pupil  of  the  mythical  Ghora  Angirasa. 
Tradition,2  and  several  modern  writers  like  Grierson,  Garbe, 
and  von  Schroeder,  recognize  in  him  the  hero  Krsna,  who  later 
is  deified.  In  their  view  he  is  a  Ksatriya  teacher  of  morals,  as 
opposed  to  Brahminism.3  This  is  extremely  doubtful.  It 
appears  better  either  to  regard  the  coincidence  of  name  as 
accidental,  or  to  suppose  that  the  reference  is  a  piece  of 
Euhemerism.  To  identify  this  Krsna  with  the  preceding, 
as  does  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  seems  to  be  quite 
groundless. 

padia    of  Religions,    article    'Bhakti'; 
Garbe,  Bhagavadgita. 

Cf.  Weber,  op.  cit.,  71 ;  148;  Hopkins, 
Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1905, 
386. 


iii.  17,  6. 

Weber, 


Indian      Literature, 


2  Cf. 
169. 

3  Von     Schroeder,    Vienna    Oriental 
Journal,  19,  414,  415  ;  Grierson,  Encyclo- 


4.  Krsna  Harita  is  mentioned  as  a  teacher  in  the  Aitareya 
Aranyaka.1  The  Sankhayana  Aranyaka2  has  Krtsna  in  the 
parallel  passage. 

iii.  2,  6.  1       Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  391,  n.  • 

Indian  Literature,  50. 


Kekaya  ]    TEACHERS— WEIGHT— DEERSKIN— IRON  185 

Kp§na-datta  Lauhitya  ('  descendant  of  Lohita ')  is  mentioned 
in  a  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers)  of  the  Jaiminlya  Upanisad  Brah- 
mana  (iii.  42, 1)  as  a  pupil  of  Syamasujayanta  Lauhitya. 

Krsna-dhrti  Satyaki  ('  descendant  of  Satyaka ')  is  mentioned 
in  a  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers)  of  the  Jaiminlya  Upanisad  Brah- 
mana  (iii.  42,  1)  as  a  pupil  of  SatyaSravas. 

Krsna-rata  Lauhitya  ('descendant  of  Lohita')  is  mentioned  :  Tci"4!*-  £<*"*- 
in  a  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers)  of  the  Jaiminlya  Upanisad  Brah-  ^cJ  i_  im^ 
mana  (iii.  42,  1)  as  a  pupil  of  Syamajaj ayanta  Lauhitya.  *  T^yvlkT 

Krsnala  denotes  the  berry  of  the  A  brus  precatorius,  used  as  a 
weight  according  to  the  later  authorities,  one  Masa  ('  bean  ') 
being  equated  to  four  Krsnalas.1  In  the  sense  of  a  weight  it 
occurs  in  the  Taittiriya2  and  other  Samhitas,3  and  later.4 


1  Manu,  viii.  134. 

2  ii.  3,  2,  1  et  seq. 

3  Maitrayanl  Samhita,  ii.  2,  2  ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xi.  4  {hiranya 
krsiiala). 

*  Taittiriya   Brahmana,  i.  3,   6,   7; 


Anupada  Sutra,  ix.  6.  In  the  later 
language  it  is  also  called  raktika  or 
guhja  (being  a  smooth  red  berry  with  a 
black  spot  at  one  end). 

Cf.  Weber's  edition  of  the  Jyotisa,  82 
et  seq.  ;  Indische  Stnifen,  1,  102,  103. 


Krsnajina  is  the  skin  (ajina)  of  the  black  antelope  (Krsna.) 
It  is  repeatedly  referred  to  in  the  later  Samhitas  and  Brah- 
manas1  with  regard  to  its  ritual  use. 

1  Av.  ix.  6,  17;  Taittiriya  Samhita,    I   Brahmana,  i.  1,  1,  22;  4,  1;  9,  2,  35, 
ii.    4,   9,    2;    v.    4,   4,    4;    Satapatha   |  etc. 

Krsnayasa  (' black  metal'),  'iron,'  is  referred  to  in  the  Chan- 
dogya  Upanisad  (vi.  1,  6).     See  also  Ayas  and  Kar§nayasa. 

Krsara,  a  term  denoting  a  mess  of  rice  and  sesamum,  often 
mentioned  in  the  Sutras,  occurs  in  the  Sadvimsa  Brahmana.1 

1  v.  2.     Cf.  Weber,  Omina  und  Portenta,  315  et  seq. 

Kekaya  is  the  name  of  a  tribe  which  in  later  days,  and 
probably  also  in  Vedic  times,  was  settled  in  the  north-west, 


186  METEOR— FISHERMAN— HAIR— TRIBES  [  Ketu 

between  the  Sindhu  (Indus)  and  Vitasta.1  In  the  Vedic  texts 
the  Kekayas  are  mentioned  indirectly  only  in  the  name  of  their 
prince  ASvapati  Kaikeya.2 

1  Pargiter,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  I       2  Satapatha  Brahmana,   x.    6,    i,    2 
Society,  1908,  317,  332.  |  et  seq. ;  Chandogya  Upanisad,  v.  11,  4. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indian  Literature,  120  ;  Indische  Studien,  1,  126. 

i.  Ketu  is  a  term  which  Weber1  understands  in  the  sense  of 
'  meteor  '  or  '  comet '  in  the  late  Adbhuta  Brahmana. 

1  Indische  Studien,  1,41.     The  arunah  I   Dictionary,    are    not    so    treated    by 


ketavah  (Av.   xi.   10,   1.  2.  7),  referred 
to  in  this  sense  in  the  St.  Petersburg 


Bohtlingk  in  his  Dictionary. 


2.  Ketu  Vajya  ('  descendant  of  Vaja ')  is  mentioned  as  a 
teacher  in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana.1 

1  Indische  Studien,  4,  372. 

Kevarta,  Kaivarta  are  two  variant  forms  denoting  '  fisher- 
man '  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita1  and  Taittiriya  Brahmana2 
lists  of  victims  at  the  Purusamedha,  or  human  sacrifice. 

1  xxx.  16,  with  Mahidhara's  note.  2  iii.  4,  12,  1,  with  Sayana's  note. 

Kesa,  '  hair  of  the  head,'  is  repeatedly  mentioned  in  the  later 
Samhitas  and  Brahmanas.1  The  hair  was  a  matter  of  great 
care  to  the  Vedic  Indian,  and  several  hymns  of  the  Atharva- 
veda2  are  directed  to  securing  its  plentiful  growth.  Cutting 
or  shaving  (vap)  the  hair  is  often  referred  to.3  For  a  man  to 
wear  long  hair  was  considered  effeminate.4  As  to  modes  of 
dressing  the  hair  see  Opasa  and  Kaparda ;  as  to  the  beard  see 
Smasru. 


1  Av.  v.  19,  3  ;  vi.  136,  3,  etc. ;  Vaja- 
saneyi Samhita,  xix.  22  ;  xx.  5  ;  xxv.  3  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  5,  2,  48,  etc. 

2  vi.  136.  137.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altin- 
disches  Leben,  68  ;  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  536,  537. 


3  Av.  viii.  2,  17 ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, v.  5,  3,  1,  etc.  Cf.  Oldenberg, 
Religion  des  Veda,  425  et  seq. 

4  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  1,  2, 
14.  But  cf.  Vincent  Smith,  Indian 
Antiquary,  34,  203. 


1.  Ke6in  is  the  name  of  a  people  occurring  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana,1  where  their  king  is  mentioned  as  learning  from 
Khandika  the  atonement  for  a  bad  omen  at  the  sacrifice. 


1  xi.  8,  4,  6.     Cf.  Panini,  vi.  4,  165;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  44, 
131.  134- 


Ke&n  Satyakami  ]    AN  ANCIENT  SAGE— A  TEACHER 


187 


2.  Kesin  Darbhya1  or  Dalbhya2  ('  descendant  of  Darbha ')  is  a 
somewhat  enigmatic  figure.  According  to  the  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana3 and  the  Jaiminlya  Upanisad  Brahmana4  he  was  a  king, 
sister's  son  of  Uccaih6ravas,  according  to  the  latter  authority. 
His  people  were  the  Pancalas,  of  whom  the  Kesins  must  there- 
fore have  been  a  branch,  and  who  are  said  to  have  been  threefold 
(tryanika).5  A  story  is  told  of  his  having  a  ritual  dispute  with 
Sandika  in  the  MaitrayanI  Samhita6;  this  appears  in  another 
form  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.3  He  was  a  contemporary 
of  a  fellow  sage,  KeSin  Satyakami,  according  to  the  Maitra- 
yanI7 and  Taittirlya8  Samhitas.  The  Pancavimsa  Brahmana9 
attributes  to  him  a  Saman  or  chant,  and  the  Kausitaki  Brah- 
mana10 tells  how  he  was  taught  by  a  golden  bird. 

In  view  of  the  fact  that  the  early  literature  always  refers  to 
Darbhya  as  a  sage,  it  seems  doubtful  whether  the  commentator 
is  right  in  thinking  that  the  Satapatha  refers  to  a  king  and 
a  people,  when  a  sage  alone  may  well  be  meant,  while  the 
Jaiminlya  Upanisad  Brahmana  is  of  no  great  authority.  The 
latter  work  may  have  assumed  that  the  reference  in  the  Kathaka 
Samhita11  to  the  Kesin  people  signifies  kingship,  but  this  is 
hardly  necessary. 


1  This  is  the  form  of  the  name  in 
the  Jaiminlya  Upanisad  Brahmana, 
the  MaitrayanI  Samhita,  the  Taittirlya 
Samhita,  and  the  Kausitaki  Brah- 
mana ;  also  later  in  the  Brhaddevata. 

2  This  is  the  form  in  the  Kathaka 
Samhita  and  the  Pancavimsa  Brah- 
mana. It  also  appears  later  in  the 
Rigveda  Anukramanl. 

3  xi.  8,  4,  1  et  seq.,  as  explained  by 
Sayana. 

4  iii.  29,  1  et  seq. 

5  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxx.  2  (Weber, 
Indische    Studien,    3,    471) ;    Jaiminlya 


Upanisad  Brahmana,  loc.  cit.  \  Baudh- 
ayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xx.  25. 

6  i.  4,  12  (von  Schroeder  gives  no 
variant  reading  ;  but  *  and  kh  are  con- 
stantly confused  in  manuscripts). 

7  i.  6,  5. 

8  ii.  6,  2,  3. 

9  xiii.  10,  8. 

10  vii.  4.  n  xxx.  2. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  i,  193, 
209  ;  2,  308  ;  Hopkins,  Transactions  of 
the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and 
Sciences,  15,  58,  59;  Sieg,  Die  Sagenstoffe 
des  Rgveda,  62,  n.  2. 


3.  KeSin  Satya-kami  (<  descendant  of  Satyakama ')  is  men- 
tioned as  a  teacher  and  contemporary  of  KeSin  Darbhya  in 
the  Taittirlya  (ii.  6,  2,  3)  and  MaitrayanI  (i.  6,  5)  Samhitas. 


1 88  NAMES  [  Kesaraprabandha 

Kesara-prabandha. — In  the  list  of  the  crimes  of  the  Vaita- 
havyas  narrated  in  the  Atharvaveda1  is  the  cooking  of  the  last 
she-goat  (caramdjam)  of  Kesaraprabandha,  who  may  presum- 
ably be  deemed  to  have  been  a  woman,  '  having  braided  hair.' 2 
Ludwig,3  followed  by  Whitney,4  appears  to  amend  the  passage 
(carama-jdm)  as  meaning  *  the  last-born  calf  of  Kesarapra- 
bandha, a  cow.  But  this  interpretation  does  not  suit  the  name 
so  well. 


2  Bloomfield,    Hymns   of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 432,  433.  I    252 


Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  2,  447. 
Translation  of    the   Atharvaveda, 


Kaikeya,  '  king  of  the  Kekayas,'  is  an  epithet  of  Agvapati.1 

1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  x.  6,  1,  2  ;  Chandogya  Upanisad,  v.  11,  4. 

Kairata  is  the  name  of  a  snake  in  the  Atharvaveda 1 — possibly, 
but  not  probably,  the  modern  Karait. 

1  v.  13,  5.     Cf.  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  243. 

Kairatika,  a  '  maiden  of  the  Kirata  people,'  is  mentioned  in 
the  Atharvaveda  (x.  4,  14)  as  digging  up  roots  for  medicinal  use. 

Kairigi,  '  descendant  of  Kirisa,'  is  the  patronymic  of  Sutvan 
in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana  (viii.  28). 

Kaivarta.     See  Kevarta. 

KaiSini. — The  Kaisinyah  prajah,  'offspring  or  people1  of 
Resin,'  are  mentioned  in  an  obscure  passage  of  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana2  either  as  still  existing  at  the  date  of  the  Brahmana3 
or  as  extinct. 

1  So  Sayana.  3  Cf.  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the 

2  xi.  8,  4,  6.  I   East,  44,  134. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  208. 

Kaisorya,  'descendant  of  Kaisori,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
Kapya  in  the  first  two  Vamsas  (lists  of  teachers)  in  the  Brhad- 
aranyaka  Upanisad.1 

l  ii.  5,  22;  iv.  5,  28  (Madhyamdina  =  ii.  6,  3 ;  iv.  6,  3  Kanva). 


CUCKOO— JUJUBE— BUCKET— BODY  OF  CAR 

I.  Koka,  a  word  occurring  in  the  Rigveda1  and  the  Atharva- 
veda,2  seems  to  denote  the  '  cuckoo.'  In  all  the  three  passages 
in  which  it  is  found,  Sayana  explains  it  as  the  Cakravaka. 
Roth3  renders  it  in  the  Atharvaveda  passages  as  a  certain 
destructive  parasitic  animal.     Cf.  Anyavapa. 

1  vii.  104,  22  (koka-yatu,  a  ghost  in      vaveda,  454  ;  Whitney,  Translation  of 
the  shape  of  a  cuckoo).  the  Atharvaveda,  262;    Geldner,  Rig- 

2  v.  23,  4  ;  viii.  6,  2.  veda,  Glossar,  49;  Zimmer,  Altindisches 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.,  6.        Leben,  92. 
Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  A  thar- 


2.  Koka  is  mentioned  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (xiii.  5, 
4,  17)  as  a  son  of  the  Pancala  king,  Satrasaha. 

Kokila,  a  very  frequent  word  in  the  Epic  and  later,  denoting 
the  cuckoo,  is  only  inferred  for  the  Vedic  period  from  its  being 
the  name  of  a  Rajaputra  in  the  Kathaka  Anukramanl.1 

1  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  3,  460. 

Koneya,  Kauneya.    See  Raj  ana. 

Kola,  another  form  of  Kuvala,  the  Zizyphus  jujuba,  is 
mentioned  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad  (vii.  3,  1). 


1.  Ko£a  is  the  name  in  the  Rigveda1  for  the  *  bucket '  used  in 
drawing  water  by  means  of  a  rope  from  a  well  (Avata).  In  the 
ritual2  it  denotes  a  large  vessel  to  hold  Soma,  as  opposed  to 
Kalasa. 


1  i.  130,  2  ;  iii.  32,  15  ;  iv.  17,  6.     Cf. 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  156. 

2  Rv.  ix.  75,  3  ;  Av.  xviii.  4,  30,  etc. 


Cf.  Hillebrandt,   Vedische  Mythologie,  1, 
183  et  seq. 


2.  Ko£a  denotes  the  body  of  a  chariot.1  Presumably  it  was 
fastened  to  the  axles,  but  it  was  probably  not  very  secure,  as 
the  body  of  Pusan's  chariot  is  said  not  to  fall.2  The  ropes3 
used  to  fasten  the  Kosa  are  perhaps  referred  to  in  the  word 
aksa-nah.4  By  synecdoche  this  word  also  denotes  the  whole 
chariot.5    See  also  Vandhura,  Ratha. 


1  Rv.  i.  87,  2 ;  x.  85,  7,  etc. 

2  Rv.  vi.  54,  3. 

3  Gavah,  Rv.  viii.  48.  K. 


4  See  under  1.  Aksa. 

5  Rv.  viii.  20,  8 ;  22,  9. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  op.  cit.,  246. 


190  NAMES— THE  KOSALA  PEOPLE  [  KoSa 

3.  Koga. — The  exact  sense  of  this  word  in  Ko£a-karI,  the 
designation  of  a  female  victim  at  the  Purusamedha,  or  human 
sacrifice,1  is  uncertain.     It  may  be  *  sheath.' 

1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  14 ;  Taittirlya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  10,  1. 

Kosa. — The  Kosas  appear  as  a  priestly  family  in  the  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,  where  one  of  them,  SuSravas,  is  mentioned 
by  name.2 

1  x.  5,  5.  8.  »  x.  5,  5,  1. 

Kosala  is  the  name  of  a  people  not  occurring  in  the  earliest 
Vedic  literature.  In  the  story  of  the  spread  of  Aryan  culture 
told  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,1  the  Kosala- Videhas,  as  the 
offspring  of  Videgha  Mathava,  appear  as  falling  later  than  the 
Kuru-Pancalas  under  the  influence  of  Brahminism.  The  same 
passage  gives  the  Sadanira  as  the  boundary  of  the  two  peoples 
— Kosala  and  Videha.  Elsewhere2  the  Kausalya,  or  Kosala 
king,  Para  Atnara  Hairanyanabha,  is  described  as  having 
performed  the  great  Asvamedha,  or  horse  sacrifice.  Connexion 
with  Kasi  and  Videha  appears  also  from  a  passage  of  the 
Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra.3  Weber4  points  out  that  Asvalayana, 
who  was  very  probably  a  descendant  of  A£vala,  the  Hotr  priest 
of  Videha,  is  called  a  Kosala  in  the  Prasna  Upanisad.5  The 
later  distinction  of  North  and  South  Kosala  is  unknown  to 
both  Vedic  and  Buddhist  literature.6 

Kosala  lay  to  the  north-east  of  the  Ganges,  and  corresponded 
roughly  to  the  modern  Oudh. 

1  i.  4,  1,  1  et  seq. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  5,  4,  4. 
Cf.  Hiranya-nabha,  a  Rajaputra,  in 
PraSna  Upanisad,  iii.  2,  and  Sankha- 
yana Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  9,  13,  as  a 
Kausalya,  while  ibid.,  11,  Para  is  styled 
Vaideha. 

3  xvi.  29,  5. 

4  Indische  Studien,  1,  182,  441. 

Kaukusta  is  mentioned  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  as  a 
giver  of  a  Daksina,  or  gift  to  the  priests  officiating  at  a  sacrifice. 
The  Kanva  recension  reads  the  name  Kaiikthasta.2 

1  iv.  6,  I,  13.  2  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  26,  426,  n.  1. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indian  Literature,  134. 


0  vi.  1. 

6  Oldenberg,  Buddha,  393,  n. 

Cf.  von  Schroeder,  Indiens  Literatur 
und  Cultur,  167  ;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books 
of  the  East,  12,  xlii ;  Weber,  bidian 
Literature,  39,  132  et  seq. ;  Macdonell, 
Sanskrit  Literature,  213  -  215  ;  Rhys 
Davids,  Buddhist  India,  25. 


Kautsa  ]  PATRONYMICS 

Kauneya.     See  Raj  ana. 


ifi 


Kauntha-ravya  is  mentioned  as  a  teacher  in  the  Aitareya1 
and  Sankhayana  Aranyakas.2 

1  iii.  2,  2.  2  vii.  14  ;  viii.  2. 

Cf.  Keith,  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  249. 


Kaundini.     See  Parasarikaundimputra. 

Kaundinya  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Sandilya  in  the  first 
two  Vamsas  (lists  of  teachers)  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.1 
See  also  Vidarbhikaundinya,  and  the  following. 

1  ii.  5,  20;  iv.  5,  26  (Madhyamdina  =  ii.  6,  1 ;  iv.  6,  1,  Kanva). 

Kaundinyayana  is  mentioned  in  the  first  Vamsa  (list  of 
teachers)  of  the  Madhyamdina  recension  of  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad1  as  a  pupil  of  Kaundinya,  pupil  of  Kaundinya  and 
Agnivesya;  in  the  second2  as  a  pupil  of  the  two  Kaundinyas, 
pupils  of  Aurnavabha,  pupil  of  Kaundinya,  pupil  of  Kaundinya, 
pupil  of  Kaundinya  and  Agnivesya.  Neither  Vamsa  is  of  much 
value.3 

1  ii.  5,  20.  I       3  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 

2  iv.  5,  26.  I2»  xxxiv. 


Kautasta,  a  word  occurring  once  in  the  dual,  is  apparently 
a  patronymic  of  Arimejaya  and  Janamejaya,  two  Adhvaryu 
priests  at  the  snake  sacrifice  described  in  the  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana.1 

1  xxv.  15,  3.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  35. 

Kautsa  ('  descendant  of  Kutsa ')  is  mentioned  in  the  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana1  as  a  pupil  of  Mahitthi.  A  Kautsa  is  also 
attacked  in  the  Nirukta2  as  denying  the  value  of  the  Vedas,  and 
there  is  a  strong  ritual  tradition  of  hostility  to  the  Kautsas.3 


1  x.  6,  5,  9 ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upani- 
sad, vi.  5,  4  (Kanva  recension  only). 

2  i.  15- 

■  E.g.,    Apastamba    Srauta    Sutra, 


x.  20,  12;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Myth- 
ologie,  3,  285.  Cf.  Weber,  Iniinn 
Liter  attire,  77,  i4«. 


192 


PATRONYMICS 


[  Kautsiputra 


Kautsl-putra  ('  son  of  a  female  descendant  of  Kutsa ')  is 
mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Baudhiputra  in  the  last  Vamsa 
(list  of  teachers)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  in  the 
Madhyamdina  recension  (vi.  4,  31). 

Kaupayeya  is  the  patronymic  of  Uccaihsravas. 

Kaumbhya  ('  descendant  of  Kumbhya ')  is  the  patronymic 
of  Babhru. 

Kaurama.     See  Kaurava. 

Kaurayana  is  apparently  a  patronymic  of  Pakasthaman  in 
the  Rigveda.1  Hopkins2  suggests  that  Kaurayana  may  be 
meant. 

1  viii.  3,  21.     Cf.  Nirukta,  v.  25. 

2  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  17,  90,  n.  2. 


Kaurava  is  the  reading  of  the  text  of  the  Khilas1  and  of 
some  manuscripts  of  the  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra2  for  the 
Kaurama  of  the  Atharvaveda,3  who  appears  in  a  Danastuti 
('  Praise  of  Gifts ')  as  a  generous  donor  among  the  Rugamas. 


1  v.    8,    1    (Scheftelowitz,   Die  Apo- 
kryphen  des  Rgveda,  155). 

2  xii.  14,  1. 


3  xx.  127,  1. 

Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 689. 


Kauravya  ('  belonging  to  the  Kurus ').  A  man  of  the  Kuru 
people,  is  described  in  the  Atharvaveda  as  enjoying  prosperity 
with  his  wife  under  the  rule  of  King  Pariksit.1  Mention  is  also 
made  of  the  Kauravya  king  Balhika  Pratipiya  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana,2  and  in  the  later  legend  Arstisena  and  Devapi  are 
alleged  to  have  been  Kauravyas.3 


1  xx.  127,  8  ;  Khila,  v.  10,  2  ;  Sankh- 
ayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xii.  17,  2.  Cf.  a 
Mantra  in  the  Vaitana  Sutra,  xxxiv.  9. 


xii.  9.  3,  3- 
Nirukta,  ii.  10. 


IS 


Kauravyayani-putra  ('  son  of  a  female  descendant  of  Kuru ') 
mentioned  as  a  teacher   in   the   Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad 


(v.  1,  1). 


Kausambeya  ]  NAMES  193 

Kauru-paiieala,  '  belonging  to  the  Kuru-Pancalas,'  is  an 
epithet  of  Aruni  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (xi.  4,  1,  2),  and 
a  practice  of  those  tribes  is  designated  by  this  word  in  the 
same  work  (i.  7,  2,  8)* 

Kaulakavati  are  two  persons  mentioned  in  the  Maitrayani 
Samhita  (ii.  1,  3)  as  having  given  advice,  in  the  capacity  of 
priests,  to  Rathaprota  Darbhya. 

Kaulala  is  a  word  denoting  a  hereditary  potter  ('  son  of  a 
kulala  or  potter ')  according  to  the  commentator  Mahidhara 
on  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.1  The  other  Samhitas2  have 
Kulala. 

1  xxx.  7.  I   Kathaka    Samhita,    xvii.    13,    and    cf. 

2  Maitrayani     Samhita,     ii.     9,     5  ;    |  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  27. 

Kaulitapa  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1  as  a  Dasa.  Appar- 
ently the  name  is  an  epithet  of  Sambara,  meaning  '  son  of 
Kulitara':  this  points  to  Sambara  having  been  a  terrestrial  foe, 
and  not  a  mere  demon.2 

1  iv.  30,  14.  I   3,    273 ;    Macdonell,    Vedic  Mythology, 

2  Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,    |   pp.  64,  161. 

Kaulika,  like  Kulika,  is  the  name  of  some  sort  of  bird  in  the 
list  of  victims  at  the  Asvamedha,  or  horse  sacrifice,  in  the 
Yajurveda.1 

1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  24  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  5. 

Kausambeya  is  the  patronymic  ('  descendant  of  Kusamba ') 
of  a  teacher  Proti  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  according  to 
the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary :  a  view  supported  by  the  fact 
that  Kusamba  actually  occurs  as  the  name  of  a  man  in  the 
PancavimsSa  Brahmana.2  It  is,  however,  possible  that  the 
word  means  a  '  native  of  the  town  Kausambi '  as  understood 
by  Harisvamin  in  his  commentary  on  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.3 


1  xii.  2,2,  13  ;  Gopatha  Brahmana,  i. 
2,  24. 

2  viii.  6,  8.  The  name  is  also  found 
later  (in  the  Epic)  in  the  form  of 
Kusamba. 

VOL.  I.  13 


3  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 
44,  153,  n.  5.  Cf.  Weber,  Indischc 
Studien,  1,  193  ;  Rhys  Davids,  Buddhist 
India,  3,  36  ;  Oldenberg,  Buddha,  397. 


194 


PATRONYMICS 


„ 


Kaugika  is  an  epithet  of  Indra  as  *  connected  with  the 
Kusikas,'  and  also  of  Visvamitra  as  'son  of  Kusika.'1  A 
teacher  named  Kausika  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Kaundinya 
in  the  first  two  Vamsas  (lists  of  teachers)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad.2 


1  In  a  late  Khila,  Scheftelowitz,  Die 
Apokryphen  des  Rgveda,  104. 


ii.  6,  1 


r.  6,  i  (Kanva  recension). 


Kausikayani  ('  descendant  of  Kausika ')  is  mentioned  as  a 
teacher  and  a  pupil  of  Ghrtakausika  in  the  first  two  Vamsas 
(lists  of  teachers)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.1 

1  ii.  5,  21 ;  iv.  5,  27  (Madhyamdina  =  ii.  6,  3 ;  iv.  6,  3,  Kanva). 


Kau&ki-putra  ('son  of  a  female  descendant  of  Kusika')  is 
mentioned  in  a  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers)  in  the  Kanva  recension 
of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  (vi.  5,  1)  as  a  pupil  of  Alam- 
biputra  and  Vaiyagrhrapadiputra. 

Kau£reya  ('  descendant  of  Kusri ')  is  the  patronymic  of 
Somadaksa  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita  (xx.  8  ;  xxi.  9). 

Kausarava  ('  descendant  of  Kusa.ru ')  is  the  patronymic  of 
Maitreya  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana  (viii.  28). 

Kausitaki  ('  descendant  of  Kusitaka ')  is  the  patronymic  of  a 
teacher,  or  series  of  teachers,  to  whom  the  doctrines  set  forth 
in  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana1  and  in  the  Sankhayana  Aranyaka,2 
and  the  Srauta  and  Grhya  Sutras,3  are  referred.  He  is  rarely 
mentioned  elsewhere.4  The  doctrine  of  Kausitaki  is  called  the 
Kausltaka.5  The  pupils  of  Kausitaki  are  known  as  the  Kausl- 
takis  in  the  Nidana  Sutra,6  and  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana7 


1  ii.  9 ;  vii.  4.  10  ;  viii.  8  ;  xi.  5.  7  ; 
xiv.  3.  4 ;  xv.  2 ;  xvi.  9 ;  xviii.  5 ; 
xxii.  1.  2;  xxiii.  1.  "4;  xxiv.  8.  9; 
xxv.  8.   10.   14.   15,  etc. 

2  ii.  17  ;  xv.  1 ;  Kausitaki  Upanisad, 
ii.  1.   7. 

3  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  iv.  15, 
11 ;  vii.  21,6;  ix.  20,  33  ;  xi.  11,  3.  6,  etc. 


4  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  4,  3,  1 
Chandogya  Upanisad,  i.  5,  2. 

5  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  iii.  1  ;  xix. 
Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  iv.  2,  1 
xi.  14,  2/8 ;  Anupada  Sutra,  ii.  7  ;  vii.  1 
viii.  5,  etc?    ' 

6  vi.  12. 

7  xvii.  4,  3. 


Vf> 


Kratujit  Janaki  ]  PATRONYMICS  195 

they  with  Kusltaka  are  stated  to  have  been  cursed  by  LuSakapi. 
Elsewhere8  they  are  called  Kausitakins.  If  the  Sahkhayana 
Aranyaka9  can  be  trusted,  there  were  among  them  at  least  two 
leading  teachers,  Kahoda  and  Sarvajit,  the  former  of  whom  is 
mentioned  elsewhere.10 


8  Apastamba  Srauta  Sutra,  x.  1,  10; 
Asvalayana  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  23. 

9  Cf.   Keith,    Sahkhayana   Aranyaka, 
14,  24,  71. 

10  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  4,  3,  1  ; 


Brhadaranyaka    Upanisad,    iii.   4,    1  ; 
Asvalayana  Grhya  Sutra,  iii.  4. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  259  ; 
2,  289  et  seq. ;  Indian  Literature,  44  etseq.  ; 
Lindner,  Kausltaki  Brahmana,  ix. 


Kausya,  <  descendant  of  Kosa,'  is  the  patronymic  of  Susravas. 

Kausalya, '  prince  of  Kosala,'  is  the  designation  of  Para  Atnara 
in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,1  and  of  Hiranyanabha  in  the 
Sahkhayana  Srauta  Sutra.2  Asvalayana  is  styled  Kausalya,  as 
1  belonging  to  the  Kosala  country,'  in  the  Prasna  Upanisad,3 
and  the  Kasi-Kausalyah,  or  the  '  Kasis  and  people  of  Kosala,' 
are  mentioned  in  the  Gopatha  Brahmana.4 

1  xiii.  5,  4,  4.  3  i.  1. 

2  xvi.  9,  13.     Cf.  xvi.  29,  5.  4  i.  2,  9  (spelt  Kausalyah). 

Kausita  appears  in  the  MaitrayanI  Samhita  (ii.  1,  11)  in 
connexion  with  the  demon  Kusitayin  as  the  name  of  a  lake. 
The  Kathaka  Samhita  (x.  5)  has  Kausida  instead. 

Kausurubindi,  '  descendant  of  Kusurubinda,'  is  the  patro- 
nymic of  Proti  Kausambeya  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana 
(xii.  2,  2,  13).  In  the  Gopatha  Brahmana  (i.  4,  24)  the  form  is 
Kausuravindu. 

Kauhada,  '  descendant  of  Kohacla,'  is  the  patronymic  of  a 
teacher,  Mitravinda,  mentioned  in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana,1  as 
well  as  of  Sravanadatta. 

1  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  4,  372,  382  et  seq.     A  school  of  Kauhadiyas  is  known 
in  the  Gobhila  Grhya  Sutra,  iii.  4,  34. 

Kratu-jit  Janaki  ('  descendant  of  Janaka ')  is  mentioned  in 
the  Yajurveda1  as  the  priest  of  Raj  ana  Kauneya.  See  also 
Kratuvid. 

1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  3,  8,  1  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xi.  1.  Cf.  Weber, 
Indische  Studien,  3,  474. 

I3~2 


196 


NAME—SALE 


[  Kratuvid  Janaki 


Kratu-vid  Janaki  ('  descendant  of  Janaka ')  is  mentioned  in 
the  Aitareya  Brahmana  (vii.  34)  as  having  learned  a  certain 
doctrine  regarding  Soma  from  Agni. 


Kraya,  '  sale,'  is  a  word  which  does  not  actually  occur  in  the 
Rigveda,  though  the  verb  kri,  from  which  this  noun  is  derived, 
is  found  there.1  Both  noun  and  verb  are  common  in  the  later 
Samhitas.2  Sale  appears  to  have  regularly  consisted  in  barter 
in  the  Rigveda : 3  ten  cows  are  regarded  as  a  possible  price  for 
an  (image  of)  Indra  to  be  used  as  a  fetish,  while  elsewhere  not 
a  hundred,  nor  a  thousand,  nor  a  myriad  are  considered  as  an 
adequate  price  (sulka)  for  the  purchase  of  Indra.4  The  Athar- 
vaveda5  mentions,  as  possible  objects  of  commerce,  garments 
(dursa),  coverlets  (pavasta),  and  goatskins  (ajina).  The  haggling 
of  the  market  was  already  familiar  in  the  days  of  the  Rigveda,6 
and  a  characteristic  hymn  of  the  Atharvaveda7  is  directed  to 
procuring  success  in  trade.  The  '  price  '  was  called  Vasna,  and 
the  '  merchant '  Vanij.  his  greed  being  well  known.8 

There  is  little  evidence  of  a  standard  of  value  in  currency 
having  been  adopted.  When  no  specific  mention  is  made  of 
the  standard,  the  unit  was  probably  the  cow.9  In  a  consider- 
able number  of  passages  of  the  Satapatha  Brahmana10  and 
elsewhere,11  however,  the  expression  hiranyam  sata-mdnam 
suggests  that  there  must  have  been  some  standard  other  than 


1  iv.  24,  10. 

2  Kraya:  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  1, 
2,  i;vi.  i,  3,  3;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
viii.  55  ;  xix.  13  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
iii.  3,  2,  10,  etc.  ;  krl :  Av.  iii.  15,  2  ; 
Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  1,  10,  3  ;  vii.  1, 
6,  2,  etc.;  apa-kri :  Av.  viii.  7,  11; 
pari-hrl :  Av.  iv.  7,  6,  etc.  ;  vi-kri : 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  iii.  49,  etc. 

3  iv.  24,  10. 

4  Rv.  viii.  1,  5. 

5  iv.  7,  6. 

6  iv.  24,  9.  See  Oldenberg,  Rgveda- 
hioten,  1,  419,  42°.  correcting  Sieg,  Die 
Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  91,  and  Geldner's 
Kommentar  on  iv.  24. 

7  iii.  15.     See  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of 


the  Atharvaveda,  352  ;  Whitney,  Trans- 
lation of  the  Atharvaveda,  in,  112. 

8  Rv.  i.  33,  3,  and  see  Pani. 

9  Cf.  Harisvamin  on  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, xiii.  4,  2,  1,  where  he  renders 
sahasrdrha  as  equal  to  'worth  a  thousand 
cows,'  in  which  Eggeling  follows  him  ; 
Samksiptasara  on  Katyayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  xxii.  10,  33. 

10  xii.  7,  2,  13  ;  9,  1,  4  ;  xiii.  1,1,4; 
2,  3,  2;  4,  1,  13;  xiv.  3,  1,  32.  Cf. 
v.  5.  5.  16;  xiii.  4,  1,  6. 

11  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xviii.  3,  2, 
where  a  long  series  of  compounds  of 
numerals  with  -mana  occurs  ;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  viii.  5 ;  xiv.  8  ;  xxii.  8.  . 


Krimi 


UNIT  OF  VALUE— RAW  FLESH 


197 


cows,  though  it  might  in  all  these  passages  be  rendered  as 
'  gold  worth  a  hundred  cows.'  But  the  use  of  the  Krsnala  as  a 
measure  of  weight12  suggests  that  the  meaning  is  '  gold  weighing 
a  hundred  Krsnalas,'  and  this  seems  the  more  probable  explana- 
tion. This  unit  seems  not  to  be  known  in  the  Rigveda,  where 
the  meaning  of  the  term  Mana,  which  occurs  once,  is  mysterious, 
and  where  necklets  (Niska)  seem  to  have  been  one  of  the  more 
portable  forms  of  wealth,  like  jewellery  in  modern  India,  and 
may  perhaps  have  served  as  a  means  of  exchange. 


12  Cf.  Kathaka  Samhita,  xi.  4  ;  Tait- 
tiriya  Brahmana,  i.  3,  6,  7  ;  Anupada 
Sutra,  ix.  6  ;  Weber,  Indische  Streifen, 
I.  99-103. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  255- 
260.     Barter  had   for  the  most   part 


passed  away  by  the  time  of  the  Jatakas, 
an  illustration  of  the  modern  character 
of  the  society  they  represent.  See  Mrs. 
Rhys  Davids,  Journal  of the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society,  1901,  874  et  seq. 


Kravana,  a  word  occurring  only  once  in  the  Rigveda,1  is 
understood  by  Ludwig2  as  the  name  of  the  Hotr  priest  or  the 
sacrificer.  Roth  considered  it  an  adjective  without  at  first3 
assigning  a  sense,  but  afterwards4  as  meaning  '  timid.'  Sayana 
interprets  it  as  'worshipping.'  Oldenberg5  considers  the  meaning 
uncertain,  suggesting  as  possible  '  the  slayer  of  the  victim.' 


1  v.  44,  9. 

2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  138. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


4  Bohtlingk's  Dictionary,  s.v. 

5  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  342. 


Kravya,  '  raw  flesh,'  is  never  mentioned  in  Vedic  literature 
as  eaten  by  men.  Demons  alone  are  spoken  of  as  consuming  it,1 
apart  from  Agni  being  called  kravydd,  '  eating  raw  flesh,'  as 
consumer  of  the  bodies  of  the  dead.2  The  man  who  in  the 
Rigveda  is  compelled  by  starvation  to  eat  dog's  flesh,  never- 
theless cooks  it.3 


1  Rv.  vii.  104,  2 ;  x.  87,  2.  19 ;   162,  2  ; 
Av.  iii.  28,  2  ;  iv.  36,  3  ;  v.  29    10,  etc. 

2  Rv.  x.  16,  9.  10.     See  Macdonell, 
Vedic  Mythology,  pp.  97,  165. 


3  iv.  18,  13. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  270, 
271. 


Kratu-jateya  is  a  patronymic  of  Rama  Kratujateya  Vaiya- 
ghrapadya  in  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana  (iii.  40,  2  ; 
iv.  16,  1). 


Krimi.     See  Xrmi. 


198 


THE  KRIVI  TRIBE— CURLEW 


[  Krii 


Krivi  is  asserted  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  to  have  beei 
the  older  name  of  the  Pancalas.     This  statement  is  supportec 
by  the  name  of  the  king  there  mentioned,  Kraivya  Pancalj 
The  Krivis  appear  in  the  Rigveda2  as  settled  on  the  Sindhl 
and  the  AsiknI.     It  is  a  plausible  conjecture  of  Zimmer's3  that 
with  the  Kurus  they  made  up  the  Vaikarna   people.4    The 
importance   of  the    Pancalas,    and    the   insignificance   of   the 
Krivis,  may  be  explained  in  part  by  the  fact  that  the  later 
Kuru-Pancala  alliance   included    the    Bharatas.      It   is   also 
probable,  as  Oldenberg5  suggests,  from  the  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana,6 that  the  Turva£as  were  included  in  the  Pancalas,  and 
as  the  latter  name  indicates,  probably  other  tribes  also.     Or,  if 
Hopkins'  view7  is  accepted  that   Turvasa  was   king   of  the 
Yadus,  the  latter  may  in  part  have  been  allied  with  the  Krivis 
to  form  the  Pancalas. 


1  xm.  5.  4.  7- 

2  viii.  20,  24 ;  22,  12.  Elsewhere 
Krivi  is  doubtful  in  sense.  In  several 
passages  (i.  30,  1  ;  viii.  87,  1  ;  ix.  9,  6, 
and  perhaps  i.  166,  6,  where  krivir-datl 
is  an  epithet  of  lightning)  Oldenberg, 
Rgveda-Noten,  i.  166,  341,  understands 
the  word  to  mean  '  horse.'  Elsewhere 
(ii.  17,  6  ;  22,  2  ;  viii.  51,  8)  he  takes  it 
to  be  a  proper  name,  while  in  v.  44,  4, 
he  is  doubtful.  In  the  passages  last 
cited  this  view  may  very  well  be 
correct. 

3  Altindisches  Leben,  103. 

4  Cf.  Kava§a. 
6  Buddha,  404. 
6  xiii.  5,  4,  16. 


7  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  15,  258  et  seq.  This  view  is 
hardly  convincing,  while  the  disappear- 
ance of  the  TurvaSas  is  easily  to  be 
accounted  for  by  their  being  merged, 
along  with  the  Krivis,  in  the  Pancalas. 
The  name  of  Krivi  is  lost  in  the  Epic 
as  completely  as  that  of  Turvasa 
(Pargiter,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society,  1910,  48,  notes  4,5). 

Cf.  Macdonell,  Sanskrit  Literature, 
155,  157;  Grierson,  Journal  of  the  Royal 
Asiatic  Society,  1908,  602-607 I  Keith, 
ibid.,  831  et  seq. ;  Ludwig,  Translation 
of  the  Rigveda,  3,  152,  153 ;  Eggeling, 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  12,  xli.;  Max 
Miiller,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32, 407. 


Krita  Vaita-hotra  ('  descendant  of  Vltahotra ')  is  mentioned 
in  the  Maitrayani  Samhita  (iv.  2,  6)  in  connexion  with  the 
Kurus. 


1.  Krufic,1  Krufica,2  Kraunca,3  are  variant  forms  denoting 
the  '  curlew'  or  'snipe.'     To  it  is  attributed  in  the  Yajurveda1 


1  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  11,  6; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxxviii.  1  ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xix.  73  et  seq. ;  Tait- 
tiriya  Brahmana,  ii,  6,  2,  1-3. 


2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  22.  31 
(in  xxv.  6  the  sense  is  quite  uncertain) ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  3. 

3  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  12,  1. 


KroSa  ]  NAMES— KRUMU  RIVER— MEASURE  OF  DISTANCE   199 


the  faculty,  later  assigned  to  the  Hamsa,  of  extracting  milk 
from  water  when  the  two  fluids  are  mixed.4 


4  Lanman,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  19,  151-158;  Macdonell, 
Sanskrit  Literature,  150. 


Cf.   Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  91, 


92. 


2.  Kruric  Ahgirasa  is  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana1  the 
name  of  the  seer  of  a  Saman  or  Chant  called  the  Kraufica.  It 
is  doubtless  invented  to  explain  the  name  of  the  Chant  on  the 
ordinary  principle  that  Samans  are  called  after  their  authors, 
though  this  rule  has  many  exceptions.2 


1  xin.  9,  11  ;  11,  20. 

2  Hopkins,    Transactions   of  the   Con- 
necticut Academy   of  Arts  and  Sciences, 


15,  68.  Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mytho- 
logie,  2,  160. 


Krumu  is  the  name  of  a  stream  mentioned  twice  in  the 
Rigveda — once  in  the  fifth  book1  and  once  in  the  last,  in  the 
Nadl-stuti,  or  'praise  of  rivers.'2  There  can  be  little  doubt 
that  this  river  is  identical  with  the  modern  Kurum,  a  western 
tributary  of  the  Indus.3 


v.  53.  9- 

x.  75,  6. 

Roth,  Nirukta,   Erlduterungen,  43 


Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  14  ;  Lud- 
wig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3, 
200. 


Krumuka  as  the  name  of  '  wood '  appears  to  be  a  variant 
form  of  Krmuka. 

1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  1,  9,  3  ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  4,  7,  3. 

Kraivya.  Paneala,  the  king  of  the  Krivis,1  is  mentioned  in 
the  Satapatha  Brahmana2  as  having  performed  the  Asvamedha, 
or  horse  sacrifice,  on  the  Parivakra.  Eggeling,3  however, 
takes  the  word  as  a  proper  name,  l  Kraivya,  the  Paneala  king.' 


1  So  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v. ;  Weber,  Indian  Literature,  125,  n.  ; 
Oldenberg,  Buddha,  409,  n. 


-  xm.  5,  4,  7. 

3  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  44,  397 
(but  cf.  p.  398,  top). 


Krosa,  as  a  measure  of  distance  (lit.  '  a  shout,'  as  expressing 
the  range  of  the  voice),  is  found  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.1 


1  xvi.  13,  12.  Cf.  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  8,  432  et  seq.  In  the  later 
literature  it  is  equivalent  to  about  two 


miles.  The  word  still  survives  in  the 
vernacular  form  of  Kos  as  the  most 
popular  measure  of  distance  in  India. 


200 


J  A  CKA  L—MO  UNTA IN—NA  MES—BIRD  [  Krosfr 


Krostr  (lit.  'howler'),  the  'jackal,'  is  mentioned  in  the 
Rigveda1  as  by  nature  cowardly  compared  with  the  wild  boar 
(Varaha).  In  the  Atharvaveda2  it  is  spoken  of  as  devouring 
corpses.  The  word  also  occurs  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,3 
where  the  commentator  glosses  it  with  Srgala,  another  name  of 
the  jackal.     See  also  Lopaia. 


1  X.  28,  I. 

2  xi.  2,  2. 


3  xxiv.  32. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  84. 


i.  Kraufica.     See  Kruiic. 


2.  Kraufica,  as  the  name  of  a  mountain,  occurs  only  in  the 
latest  Vedic  literature.1 


1  Taittiriya  Aranyaka,   i.  31,  2. 
Studien,  1,  78. 


See  Weber,  Indian  Literature,  93  ;   Indische 


Kraunciki-putra,  '  son  of  a  female  descendant  of  Kraufica, ' 
is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Vaittabhatiputra 1  in  the  last  Vamsa 
(list  of  teachers)  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.2 


1  Vaidabhrti-putra  in  the  Madhyam- 
dina  recension,  vi.  4,  32. 


2  vi.  5,  2  (Kanva). 


Kraustuki,  'descendant  of  Krostuka,'  is  mentioned  as  a 
grammarian  in  the  Nirukta,1  the  Brhaddevata, 2  and  the 
Chandas,3  but  as  an  astrologer  in  a  Parisista  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda.4 


2  iv.  137.    Cf.  Indische  Studien,  1, 105. 

3  5- 

4  Weber,  Berlin  Catalogue  of  San- 
skrit MSS.,  1,  94.  See  Boiling  and 
von   Negelein,    The    Parifistas    of   the 


Atharvaveda,  2,  438  et  seq.,  where  in 
Parisista  lxviii  (Svapnadhyayah),  i.  2 ; 
ii.  8,  the  name  appears  as  Krostuki. 

Cf.  Weber,  Jyotisa,  12  ;  Indian  Litera- 
ture, 61. 


Kvayi  is  the  name  of  some  species  of  bird  in  the  Yajurveda,1 
occurring  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the  Asvamedha,  or  horse 
sacrifice.     The  form  in  the  Maitrayani  Samhita2  is  Kuvaya. 


1  Taittiriya    Samhita,    v.    5, 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  29. 


17,    1 


2  iii.  14,  18. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  gg. 


K§attr  ] 


JUJUBE  FRUIT— ROYAL  RETAINER 


20 1 


Kvala  is  a  substance,  perhaps1  identical  with  Kuvala,  the 
fruit  of  the  jujube,  used  to  coagulate  milk  according  to  the 
Taittirlya  Samhita.2 

1  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

2  "■  5,  3.  5-     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  227. 


Ksata  is  regarded  by  Zimmer1  as  denoting  a  special  disease 
(a  sort  of  Phthisis  pulmonalis)  in  the  Atharvaveda,2  but  the 
word  is  probably  only  an  adjective.3 


1  Altindisches  Leben,  377. 

2  vii.  76,  4  (where  the  reading  is 
doubtful,  the  text  having  aksita.  See 
Aksata). 


3  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, 509 ;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  442. 


Ksattr  is  a  word  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  later  Samhitas 
and  Brahmanas,  denoting  a  member  of  the  royal  entourage, 
but  the  sense  is  somewhat  uncertain.  In  the  Rigveda1  it  is 
used  of  a  god  as  the  *  distributor '  of  good  things  to  his 
worshippers ;  the  same  sense  seems  to  be  found  in  the  Athar- 
vaveda2 and  elsewhere.3  In  one  passage  of  the  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita4  the  interpretation  'doorkeeper'  is  given  by  the  com- 
mentator Mahldhara,  a  sense  which  seems  possible  in  other 
passages,5  while  Sayana  ascribes  to  it  in  one  passage  of  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana6  the  more  dignified  meaning  of  antah- 
puradhyaksa,  '  a  chamberlain.'  In  other  passages,7  again,  the 
sense  of  '  charioteer '  is  not  unlikely.  Later  the  Ksattr  was 
regarded  as  a  man  of  mixed  caste.8 


1  vi.  13,  2. 

2  iii.  24,  7 ;   v.  17,  4. 

3  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  5,  4,  6  ; 
Sahkhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  9,  16. 

4  xxx.  13.     Cf.  Taittiriya  Brahmana, 

i-  7,  3,  5- 

5  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  5,  4,  2  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  9,  4;  Katnaka 
Samhita,  xvii.  13  ;  Chandogya  Upani- 
sad,  iv.  1,  5  ;  Paiicavimsa  Brahmana, 
xix.  1,  4. 

6  v.  3,  1,  7.  Cf.  on  xiii.  4,  2,  5 
(ayavyayddhyaksa),  and  Harisvamin  on 
xiii.  5,4,6  (kosadhyaksa).  The  scholiast 
on  the  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xv.3,  9, 


nas  mantr'i  duto  va  ;  on  xx.  1,  16,  prafi- 
haro  duto  va.  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books 
of  the  East,  41,  61,  etc.,  renders  it 
'  chamberlain. ' 

7  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  26  ; 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  7,  1,  with 
the  scholiast's  note,  and  ibid.,anuksattr, 
rendered  as  sarather  anucara,  '  the  at- 
tendant of  the  charioteer '  ;  Sahkha- 
yana Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  1,  20,  with  the 
scholiast's  note. 

8  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  i2,  481. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  2,  36 ; 
17,  290  ;  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v. 


202  RULING  POWER— MILITARY  CLASS  [  K§at: 

I.  Ksatra,  in  the  general  sense  of  '  dominion,'  '  rule,'  '  power,' 
as  exercised  by  gods  and  men,  occurs  frequently  from  the 
Rigveda1  onwards.  The  word  is  also  found  in  the  concrete 
sense  of  '  rulers '  in  the  Rigveda  2  and  later  ;3  but  in  no  case 
does  it  in  the  Rigveda  certainly4  mean  what  it  regularly  denotes 
in  the  later  Samhitas,5  the  ruling  class  as  opposed  to  the  priests 
(Brahman),  the  subject  people  (Vi£,  Vaisya),  and  the  servile 
class  (Sudra).  See  also  Ksatriya.  A  Ksatra-pati  is  several 
times  mentioned6  as  an  equivalent  of  '  king.' 


. 


1  i.  24,  11;  136,  1.  3;  iv.  17,  1; 
v.  62,  6,  etc.;  Av.  iii.  5,  2  ;  v.  18,  4, 
etc.  So  ksatra-sri,  Rv.  i.  25,  5  ;  vi.  26, 
8 ;  ksatra-bhrt,  '  bringers  of  lordship. ' 
Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  4,  7,  2  ;  Tait- 
tiriya  Brahmana,  ii.  4,  6,  12 ;  7,  6,  3  ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxvii.  7,  etc. 

2  Singular:  i.  157,  2  ;  viii.  35,  17. 

3  Plural:  Av.  iv.  22,  2;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita.,  x.  17  ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana, 
ii.  7.  6,  3- 


4  See    Roth,    St.    Petersburg    Die 
tionary,  s.v.,  and  Varna. 

5  Av.  ii.  15,  4  ;  ix.  7,  9  ;  xii.  5,  8  ; 
xv.  10,  5,  etc.  ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  i.  6, 
1,  2 ;  ii.  2,  11,  2,  etc.  ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  v.  27  ;  xiv.  24  ;  xviii.  38,  etc. 
See  other  citations  under  Varna. 

6  Taittiriya  Samhita,  i.  8,  14,  2; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  x.  17 ;  Taittiriya 
Brahmana,  i.  7,  8,  5  ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, v.  4,  2,  2. 


2.  Ksatra  seems  to  be  the  name  of  a  man  mentioned  with 
others,  including  Manasa,  Yajata,  and  Avatsara,  in  one  quite 
obscure  passage  of  the  Rigveda.1 

1  v.  44,  10.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  138. 

Ksatra-vidya,  '  the  science  of  the  ruling  class,'  is  mentioned 
in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad.1  Sankara  glosses  the  term  with 
dhanur-veda,  '  the  science  of  the  bow,'  which  is  the  most 
probable  sense.2 

1  vii.  1,  2.  4 ;  2,  1 ;  7,  1. 

2  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  13,  104. 

Ksatriya. — As  the  origin  of  caste,  the  relation  of  the  castes, 
intermarriage,  and  cognate  matters  may  most  conveniently  be 
discussed  under  Varna,  this  article  will  be  confined  to  deter- 
mining, as  far  as  possible,  the  real  character  of  the  class  called 
Ksatriyas,  or  collectively  Ksatra. 

The  evidence  of  the  Jatakas1  points  to  the  word  Khattiya 

1  See  Fick,  Die  sociale  Gliederung  im      Buddha,   1,  95  et  seq. ;  Buddhist  India, 
nordostlichen  Indien  zu  Buddhas  Zeit,  59      52  et  seq. 
et  seq. ;  Rhys  Davids,  Dialogues  of  the 


K§atriya  ] 


THE  MILITARY  CLASS 


203 


denoting  the  members  of  the  old  Aryan  nobility  who  had  led 
the  tribes  to  conquest,  as  well  as  those  families  of  the  aborigines 
who  had  managed  to  maintain  their  princely  status  in  spite 
of  the  conquest.  In  the  epic2  also  the  term  Ksatriya  seems  to 
include  these  persons,  but  it  has  probably  a  wider  signification 
than  Khattiya,  and  would  cover  all  the  royal  military  vassals 
and  feudal  chiefs,  expressing,  in  fact,  pretty  much  the  same 
as  the  bar  ones  of  early  English  history.  Neither  in  the 
Jatakas3  nor  in  the  epic4  is  the  term  co-extensive  with  all 
warriors ;  the  army  contains  many  besides  the  Ksatriyas,  who 
are  the  leaders  or  officers,  rather  than  the  rank  and  file. 

In  the  later  Samhitas5  and  the  Brahmanas6  the  Ksatriya 
stands  as  a  definite  member  of  the  social  body,  distinct  from 
the  priest,  the  subject  people,  and  the  slaves,  Brahmana, 
Vaigya,  and  Sudra.  It  is  significant  that  Rajanya  is  a  variant 
to  Ksatriya,  and  an  earlier  one.  Hence  it  is  reasonable  to 
suppose  that  the  Ksatriya  and  Rajanya  are  both  of  similar 
origin,  being  princely  or  connected  with  royalty.  Moreover, 
the  early  use  of  Ksatriya  in  the  Rigveda7  is  exclusively  con- 
nected with  royal  authority  or  divine  authority. 

It  is  impossible  to  say  exactly  what  persons  would  be  in- 
cluded in  the  term  Ksatriya.  That  it  covered  the  royal  house 
and  the  various  branches  of  the  royal  family  may  be  regarded 
as  certain.  It,  no  doubt,  also  included  the  nobles  and  their 
families :  this  would  explain  the  occasional  opposition  of 
Rajanya  and  Ksatriya,  as  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana,8  where 
a  Rajanya  asks  a  Ksatriya  for  a  place  for  sacrifice  (deva-yajana). 
Thus,  when  strictly  applied,  Ksatriya  would  have  a  wider 
denotation  than  Rajanya.  As  a  rule,  however,  the  two 
expressions  are  identical,  and  both  are  used  as  evidence  in 
what  follows.     That  Ksatriya  ever  included  the  mere  fighting 


2  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  13,  73  et  seq. 

3  Fick,  op.  cit.,  52,  n.  2. 

4  Hopkins,  op.  cit.,  184  et  seq.,  190. 

5  Av.  vi.  76,  3.  4;  xii.  5,  5.  44.  46, 
etc.  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  5,  etc. 
See  Varna  and  Rajanya. 

6  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  24,  etc.  ; 


Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  3,  2,  15  ;  iv.  1, 
4,  5.  6,  etc.     See  Varna. 

7  iv.  12,  3  ;  42,  1  ;  v.  69,  1  ;  vii.  64,  2  ; 
viii.  25,  8  ;  56,  1 ;  x.  109,  3.  Cf.  Vaja- 
saneyi Samhita,  iv.  19;  x.  4;  Tait- 
tirlya  Brahmana,  ii.  4,  7,  7. 

8  vii.  20.  Cf.  Pancavimsa  Brahmana, 
xxiv.  18,  2  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xx.  1. 


204    RELATION  OF  KSATRIYAS  TO  OTHER  CLASSES    [  Ksatriya 

man  has  not  been  proved:  in  the  Rigveda9  and  later10  others 
than  Ksatriyas  regularly  fought ;  but  possibly  if  the  nobles  had 
retinues  as  the  kings  had,  Ksatriya  would  embrace  those 
retainers  who  had  military  functions.  The  term  did  not  apply 
to  all  members  of  the  royal  entourage ;  for  example,  the 
Gramani  was  usually  a  Vaisya. 

The  connexion  of  the  Ksatriyas  with  the  Brahmins  was  very 
close.  The  prosperity  of  the  two  is  repeatedly  asserted11  to 
be  indissolubly  associated,  especially  in  the  relation  of  king 
(Raj an)  and  domestic  priest  (Purohita).  Sometimes  there  was 
feud  between  Ksatriya  and  Brahmin.12  His  management  of  the 
sacrifice  then  gave  the  Brahmin  power  to  ruin  the  Ksatriya  by 
embroiling  him  with  the  people13  or  with  other  Ksatriyas.14 

Towards  the  common  people,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Ksa- 
triya stood  in  a  relation  of  well-nigh  unquestioned  superiority.15 
There   are,  however,  references  to  occasional   feuds  between 


9  In  the  following  passages  there  is 
reference  to  the  people  (vis )  fighting : 
i.  69,  3;  126,  5  (cf.,  however,  Pischel, 
Vedische  Studien,  2,  121)  ;  iv.  24,  4 ; 
vi.  26, 1 ;  vii.  79,  2;  viii.  18, 18 ;  96, 15 ; 
probably  also  vii.  33,  6,  where  the 
Trtsunam  vis  ah  means  '  the  subjects  of 
the  Trtsu  princes,'  as  Geldner,  Vedische 
Studien,  2,  136,  thinks.  In  vi.  41,  5,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  people  and  wars 
(prtandsu)  are  contrasted,  the  normal 
rule  of  the  common  folk  being  peace. 

10  In  Av.  ix.  7,  9,  the  people  are 
clearly  designated  as  balam,  or  'force,' 
a  regular  term  later  for  an  armed  force. 
The  later  law  books  (e.g. ,  Gautama, 
vii.  6 ;  Vasistha,  ii.  22)  allow  even 
Brahmins  to  maintain  themselves  by 
the  occupation  of  Ksatriyas  in  case  of 
need.  For  the  Epic,  cf.  Hopkins,  op.  cit., 
94,  95 ;   184  et  seq. 

11  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  1,  10,  3  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  2,  3  ;  iii.  1,  9 ; 
2,  3;  iv.  3,  9;  Kathaka  Samhita, 
xxix.  10 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  v.  27 ; 
vii.  21  ;  xviii.  14 ;  xix.  5  ;  xxxviii.  14, 
etc.  ;  PancavimSa  Brahmana,  xi.  11,9; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  22  ;   Satapatha 


Brahmana,  i.  2,  1,  7  ;  iii.  5,  2,  11  ;  6,  1, 
17  ;  vi.  6,  3,  14.  The  superiority  of 
the  Rajanya  to  all  other  castes  is 
asserted  in  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  5, 
10,  1,  etc.  The  superiority  of  the 
Brahmin  to  the  Ksatriya  is  sometimes 
asserted  —  e.g.,  in  the  Atharvaveda 
hymns,  v.  18.  19  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita, 
iv.  3,  8 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxi.  21 ; 
Satapatha    Brahmana,    xiii.    1,   9,    1  ; 

3,  7,  8.  So  the  Rajasuya  sacrifice  of 
the  king  is  inferior  to  the  highest 
sacrifice  (the  Vajapeya)  of  the  priest 
(ibid.,  v.  1,  1,  12),  and  though  the 
Brahmin  goes  after  the  king,  he  is  yet 
stronger  than  he  (v.  4,  2,  7,  and  v.  4, 

4,  15).     Cf.  Hopkins,  op.  cit.,  76. 

12  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxviii.  5 ;  Av. 
v.  18.  19. 

13  E.g.,  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  2,  11, 
2  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  6,  5  ;  ii.  i,  9  ; 
iii.  3,  10;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxix.  8,  etc. 

14  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  3,  10.  etc. 

15  Kathaka  Samhita,  xvi.  4  ;  xxi.  10  ; 
xxii.  9 ;  xxix.  9.  10 ;  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana, ii.  33  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
xi.  2,  7,  15.  16,  etc.  ;  Maitrayani  Sam- 
hita, iv.  4,  9.  10;  6,  8,  etc. 


X§atriya 


OCCUPATIONS  OF  THE  KSATRIYA 


205 


the  people  and  the  nobles,16  in  which  no  doubt  the  inferior 
numbers  of  the  latter  were  compensated  by  their  superior  arms 
and  prowess.  In  the  Aitareya  Brahmana17  the  Vaisya  is 
described  as  tributary  to  another  (anyasya  bali-krt),  to  be 
devoured  by  another  (anyasyddya),  and  to  be  oppressed  at  will 
(yathdkama-jyeya).  Probably  these  epithets  apply  most  strictly 
to  the  relation  of  the  king  and  his  people,  but  the  passage 
shows  that  the  people  were  greatly  at  the  mercy  of  the  nobles. 
No  doubt  the  king  granted  to  them  the  right,  which  may  have 
been  hereditary,  to  be  supported  by  the  common  people, 
whose  feudal  superiors  they  thus  became.  In  return  for  these 
privileges  the  Ksatriyas  had  probably  duties  of  protection  to 
perform,  as  well  as  some  judicial  functions,  to  judge  from  an 
obscure  passage  of  the  Kathaka  Samhita.18 

The  main  duty  of  the  Ksatriya  in  the  small  states19  of  the 
Vedic  period  was  readiness  for  war.  The  bow  is  thus  his 
special  attribute,20  just  as  the  goad  is  that  of  the  agriculturist; 
for  the  bow  is  the  main  weapon  of  the  Veda.  Whether  the 
Ksatriyas  paid  much  attention  to  mental  occupations  is 
uncertain.  In  the  latest  stratum  of  the  Brahmana  literature 
there  are  references  to  learned  princes  like  Janaka  of  Videha, 
who  is  said  to  have  become  a  Brahmin  (brahma),  apparently  in 
the  sense  that  he  had  the  full  knowledge  which  a  Brahmin 
possessed.21      Other   learned    Ksatriyas   of    this    period   were 


16  Cf.  note  13 ;  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
v.  4,  6,  7  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iv.  6,  7. 

17  vii.  29.    Cf.  Raj  an. 

18  xxvii.  4  (tasmdd  rajanyenadhyaksena 
vaisyam  ghnanti,  '  so  with  a  Raj  any  a  as 
a  supervisor  [?]  they  smite  a  Vaisya'). 
It  is  not  clear  whether  han  here  means 
'kill '  or  '  beat.' 

19  See  Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the 
Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences, 
x5.  30.  n.  2. 

20  Av.  xviii.  2,  60  ;  Kathaka  Samhita, 
xviii.  9 ;  xxxvii.  1  ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, v.  3,  5,  30  ;  Taittiriya  Aranyaka, 
vi.  1,  3.  In  the  Aitareya  Brahmana, 
vii.  19,  the  list  is  longer  —  chariot, 
breastplate  (Kavaca),  bow  and  arrow 
(isu-dhanvan) — and  in  the  prayer  for  the 


prosperity  of  the  Ksatriya  (called,  as 
usual  in  the  older  texts,  Rajanya),  at 
the  Asvamedha,  the  Rajanya  is  to  be 
an  archer  and  a  good  chariot-fighter ; 
Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  5,  18,  1  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  12 ,  6  ;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  Asvamedha,  v.  14 ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxii.  2.  So  Indra  is  the  god 
of  the  Ksatriyas,  Maitrayani  Samhita, 
ii.  3,  1 ;  iv.  5,  8,  etc. 

21  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  6,  2,  1. 
Cf.  Kausltaki  Upanisad,  iv.  1.  See 
Max  Miiller,  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature, 
421  et  seq. ;  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  i2, 
426  et  seq.  Similarly  at  the  Diksa  a 
Ksatriya  becomes  temporarily  a  Brah- 
min, Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  23. 
Cf.  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  1,  3. 


206 


LEARNED  KSATRIYAS 


[  K§atrij 


Pravahana  Jaivali,22  Asvapati  Kaikeya,23  and  AjataSatru. 

Garbe,25  Grierson,26  and  others  believe  they  are  justified  ii 
holding  the  view  that  the  Ksatriyas  developed  a  specie 
philosophy  of  their  own  as  opposed  to  Brahminism,  which 
appears  later  as  Bhakti,  or  Faith.  On  the  other  hand,  there 
is  clear  evidence27  that  the  opinion  of  Ksatriyas  on  such  topics 
were  held  in  little  respect,  and  it  must  be  remembered  that  to 
attribute  wisdom  to  a  king  was  a  delicate  and  effective  piece 
of  flattery.  There  are  earlier  references  to  royal  sages  (raj an- 
yarsi),28  but  it  is  very  doubtful  if  much  stress  can  be  laid  on 
them,  and  none  can  be  laid  on  the  later  tradition  of  Sayana.29 
Again,  the  Nirukta30  gives  a  tradition  relating  how  Devapi, 
a  king's  son,  became  the  Purohita  of  his  younger  brother 
Samtanu ;  but  it  is  very  doubtful  if  the  story  can  really  be 
traced  with  Sieg31  in  the  Rigveda32  itself.  In  any  case,  the 
stories  refer  only  to  a  few  selected  Ksatriyas  of  high  rank, 
while  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  average  Ksatriya  was 
concerned  with  intellectual  pursuits.  Nor  is  there  any 
reference  to  Ksatriyas  engaging  in  agriculture  or  in  trade 
or  commerce.  It  may  be  assumed  that  the  duties  of 
administration  and  war  were  adequate  to  absorb  his  atten- 
tion.     On    the    other    hand,    we    do     hear    of    a    Rajanya 


22  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  i,  i  ; 
Chandogya  Upanisad,  i.  8,  i ;  v.  3,  i  ; 
Muir,  op.  cit.,  433-435  ;  515  ;  Weber, 
Indische  Studien,  10,  117;  Max  Muller, 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  1 ,  lxxv. 

23  Satapatha  Brahmana,  x.  6,  i, 
2  et  seq. 

24  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  1,  1  ; 
Kausitaki  Upanisad,  iv.  1, 

25  Beitrdgezur indischen  Kulturgeschichte, 
1  et  seq.  Cf.  Deussen,  Philosophy  of 
the  Upani shads,  17  et  seq. ;  Winterniz, 
Geschichte  der  indischen  Litter atur,  1,  199. 

26  Article  '  Bhakti '  in  Encyclopedia  of 
Religion  and  Ethics ;  Journal  of  the  Royal 
Asiatic  Society,  1908,  843. 

27  Satapatha  Brahmana,  viii.  1,  4,  10. 
Cf.  Oldenber  g,  Buddha,  73,  n.  1 ;  Keith, 
Aitareya  Ar  any  aha,  50,  257  ;  Journal 
of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,   1908,  868, 


883,  1140-1142.  Professor  Eggeling 
concurs  in  the  view  that  the  Ksatriya 
share  in  the  religious  movement  was 
not  substantially  real. 

28  E.g.,  in  Pancavimsa  Brahmana, 
xii.  12,  6  ;  but  see  on  this  Oldenberg, 
Zeitschrift  der  DeutscJien  Morgenldndischen 
Gesellschaft,  42,  235,  n.,  and  Varna. 

29  Cited  in  Muir,  op.  cit.,  i2,  265  et 
seq. 

30  ii.  10. 

31  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  91  et 
seq.     See  Devapi. 

32  x.  98.  The  case  of  Visvamitra 
may  also  be  cited  ;  but  his  royal  rank, 
which  is  attested  by  the  mention  of 
him  as  a  Rajaputra  in  the  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  vii.  17,  is  at  most  merely  a 
matter  of  descent,  and  is  of  very  doubt- 
ful authenticity.     See  under  Varna. 


Ksatriya  ]      KSATRIYA  S'  RELATION  TO  THE  KING  207 

as   a   lute   player    and   singer    at    the   Asvamedha    or    horse 
sacrifice.33 

Of  the  training  and  education  of  a  Ksatriya  we  have  no 
record;  presumably,  as  in  fact  if  not  in  theory  later  on,  he  was 
mainly  instructed  in  the  art  of  war,  the  science  of  the  bow,  and 
the  rudimentary  administrative  functions  which  would  devolve 
on  him.  At  this  early  state  of  the  development  of  the  nobility 
which  appears  to  be  represented  in  the  Rigveda,  it  was  probably 
not  unusual  or  impossible  for  a  Vaisya  to  become  a  Ksatriya ; 
at  least,  this  assumption  best  explains  the  phrase34  '  claiming 
falsely  a  Ksatriya's  rank '  (ksatriyam  mithuya  dhdrayantam). 

The  king  and  the  Ksatriyas  must  have  stood  in  a  particularly 
close  relation.  The  former  being  the  Ksatriya  par  excellence, 
it  is  to  him  rather  than  to  the  ordinary  Ksatriya  that  we  must 
refer  passages  like  that  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,35  where  it 
is  said  that  the  Ksatriya,  with  the  consent  of  the  clansmen, 
gives  a  settlement  to  a  man  :  clearly  a  parallel  to  the  rule  found 
among  many  peoples  that  the  chief,  but  only  with  the  consent  of 
the  people,  can  make  a  grant  of  unoccupied  land.  In  the  same 
Brahmana36  it  is  said  that  a  Ksatriya  consecrates  a  Ksatriya,  a 
clear  reference,  as  the  commentator  explains,  to  the  practice  of 
the  old  king  consecrating  the  prince  (kumdra)  who  is  to  succeed 
him  ;  and  again,37  the  Ksatriya  and  the  Purohita  are  regarded 
as  alone  complete  in  contrast  with  other  people,  the  parallel 
with  the  Purohita  here  suggesting  that  the  Ksatriya  par  excellence 
is  meant.  On  the  other  hand,  the  king  is  sometimes  con- 
trasted with  the  Rajanya.38 

The  Sutra  literature  contains  elaborate  rules39  for  the  educa- 

33  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  4,  3,  5.  ;  38  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  4,  2, 
This  mention  is  proof  of  the  existence   j    17,  and  see  Rajanya. 

of  a  class  of  Ksatriya  bards  (as  opposed  39  See  references  in  Buhler,  Sacred 

to  priestly  reciters),  from  whose  pro-  |  Books  of  the  East,  14,  395,  396. 

ductions  the  Epic  naturally  grew  up.  j  Cf.   Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  212 

Cf.   Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  j  et  seq.;    Ludwig,   Translation   of    the 

Oriental  Society,  15,  258.  Rigveda,  3,  231  et  seq. ;  von  Schroeder, 

34  vii.  104,  13.  Cf,  for  a  similarly  !  Indiens  Literatur  und  Cultur,  151  etseq.; 
false  claim  to  be  a  Brahmin,  x.  71,  8.  |  Weber,  Indische  Studien,    10,   4  et  seq. 

33  vii.  1,  1,  8. 

88  xii.  8,  3,  19  ;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books 
of  the  East,  44,  254,  n.  1. 


(where  practically  every  passage  on  the 
subject  is  cited  or  referred  to) ;  Hopkins, 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
37  Cf.  Eggeling,  ibid.,  41,  259.  |    13,  98  et  seq.  (for  the  Epic  parallels). 


208    KING— WOUND— DWELLING— FALCON— MILK   [  Ksapavan 

tion  and  occupations  of  Ksatriyas,  but  their  contents  cannot 
always  be  traced  in  the  Brahmana  literature,  and  their  value  is 
questionable. 

Ksa-pavan,  '  protector  of  the  earth,'1  is  an  epithet  of  a  king,2 
or  denotes  a  king3  in  the  Rigveda.  The  word  is  significant,  as 
showing  the  function  of  the  king  as  the  protector  of  the  tribal 
territory. 

1  The  word  occurs  only  in  the 
nominative  singular  as  ksapavan,  which 
would  be  the  regular  form  from  a  stem 
ksapavant ;  but  it  is  probably  an  irregu- 
larity for  ksapava.  Cf.  Olden  berg, 
Rgveda-Noten,  i,  72. 


z  111.  55.  17. 

3  i.   70,    5 ;    vii.    10,   5 ;    viii.    71, 
:.  29,  1. 

Cf.    ksiti-pa,    'guardian    of    earth, 
king,'  in  later  Sanskrit. 


Ksiti  is  in  the  Rigveda1  a  regular  word  for  'dwelling,'  and  in 
particular  the  ksitir  dhruvd,  '  the  secure  dwelling,'  is  mentioned  2 
in  a  context  that  shows  it  to  be  equivalent  to  the  Vrjana  or 
Grama  regarded  as  a  stronghold.  From  this  sense  is  developed 
that  of  the  peoples  occupying  the  settlements,3  and  in  particular 
the  five  peoples4  (for  whom  see  Pafica  Janasah). 


1  i.    65,    3;    iii.    13,    4;    v.    37,    4, 
etc. 

2  i-    73,  '4   {of.   2)  ;  vii.    88,   7.     See 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  142. 


3  Rv.  iii.  38,  1 ;  iv.  24,  4 ;  38,  5 ;  v.  1, 
10,  etc. 

4  i.  7,  9;  176,  3;  v.  35,  2;  vi.  46,  7; 
vh.  75.  4  :  79,  I. 


Ksipta,  ■  a  wound  '  (caused  by  shooting),  or  '  bruise  '  (caused 
by  throwing),  is  mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  together  with 
a  remedy  for  it,  the  Pippali. 

1  vi.  109,  1.  3.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  389. 

Ksipra-syena,  '  swift  falcon,'  is  the  name  of  a  bird  in  the 
Maitrayani  Samhita  (iii.  14,  11)  and  the  Satapatha  Brahmana 
x.  5,  2,  10). 


Ksira,  '  milk,'  also  called  Go  or  Payas,  played  a  large  part  in 
the  economy  of  the  Vedic  Indians.1    It  was  taken  warm  {pakva 


1  The  word  ksira  does  not  occur  in 
Rv.  ii.-vii.  It  is  found  in  i.  109,  3  ; 
164,   7;   viii.   2,   9;   ix.  67,   32;   x.  87, 


16  (  =  Av.  viii.  3,   15).     See  Hopkins,       Samhita,  iii.  4,  8,  7,  etc 


Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
17,  64,  73  et  seq.  See  also  Av.  ii.  26,  4  ; 
v.    19,    5 ;    x.    9,    12,    etc.  ;    Taittirlya 


K§ura  ] 


MILK— HYMN-WRITERS— RAZOR 


209 


as  it  came  from  the  cow,2  or  was  used  with  grain  to  make  a 
'mess  cooked  with  milk'  (kslra-pdkam  odanam).3  It  was  also 
used  for  mixing  with  Soma  (Abhi£ri,  Agir).  From  it  butter 
(Ghrta)  was  made.  Milk  was  also  curdled,  the  Putika  and 
Kvala  plants,  among  others,  being  used  for  the  purpose.4  The 
curdled  milk  (Dadhi)  was  undoubtedly  used  for  food ;  and  a 
kind  of  cheese  is  perhaps  referred  to  in  one  passage  of  the 
Rigveda.5     Goat's  milk  (aja-ksira)  is  also  mentioned.6 


2  i.  62,  9 ;   180,  3  ;  iii.  30,  4. 

3  Rv.  viii.  77,  10 ;  Av.  xiii.  2,  20. 
Cf.  kfira-sri,  '  milk-mixed,'  Taittiriya 
Samhita,  iv.  4,  9,  1  ;  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 
hita, viii.  57,  etc. 

4  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  3,  5. 


5  vi.  48,  18. 

6  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiv.  1,  2,  13  ; 
see  Aja. 

Cf.   Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  63, 
226,  226,  268. 


Ksiraudana,  '  rice  cooked  with  milk,'  is  mentioned  frequently 
in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (ii.  5,  3,  4 ;  xi.  5,  7,  5,  etc.). 

Ksudra-suktas,  '  makers  of  short  hymns,'  is  the  name  given 
in  the  Aitareya  Aranyaka1  to  the  authors  of  certain  hymns  of 
the  Rigveda.     Cf.  Mahasukta. 

1  ii.  2,  2.  Cf.  Keith,  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  212,  and  Macdonell,  Brhaddevata, 
notes  on  iii.  116. 

Ksumpa  is  a  word  occurring  only  in  one  passage  of  the 
Rigveda,1  where  it  seems  to  mean  a  'bush.'  The  Nirukta2 
identifies  it  with  the  Ahichatraka,  a  '  mushroom.' 

1  i.  84,  8.  2  v.  16.     Cf.  Benfey,  Samaveda,  Glossar,  53. 


Ksura  occurs  three  times  in  the  Rigveda.  The  word  appears 
to  have  the  general  sense  of  '  blade  '-1  in  one  passage,2  possibly 
also  in  another,3  where  it  is  said  that  the  hare  swallowed  a 


1  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  17,  61,  69.  Cf.  13,  292 
(as  *  knife  '  in  the  Epic). 

2  i.  166,  10  (pavisti  hsurah  on  the 
fellies  of  the  Maruts'  car ;  possibly 
'razors'  may  be  meant,  as  Max  Miiller 

VOL.  I. 


says  in  his  note  on  this  passage,  Sacred 
Books  of  the  East,  32,  235,  n.  4). 

3  x.  28,  9,  where  Sayana  renders  it 
as  meaning  'having  claws.'  The  later 
tradition  ascribes  the  swallowing  to  a 
goat. 

14 


2IO 


RAZOR— FIELD 


[  K§etra 


Ksura,  and  where  the  sense  '  blade '  is  adequate.  In  the  third 
passage 4  there  seems  to  be  a  reference  to  the  sharpening  of  a 
razor  on  a  grindstone5  (bhurijos,  the  dual  denoting  precisely,  as 
Pischel6  points  out,  the  two  sides  of  the  apparatus,  between 
which  the  stone  revolved  like  the  modern  grindstone).  But 
Muir,7  following  another  view  of  Roth,8  adopts  the  sense  '  the 
edge  of  scissors,'  which,  however,  hardly  suits  the  other 
passage,  one  in  the  Atharvaveda,9  where  a  Ksura  is  described 
as  moving  about  on  the  bhurijos,10  as  the  tongue  on  the  lip.  The 
meaning  *  razor  '  is  perfectly  clear  in  the  Atharvaveda,11  where 
shaving  by  means  of  it  is  mentioned ;  in  many  other  passages12 
either  sense  is  adequate.  A  ksuro  bhrjvdn  occurs  in  the  Yajur- 
veda:13  it  seems  to  denote,  as  Bloomfield14  suggests,  a  razor 
with  a  strop  (in  the  shape  of  a  small  grinding  apparatus). 
Ksura-dhara15  denotes  *  the  edge  of  a  razor,'  like  ksurasya 
dhdra.10  In  the  Upanisads17  a  razor-case  (Ksura-dhana)  is 
mentioned.     See  also  Sma&FU. 


4  viii.  4,  16  (sam  nah  sisihi  bhurijor 
iva  hsuram,  ■  sharpen  us  like  a  razor  on 
a  grindstone  or  stropping  apparatus  '). 

5  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v. 

e  Vedische  Studien,  i,  243. 

7  Sanskrit  Texts,  5,  466. 

•  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 
bhurij. 

9  xx.  127,  4. 

10  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 197,  translates  bhurijos  by  'on 
a  strop. ' 

11  vi.  68,  1.  3  ;  viii.  2,  7. 

12  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  6,  4,  5 ; 
iii.  1,  2,  7  ;  ksura-pavi,  Av.  xii.  5,  20. 
55;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  1,  5,  7; 
5,  5,  6 ;  v.  6,  6,  1  ;  Satapatha  Brah- 


mana, iii.  6,  2,  9,  etc.  ;  MaitrayanI 
Samhita,  i.  10,  14 ;  Kathaka  Samhita, 
xxxvi.  8  ;  Nirukta,  v.  5. 

18  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  3,  12,  3. 
Cf.  MaitrayanI  Samhita,  ii.  8,  7  ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xv.  4  ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, viii.  5,  2,  4. 

14  American  Journal  of  Philology,  17, 
418. 

15  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana, 
iii.  13,  9. 

16  Bi-hadaranyaka  Upanisad,  iii.  3,  2. 

17  Kausitaki  Upanisad,  iv.  20. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  266; 
Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  1,  239-243; 
Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  38 
et  seq. 


Ksetra,  '  field.'  The  use  of  this  word  in  the  Rigveda  points 
clearly  to  the  existence  of  separate  fields1  carefully  measured 
off,2  though   in    some  passages  the  meaning   is  less  definite, 


1  x.  33,  6.     Cf.  hi.  31,  15;  v.  62,  7. 


2  i.  no,  5. 


K§etriya  ] 


FIELD— DISEASE 


211 


indicating  cultivated  land  generally.3  In  the  Atharvaveda4  and 
later  the  sense  of  a  separate  field  is  clearly  marked,  though  the 
more  general  use  is  also  found.6  The  deity  Ksetrasya  Pati,6 
'  Lord  of  the  Field,'  should  probably  be  understood  as  the  god 
presiding  over  each  field,  just  as  Vastos  Pati  presides  over  each 
dwelling.7  It  is  a  fair  conclusion  from  the  evidence  that  the 
system  of  separate  holdings  already  existed  in  early  Vedic 
times.8    See  also  Urvara,  Khilya. 

3  i.  ioo,  18 ;  ix.  85,  4;  91,  6;  Ksetra-  \  13;  Av.  ii.  8,  5;  ksetrasya  patni,  '  Mis- 
jesa,  i.  33,  15,  'acquisition  of  land'; 
hsetra-sa,  iv.  38,  1,  'gaining  land'; 
ksetram  -  jay  a,  '  conquering  cultivated 
land,'  Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  2,  11. 
The  wider  sense  of  '  place '  also  occurs, 
v.  2,  3;  45,  9;  vi.  47,  20,  etc.,  and 
often  later. 

4  iv.  18,  5;  v.  31,  4;  x.  1,  18;  xi.  1, 
22 ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  2,  1,  2 ; 
Chandogya  Upanisad,  vii.  24,  2,  etc. 

5  Av.  ii.  29,  3  ;  xiv.  2,  7 ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  i.  4,  1,  15.  16,  etc. 

6  Rv.  iv.  37,  1.  2  ;  vii.  35,  10;  x.  66, 


tress  of  the  Field,'  12,  1 ;  ksetrmidm 
patih,  'Lord  of  Fields,'  Vajasaneyi 
Sainhita,  xvi.  18. 

7  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  138. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  236; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  vii.  1,  1,  8,  where 
the  Ksatriya,  with  the  consent  of  the 
people,  gives  a  settlement  to  a  man  : 
that  is,  presumably  assigns  to  him  a 
definite  Ksetra  for  his  own,  probably 
measured  out  as  recorded  in  Rv. 
i.  no,  5. 


Ksetriya  is  a  disease  which  is  mentioned  several  times  in  the 
Atharvaveda,  and  against  which  three  hymns  are  specially 
directed.1  It  is  also  mentioned  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita.2  and 
the  Taittiriya  Brahmana.3  The  commentators  on  the  Athar- 
vaveda agree  in  taking  it  to  be  a  hereditary  disease.  The  word 
may  mean  *  organic,'4  or  possibly  '  produced  in  the  field,'  as  a 
theory  of  its  origin.  Wha  t  disease  is  really  intended  is  quite 
uncertain.  Weber5  considered  that  the  aim  of  the  Atharvan 
hymns  was  to  drive  away  injury  threatening  the  fields,  but  this 
is  improbable.  Bloomfield6  suggests  'scrofula'  or  'syphilis.' 
The  remedies  mentioned  throw  no  light  on  the  symptoms. 


14,  5; 


1  ii.    8.    10 ;    iii.    7.      Cf.    ii. 
iv.  18,  7.  >  xv.  1. 

3  ii.  5,  6,  1-3,  where  the  form  is 
Ksetri,  explained  as  a  demon  causing 
illness,  merely  an  incorrect  version  of 
Av.  iii.  10. 

4  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

5  Indische    Studien,    5,    145 ;     13, 
et  seq.  :  17,  208  ;  Naxatra,  2,  292. 


150 


6  Atharvaveda,  60. 

Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  AtJur- 
vaveda,  286  et  seq. ;  Whitney,  Transla- 
tion of  the  Atharvaveda,  48,  49  ; 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  391,.  392 ; 
Speijer,  De  ceremonia  apud  Indos  qua 
jatakarma  vocatur,  76-83 ;  Panini,  v.  2, 
92,  with  the  Kasika  Vrtti. 

14 — 2 


212    RETAINERS— GARMENT— BIRD   [  K§emadhrtvan  Paundarika 

Ksema-dhrtvan  Paundarika  (*  descendant  of  Pundarlka ')  is 
mentioned  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana1  as  having  sacrificed 
on  the  bank  of  the  river  Sudaman. 


1  xxii.    18,    7.     Cf.   Weber,    Indische    Studien, 
Ksema-dhanvan,  HarivamSa,  824,  etc. 


1,    32.      Later,    the    name    is 


Ksaimi,  'descendant  of  Ksema,'  is  the  patronymic  of  Suda- 
ksina  in  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana  (iii.  6,  3 ;  7,  1,  etc.; 
8,' 6). 


Ksoni. — This  word,  when  used  in  the  plural,  denotes, 
according  to  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  and  Ludwig,1  in 
several  passages  of  the  Rigveda,2  the  free  retainers  of  the  king. 
Geldner3  at  one  time  thought  it  referred  to  the  wives  of  the 
king,  pointing  to  polygamy ;  but  later4  he  concluded  that  it 
means  certain  divine  wives. 


1  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  247. 

2  i.  57,  4;  173,  7;  viii.  3,  10;  13,  17; 
x.  95,  19.  In  ii.  34,  13;  x.  22,  9,  the 
sense  is  doubtful. 


3  Bezzenberger,  Beitrdge,  II,  327. 

4  Vedische  Studien,  1,  279,  283. 


Ksauma,  ■  a  linen  garment,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Maitrayani 
Samhita  (iii.  6,  7,  etc.)  and  in  the  Sutras. 


Ksvinka  is  mentioned  once  in  the  Rigveda1  as  a  bird  of  prey. 
The  word  also  occurs  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the  Asvamedha, 
or  horse  sacrifice,  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita,2  where  the  com- 
mentary absurdly  explains  it  as  '  a  red-mouthed  female  ape ' 
(mkta-tnukhT  vdnari). 

1  x.  87,  7.  2  v.  5,  15,  I. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  93. 


Khadira  ] 


NA  VE— RHINOCEROS— ACACIA 


213 


Kha  denotes  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  the  hole  in  the  nave 
of  the  wheel  in  which  the  axle  is  inserted.  There  was  a 
difference,  it  seems,  in  the  size  of  the  hole  in  the  wheel  of 
a  cart  (Anas)  and  of  a  chariot  (Ratha).3     See  also  1.  Yuga. 


1  Rv.  viii.  77,  3  ;  91,  7  ;  x.  156,  3, 
where  only  the  Kha  is  referred  to. 
Cf.  the  adjective  su-kha,  '  having  a  good 
axle  -  hole, '  '  running  easily  ' ;  later, 
'  agreeable.' 

Khahg-a.    See  Khadgra. 


2  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  v.  12,  1 
(Madhyamdina ;  v.  10,  1  Kanva). 

3  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana,  1, 
3,  6  ;  Geldner,  Vedische  Studien,  2,  333. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  247. 


Khadga  is  the  reading  in  the  Maitrayani  Samhita1  of  the 
name  of  an  animal  which,  in  the  text  of  the  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,2  variously  appears  as  Khanga  and  Khadga.  The 
rhinoceros  seems  clearly  to  be  meant.3  In  the  Sankhayana 
Srauta  Sutra4  a  rhinoceros  hide  is  mentioned  as  the  covering  of 
a  chariot. 


in.  14,  21. 

xxiv.  40. 


Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  86. 
xiv.  33,  26  {khadga-kavaca  asvaratha). 


Khandika  Audbhari  ('  descendant  of  Udbhara ')  is  mentioned 
in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  as  a  teacher  of  Kesin,  and  in  the 
Maitrayani  Samhita2  as  having  been  defeated  by  Kesin  as  a 
sacrificer.  A  Khandika  appears  in  the  Baudhayana  Srauta 
Sutra3  as  an  enemy  of  Kesin. 


1  xi.  8,  4,  1. 

2  i.  4,  12,  where  Sandika  is  the  read- 
ing of  the  MSS. 


3  Caland,    Uber  das  rituelle  Sutra  des 
Baudhayana,  20. 


Khadira  is  mentioned  frequently  from  the  Rigveda1  onwards2 
as  a  tree  with  hard  wood3 — the  Acacia  catechu.  The  Asvattha 
is  referred  to  as  engrafting  itself  upon  it  in  the  Atharvaveda,4 


1  m.  53,  19. 

2  Av.  iii.  6,  1  ;  v.  5,  5  ;  viii.  8,  3 ; 
x.  6,  6  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  9,  3, 
etc.  So  khadira,  '  made  of  Khadira- 
wood,'  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  5,  7,  1 ; 


Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  1 ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  i.  3,  3,  20;  iii.  6,  2,  12, 
etc. 

3  Av.  x.  6,  6. 

4  iii.  6,  1.     Cf.  viii.  8,  3. 


214 


FIRE-FLY— SPADE— CHANNELS-ASS        [  Khadyota 


and  from  it  the  climbing  plant  Arundhati  is  said  to  have  sprung.5 
The  sruva  or  sacrificial  ladle  is  spoken  of  as  having  been  made 
from  it,6  no  doubt  because  of  its  hardness.  It  is  in  the  same 
passage  also  said  to  have  sprung  from  the  sap  (rasa)  of  the 
Gayatri.  There  is  no  clear  reference  to  Catechu  having  been 
prepared  from  its  core,7  as  it  was  later.  The  core  (sara)  was 
used  for  making  amulets.8 


5  Av.  v.  5,  5. 

6  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  5,  7,  1. 

7  It  is  called  bahu  -  sara,  '  of  great 
strength,'  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
xiii.  4,  4,  9. 


58. 


8  Sankhayana  Aranyaka,  xii.  8. 

Cf.    Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,   58, 


Kha-dyota  ('  sky-illuminator'),  'the  firefly,'  is  mentioned  in 
the  Chandogya  Upanisad  (vi.  7,  3.  5). 


Khanitra,  a  '  shovel '  or  '  spade '  for  digging,  is  mentioned  in 
the  Rigveda1  and  later.2 


1  i.  179,  6  (possibly  metaphorical : 
see  Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  172; 
the  passage  is  obscure). 


2  Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  viii.  2,  4, 
etc. 


Khanitrima,  '  produced  by  digging,'  as  an  epithet  of  dpah, 
'  waters,'  clearly  refers  to  artificial  water  channels  used  for 
irrigation,  as  practised  in  the  times  of  the  Rigveda1  and  the 
Atharvaveda.2 


1  vii.  49,  2. 

2  i.  6,  4 ;  xix.  2,  2. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  236; 
Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  5,  466. 


Khara,  *  ass,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Aitareya  Aranyaka,1  where 
a  team  of  asses  is  alluded  to.  Probably  the  passages  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana,2  where  the  word  is  used  to  denote  an 
earth  mound  on  which  the  sacrificial  vessels  were  placed,  pre- 
suppose the  sense  of  '  ass,'  the  mound  being  shaped  in  this 
form.3 


1  iii.  2,  4. 

2  v.  1,  2,  15;  xiv.  1,  2,  17;  2,  2,  30. 


Cf.     St.     Petersburg    Dictionary, 


Khandava  ]     OWL— THRESHING-FLOOR— PULSE— GRAIN       215 

Khargala  is  an  '  owl '  or  other  nocturnal  bird  mentioned  in 
one  passage  of  the  Rigveda.1 

1  vii.  104,  17.     Cf.  Kausika  Sutra,  107;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  93. 

Kharjura  is  the  name  of  a  tree  (Phoenix  silvestris)  which  is 
mentioned  in  the  Yajurveda.1 

1  Taittiriya    Samhita,    ii.    4,    9,    2 ;    Kathaka    Samhita,    xi.     10;    xxxvi.    7. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  63. 

Khala,  the  *  threshing-floor,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  the  Atharvaveda.2     See  Krsi. 


1  x.  48,  7 ;  Nirukta,  iii.  10. 

2  xi.  3,  9;  khala-ja,  'produced  on  a 
threshing-floor,'    viii.    6,    15;    khalya, 


4  being  on  a  threshing-floor,'  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  ii.  9,  6. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  238. 


Khala-kula  is  a  word  occurring  in  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad,1  where  Sayana  glosses  it  by  Kulattha,  a  kind  of 
pulse  (Dolichos  uniflorus). 

1  vi.  3,  22  (Madhyamdina  =  vi.  3,   13  Kanva).     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien, 
1.  355- 

Khalva  is  some  sort  of  grain  or  leguminous  plant,  perhaps,  as 
Weber1  thinks,  the  Phaselus  radiatus.  It  is  mentioned  with 
other  grains  of  all  sorts  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.,2  and  as 
being  crushed  with  the  Drsad  in  the  Atharvaveda.3  It  occurs 
also  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,4  where  Sahkara  glosses 
it  with  nispdva. 


1  Indische  Studien,  1,  355. 

2  xviii.  12,  where  Mahidhara  glosses 
it  by  canaka,  '  chick-pea.' 

3  ii.  31,  1 ;  v.  23,  8. 


4  vi.    3,    22    (Madhyamdina  =  vi.  3, 
13  Kanva). 
Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  241. 


Khandava  is  mentioned  in  the  Taittiriya  Aranyaka1  as  one 
of  the  boundaries  of  Kuruksetra.  There  seems  no  reason  to 
doubt  its  identity  with  the  famous  Khandava  forest  of  the 
Maha.bha.rata.  The  name  occurs  also  in  the  Pancaviipsa 
Brahmana2  and  the  Satyayanaka.3 

1  v.  1,  1.  3  Max  Muller,  Rgveda,2  iv,  ci. 

2  xxv.  3,  6.  I       Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  78. 


2l6 


RINGS— UNCULTIVATED  LAND 


[  Khadi 


Khadi  occurs  frequently  in  the  Rigveda  denoting  either 
anklets1  or  armlets,2  or  sometimes  rings  on  the  hands.3 
Max  Muller4  considers  that  the  word  means  quoits,  the  later 
Cakra.6     The  rings  were  sometimes  of  gold.6 


1  v.  54,  ii,  and  perhaps  53,  4. 

2  This  is  what  Khadis  on  the 
shoulders  must  mean.i.  166, 9 ;  vii.  56, 13. 

3  i.  168,  3  ;  khadi-hasta,  '  with  rings 
on  the  hands,'  5,  58,  2.  So  Roth  takes 
Khadin  in  vi.  16,  40 ;  St.  Petersburg 
Dictionary,  s.v.  Khadin  occurs  also  in 
ii.  34,  2;  x.  38,  1. 


4  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32,  120, 
230. 

5  Cf.  vrsa-khadi,  Rv.  i.  64,  10. 

6  Hiranya-khadi,  Sankhayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  iii.  5,  12 ;  viii.  23,  6. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  262  ; 
Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  5,  149. 


Khan  designates  a  measure  of  Soma  in  one  passage  of  the 
Rigveda.1 

1  iv.  32,  17.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  280. 

Khapgali,    '  descendant   of    Khargala    or    Khrgala,'    is    the 
metronymic  or  patronymic  of  Lusakapi.1 

1  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxx.  2  j  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xvii.  4,  3. 


i.  Khila,1  Khilya2  appear  to  have  the  same  meaning. 
According  to  Roth,3  these  terms  denote  the  waste  land  lying 
between  cultivated  fields ;  but  he  admits  that  this  sense  does 
not  suit  the  passage  of  the  Rigveda4  in  which  it  is  said  that 
the  god  places  the  worshipper  on  an  unbroken  Khilya  (abhinne 
khilye),  and  he  accordingly  conjectures  the  reading  akhilya- 
bhinne,  'land  unbroken  by  barren  strips.'  Pischel5  thinks  that 
the  meaning  intended  is  broad  lands,  which  were  used  for  the 
pasturing  of  the  cattle  of  the  community,  and  were  not  broken 
up  by  cultivated  fields.  Oldenberg,6  however,  points  out  that 
the  sense  is  rather  the  land  which  lay  between  cultivated  fields, 
but  which  need  not  be  deemed  to  have  been  unfertile,  as 
Roth  thought.  This  agrees  with  the  fact  that  in  Vedic 
times  separate  fields  were  already  known  :  see  Ksetra. 


1  Av.  vii.  115,  4;   Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, viii.  3,  4,  1. 

2  Rv.  vi.  28,  2  ;  x.  142,  3. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.     So 
Whitney  on  A  v.,  loc.  cit. 

*  vi.  28,  2. 


5  Vedische  Studien,  2,  205. 

6  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  385,  386. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  236; 

Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda, 
3,  499 ;  Keith,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society,  1910,  228. 


Ganga  ] 


SUPPLEMENTARY  HYMNS— GANGES 


217 


2.  Khila  as  a  designation  of  certain  hymns  appended  to  the 
received  text  of  the  Rigveda  occurs  only  in  the  Sutra  period.1 
The  term  is  a  metaphorical  application  of  the  preceding  word, 
*  a  space  not  filled  up,'  'a  supplement.' 

1  See  Scheftelowitz,  Die  Apokryphen  des  Rgveda,  16  et  seq. 


Khrgala,  or,  as  the  Paippalada  recension  of  the  Atharvaveda1 
has  it,  Khugila,  is  an  obscure  expression  found  in  two  passages 
only — once  in  the  Rigveda,2  and  once  in  the  Atharvaveda.1 
In  the  former  the  meaning  '  crutch  '  seems  required ;  in  the 
latter  Sayana  glosses  it  by  '  armour '  (tanu-trdna) ,  but  the  sense 
is  quite  uncertain. 


1  iii. 


9.3. 


1  u.  39,  4- 

Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 


vaveda, 340 ;   Whitney,  Translation  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  q8. 


Khela  occurs  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda,1  where  Pischel2 
considers  that  a  god,  Vivasvant,  is  meant,  and  that  races  were 
run  in  his  honour,  explaining  thus  the  phrase  djd  khelasya,  as 
4  in  the  race  of  Khela.'  Roth3  thinks  that  a  man  is  meant, 
and  Sieg,4  following  Sayana,  sees  in  him  a  king  whose  Purohita 
was  Agastya.     See  also  Amsu. 


1  i.  116,  15. 

2  Vedische  Studien,  1,  171- 173. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


4  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  127,  128. 
Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 4,  28. 


G. 

Ganga,  the  modern  Ganges,  is  mentioned  directly  in  the 
Rigveda  only  once,  in  the  Nadl-stuti  or  *  Praise  of  Rivers.'1 
But  it  is  also  referred  to  in  the  derivative  form  gdngyah  as  an 
epithet  of  Urukaksa.3     The  name  of  this  river  does  not  occur 


1  x.  75,  5. 

2  vi.  45,  31. 

3  The  reference  to  the  Ganga  re- 
mains, even  if  with  Oldenberg  (Rgveda- 
Noten,  1,  396)  we  assume  that  a  thicket 


i  meant,  and  not  a  proper  name 
(cf.  Wackernagel,  Altindische Grammatik, 
2,  288).  See  also  Weber,  Proceed- 
ings of  the  Berlin  Academy,  1898,  563, 
n.  1. 


218 


ELEPHANT— ASTROLOGER— GANDHARVA 


[  Gaja 


in  the  other  Samhitas,  but  appears  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,4 
where  victories  of  Bharata  Dauhsanti  on  both  Ganga.  and 
Yamuna  are  referred  to,  and  in  the  Taittirlya  Aranyaka5 
especial  honour  is  assigned  to  those  who  dwell  between  the 
Ganga.  and  the  Yamuna,  this  being,  no  doubt,  the  region  in 
which  that  text  originated.  The  identification  of  the  Ganga 
with  the  Apaya.6  made  by  Ludwig7  must  be  rejected :  see 
Apaya. 


4  xiii.  5,  4,  ii.  The  victory  on  the 
Ganga  represents  the  farthest  extent 
of  Bharata  or  Kuru  rule.  Cf.  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  viii.  23,  and  a  verse  in  the 
Vaitana  Sutra,  xxxiv.  9,  where  the 
Sarasvati  is  also  referred  to. 


6  Rv.  iii.  23,  4. 

7  Translation    of    the    Rigveda,    3, 
200. 

Cf.     Zimmer,      Altindisches      Leben, 
4.5- 


Gaja,  the  common  name  of  the  elephant  in  Epic1  and  later 
Sanskrit,  is  only  found  in  the  late  Adbhuta  Brahmana.2  See 
Hastin. 


1  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  13,  265,  269. 


2  Indische  Studien,  1,  39. 


Ganaka,  '  an  astrologer,'  occurs  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the 
Purusamedha,  or  human  sacrifice,  in  the  Yajurveda.1  See 
also  NaksatradarSa. 

1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  20;  Taittirlya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  15,  1.  Cf.  Weber, 
Indische  Streifen,  1,  78. 

Gandharvayana  Baleya  ('  descendant  of  Bali ')  Agriivegya  is 
mentioned  as  a  Pancala  in  the  Baudhayana  Srauta  Sutra  (xx.  25). 


Gandhara  is  a  later  form  of  the  name  of  the  people  called 
Gandhari  in  the  Rigveda  and  Atharvaveda.  In  the  Chandogya 
Upanisad1  the  Gandharas  are  referred  to  as  being  distant  from 
the  writer.     See  also  Gandhara. 


1  vi.  14, 1.  2.  See  Oldenberg,  Buddha, 
399,  n.  ;  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1, 
219,  n.    On  the  other  hand,  Max  Muller, 


Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  15, 106,  thought 
the  passage  meant  that  the  Gandharas 
were  near  the  writer. 


taya  Plata  ]       THE  GANDHARIS— CAR-POLE— HOUSE 


219 


Gandhari  is  the  name  of  a  people  in  the  north-west  of  India. 
In  the  Rigveda1  the  good  wool  of  the  sheep  of  the  Gandharis 
is  referred  to.  The  Gandharis  are  also  mentioned  with  the 
Mujavants,  Arig*as,  and  Magradhas  in  the  Atharvaveda.2 
Gandharis3  or  Gandharis4  are  also  spoken  of  in  the  Srauta 
Sutras.5  Zimmer6  considers  that  they  were  settled  in  Vedic 
times  on  the  south  bank  of  the  Kubha  up  to  its  mouth  in  the 
Indus,  and  for  some  distance  down  the  east  side  of  the  Indus 
itself.  They  later  formed  a  portion  of  the  Persian  empire, 
and  detachments  of  Gandarians  accompanied  Xerxes  in  his 
expedition  against  Greece.7 


1  i.  126,  7. 

2  v.  22,  14.  The  latter  two  tribes 
are  apparently  the  Eastern  limit  of 
the  poet's  knowledge,  the  two  former 
the  Northern. 

3  Hiranyakesi  Srauta  Sutra,  xvii.  6; 
Apastamba  Srauta  Sutra,  xxii.  6,  18. 


4  Baudhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xxi.  13. 

5  See  Caland,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  56,  553. 

6  Altindisches  Leben,  30,  31. 

7  Keith,  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  23. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  206. 


Gabhasti  denotes,  according  to  Roth,1  the  pole  of  a  chariot 
in  the  epithet  syuma- gabhasti,  '  having  reins  as  a  pole,'  used  of 
the  car  of  the  gods  in  the  Rigveda,2  and  independently  in  the 
plural  in  the  Taittirlya  Brahmana.3  The  meaning  is,  however, 
doubtful.4  Roth5  himself  suggests  that  symna- gabhasti  may 
refer  to  a  sort  of  double  reins. 


1  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

2  i.  122,  5  ;  vii.  71,  3. 

3  ii-  7-  13,  4- 


55- 


4  See   Oldenberg,   Rgveda- Noten,   1, 
6  Op.  cit.,  s.v. 


i.  Gaya,  '  house,'  is  a  common  word  in  the  Rigveda,1  and 
sometimes  occurs  later.2  As  its  sense  includes  the  inmates  as 
well  as  their  belongings,  it  is  equivalent  to  '  household.' 


1.  74,  2;  v.  10,  3;  44,  7;  vi.  2, 


etc. 


2  Av.  vi.    3,    3 ;    84,  1 ;    Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxvii.  3. 


2.  Gaya  Plata  ('  son  of  Plati ')  is  referred  to  in  the  Rigveda,1 
two  hymns  of  which  he  clearly  claims  to  have  composed,  and 
which  are  attributed  to  him  in  the  Sarvanukramanl  and  the 


1  x.  63,  17 ;  64,  17  (as  son  of  Plati). 


220 


POISON— A  SAGE— CAR-SEAT 


[  Gara 


Aitareya  Brahmana.2     In  the  Atharvaveda3  he  appears  with 
Asita  and  Ka£yapa  as  a  half-mythical  magician.4 


2  V.  2. 

3  i.  14,  4. 
Rv.  v.  5i, 
214. 


Cf.  also  the  Khila  after 
15 ;    Indische    Studien,   3, 


4  Bloomfield,  American  Journal  of 
Philology,  17,  403. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda,  3,  133 ;  Weber,  Indische  Studien, 
3,  460. 


i.  Gara,  ■  poison,'  is  referred  to  in  the  Atharvaveda1  in  the 
compound  gara-gtrna,  'poisoned.'  In  the  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana2 it  means  simply  a  '  fluid.' 


1  v.  18,  13.  Cf.  gara  alone,  Panca- 
vimsa Brahmana,  xix.  4,  2  (see  Indische 
Studien,  1,  33) ;  Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  i.  9, 


10;   gara-gir,    'poisoned,'   Pancavimsa 
Brahmana,  xvii.  1,  9;  xix.  4,  2.  10. 
2  xi.  5',  8,  6. 


2.  Gara  is  mentioned  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana1  as  the 
author  of  a  Saman  or  Chant,  and  as  a  friend  of  Indra. 

1  ix.  2,  16.  Cf.  Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and 
Sciences,  15,  52. 

Garga  is  the  name  of  a  sage  who  is  not  mentioned  in  any  of 
the  Samhitas,1  but  his  descendants,  the  Gargclh  Pravareyah, 
are  referred  to  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita.2  Garga  himself  does 
not  occur  till  the  Sutra  period.3 


1  The  authorship  of  Rv.  vi.  47  is 
attributed  to  Garga  Bharadvaja  in  the 
Anukramani. 

2  xiii.  12.  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien, 
3.374 


3  Garga  -  triratra,  Garga- tryaha,  a 
three-night  or  three-day  feast  of  Garga. 
See  AsValayana  Srauta  Sutra,  x.  2  ; 
Sa.nkha.yana  Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  22,  2 ; 
Ka.tya.yana  Srauta  Sutra,  xxiii.  2,  8. 


Gargfara,  apparently  the  designation  of  a  musical  instrument, 
is  mentioned  once  in  the  Rigveda.1 

1  viii.  69,  9.     Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  144,  n.  1 ;  Zimmer,  Altin- 
disches  Leben,  289. 

Garta  in  the  Rigveda x  primarily  denotes  the  seat  of  the  chariot 
on  which  the  archer  sat.    It  seems  to  have  been  of  considerable 

1  vi.  20,  9.  Zimmer,  Altindisches Leben,   I  Oriental  Society,  13,  238,  239;  Geldner, 

246,  247.     Zimmer  wrongly  takes  this  Vedische  Studien,  3,  48,  and  cf.  garta-sad, 

passage  to  refer  to  standing  in  the  car.  '  sitting  on  the  car  seat,'  in  Rv.  ii.  ^, 

See  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  J  11. 


Gardabhimukha 


ASS— A  TEACHER 


221 


size,  being  described  as  brhant,2  '  large.'     The  word  then  comes 
to  denote  the  chariot3  itself,  either  really  or  metaphorically.4 


2  v.  62,  8;  68,  5. 

3  So  probably  in  v.  62,  5  ;  garta-ruh, 
'  mounting  the  chariot, '  in  Rv.  i.  124,  7  ; 
Nirukta,  iii.   5,  may  refer  merely  to 


mounting  the   seat.     The  passage  is 
obscure;    see  Geldner,  Rigveda,  Kbm- 
mentar,  22. 
4  vii.  64,  4  (of  the  hymn). 


Gardabha,  'the  ass,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1  as  inferior 
to  the  horse.  In  the  Taittirlya  Samhita  he  again  appears  as 
inferior  to  the  horse,2  but  at  the  same  time  as  the  best  bearer 
of  burdens  (bhdra-bhdritama)  among  animals.3  The  same 
authority  styles  the  ass  dvi-retas,  '  having  double  seed,'4  in 
allusion  to  his  breeding  with  the  mare  as  well  as  the  she-ass. 
The  smallness  of  the  young  of  the  ass,  and  his  capacity  for 
eating,  are  both  referred  to.6  The  disagreeable  cry  of  the 
animal  is  mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda,6  and  in  allusion  to 
this  the  term  '  ass '  is  applied  opprobriously  to  a  singer  in  the 
Rigveda.7  A  hundred  asses  are  spoken  of  as  a  gift  to  a  singer 
in  a  Valakhilya  hymn.8  The  mule  (asvatara)  is  the  offspring  of 
an  ass  and  a  mare,  the  latter,  like  the  ass,  being  called  dvi- 
retas,9  '  receiving  double  seed,'  for  similar  reasons.  The  male 
ass  is  often  also  termed  Rasabha.  The  female  ass,  Gardabhi, 
is  mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda10  and  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad.11 


1  iii.  53,  23.  A  car  drawn  by  asses 
is  referred  to  in  the  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana, iv.  9  ;  see  also  Khara. 

2  v.  i,  2,  1.  2. 

3  v.  1,  5,  5. 

4  v-  1>  5>  51  vn-  1>  1.  2;  Jaiminiya 
Brahmana,  i.  57,  4  (Oertel,  Transactions 
of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and 
Sciences,  15,  177-180) :  of  the  Rasabha, 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  vi.  3,  1,  23. 

5  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  1,  5,  5. 

6  viii.  6,  10. 


7  1.  29,  5. 

8  viii.  56,  3. 

9  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  1,  1,  2.  3  ; 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  vi.  1,  6  ; 
Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  i.  57,  4. 

10  x.  1,  4. 

11  i.  4,  8.  For  other  references  to  the 
ass  as  Gardabha,  see  Av.  v.  31,  3  ;  Aita- 
reya Brahmana,  iii.  34 ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  iv.  5,  1,  9;  xii.  7,  1,  5. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  232, 
233- 


Gardabhi-mukha  is  mentioned  as  a  teacher  in  the  Vamsa 
Brahmana.1 

1  Indische  Studien,  4,  384. 


222 


TEACHERS  —WILD  BOAR— OX        [  Gardabhivipii 


Gardabhi-vipita,  or  Gardabhi-vibhlta,  is  the  name  of  a 
teacher  who  was  a  Bharadvaja  and  a  contemporary  of  Janaka, 
mentioned  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad. 

1  iv.  i,  ii  (Madhyamdina  =  iv.  1,  5  Kanva). 


Garmut  is  the  name  of  a  kind  of  wild  bean  mentioned  in  the 
Taittirlya  Samhita.1  The  Kathaka  Samhita2  has  the  form 
Ganmut,  which  is  probably  a  false  reading.  The  adjective 
garmuta,  '  made  from  the  Garmut  bean,'  is  found  in  the 
Maitrayani  Samhita.3 

Cf.  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. ; 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  71. 


*  11.  4,  4,  1.  2. 
2  x.  11. 
2,  4. 


ii. 


Galunta  is  a  word  occurring  only  once  in  the  Atharvaveda,1 
apparently  in  the  sense  of  *  swelling,'2  but  Whitney3  translates 
it  by  l  neck.' 

3  Translation   of    the  Atharvaveda, 
343- 


1  vi.  83,  3. 

2  Bloomfield,  Proceedings  of  the 
American  Oriental  Society,  October,  1887, 
xvi ;  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  505. 


Galunasa  Arksakayana  ('descendant  of  Eksaka')  is  mentioned 
as  a  teacher  in  the  Jaiminlya  Upanisad  Brahmana  (i.  38,  4). 

Gavaya,  the  name  of  a  species  of  ox  (Bos  gavaens)  occurs 
frequently  from  the  Rigveda1  onwards.2  It  is  mentioned  with 
Gaura  and  Mahisa  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,3  where  also  a 
wild  Gavaya  is  spoken  of.4 

1  iv.  2i,  8. 

2  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  10 ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xvi.  17 ;  Vaja- 
saneyi Samhita,  xxiv.  28 ;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  ii.  8 ;  iii.  34 ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  i.  2,  3,  9 ;  Sankhayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  3,  14,  etc. 


3  xxiv.  28. 

4  xiii.  49 ;  Taittirlya  Samhita,  iv.  2, 
10,  3  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  7,  17  ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xvi.  17. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  83, 
84. 


GavaSir,  '  mixed  with  milk,'  is  a  frequent  epithet  of  Soma  in 
the  Rigveda.1 

1  i.   137,  1  ;   187,  9;  ii.  41,  3;  iii.  32,  2  ;  42,  1.  7  ;  viii.  52,  10;   101,   10.     Cf. 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  279. 


Gavyuti  ]       CATTLE  RAIDS— GRASS— GRAZING  LAND 


223 


Gav-isti  (lit.  *  desire  of  cows ')  in  several  passages  of  the 
Rigveda1  denotes  '  conflict '  or  '  battle,'  evidently  with  reference 
to  cattle  raids.     Gavya.2  is  similarly  used. 

1  i-  91,   23;   iii.  47,  4;    v.    63,  5  ;  vi.  31,  3;  47,  20;  59,  7;  viii.  24,  2;   ix. 
76,  2.     So  Av.  iv.  24,  5. 
■  Rv.  vii.  18,  7. 


Gavi-sthira  Atreya  ('  descendant  of  Atri ')  is  mentioned  as  a 
Rsi,  or  seer,  in  the  Rigveda1  and  the  Atharvaveda.2 


1  v.  1,  12 ;  x.  150,  5. 

2  iv.   29,    5.      See  also  Asvalayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  xii.  14,  1. 


Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  126. 


Gavldhuka,1  Gavedhuka,2  is  the  name  of  a  species  of  grass 
(Coix  barbata).  It  is  also  referred  to  in  the  adjectival  forms 
gavldhuka3  and  gavedhuka}  It  was  boiled  with  rice5  (gavldhuka- 
yavdgil)  or  barley6  (gavedhuka-saktavah)  in  preparing  gruel. 


Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  6,  5 ;  iv.  3,  8 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xv.  5. 


Satapatha  Brahmana, 


v.  2,  4,  11. 


1  Taittirlya  Samhita,  v.  4,  3,  2. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  2,  4,  13 
3,  1,  10;  xiv.  1,  2,  19. 

3  Taittirlya    Samhita,    i.    8,    7,    1  ;       13  ;  3,  1,  10;   j,  7. 
9,  2;  Taittirlya  Brahmana,  i.  7,  3,  6  ;  5  Taittirlya  Samhita,  v.  4,  3,  2. 

6  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ix.  1,  1,  8. 

Gavya.     See  Gavyuti. 


13;  3.  x,  10;  3,  7. 


Gavya.     See  Gavisti. 


Gavyuti  in  the  Rigveda1  means,  according  to  Roth,2  grass 
land  for  the  pasturing  of  cattle,  in  which  sense  Gavya  is  also 
found.3  Thence  it  derives  the  sense  of  a  measure  of  distance 
found  in  the  Paflcavimsa  Brahmana.4  Geldner,  on  the  other 
hand,  takes  the  original  meaning  to  be  •  road,'  real6  or  meta- 
phorical,7 thence  a  measure  of  distance,8  and  finally  '  land.'9 


1  i.    25,    16;    iii.    62,    16;   v.    66,    3; 
vii.  77,  4,  etc. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Aitareya    Brahmana,   iv.    28 ;    St. 
Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  3b. 

4  Paiicavimsa  Brahmana,  xvi.  13,  12. 


5  Vedische  Studien,  2,  290,  291. 

6  Rv.  i.  25,  16. 

7  Rv.  vi.  47,  20  ;  x.  14,  2. 

8  Rv.  viii.  60,  20,  and  n.  4. 

9  Rv.  iii.  62,  16  ;  vii.  62,  5  ;  65,  4 
viii.  5,  6. 


224 


NAMES— SONG 


[  G-angya 


Gangya,  '  being  on  the  Ganges,'  is  the  epithet  of  Urukaksa1 
or  of  a  thicket2  in  the  Rigveda.3 


1  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v.  Cf.  Wackernagel,  Altindische  Gram- 
matik,  2, 288 ;  Weber,  Episches  im  vedischen 
Ritual,  28. 


2  Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  398. 


vi.  45.  3i. 


Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  2,  291, 


Gangyayani,  '  descendant  of  Gangya,'  occurs  as  the  patrc 
nymic  of  Citra  in  the  Kausltaki  Upanisad.1 

1  i.  1.     There  is  a  v.l.  Ga.rgya.yani.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  395. 

Gatu.     See  Gatha. 

Gatha  in  the  Rigveda1  usually  means  only  'song,'  'verse,' 
like  Gatu.2  In  one  passage,3  however,  it  already  has  a  more 
special  sense,  as  it  is  classed  with  Narasamsi  and  Raibhi,  a 
collocation  repeatedly  found  later.4  The  commentators  identify 
the  three  terms  with  certain  verses  of  the  Atharvaveda,5  but 
Oldenberg6  has  shown  that  this  identification  is  incorrect  for 
the  Rigveda.  Gathas  are  often  mentioned  elsewhere,7  and  are 
referred  to  as  metrical  in  the  Aitareya  Aranyaka,8  where  the 
Rc,  Kumbya,  and  Gatha  are  classed  as  forms  of  verse.  The 
Aitareya  Brahmana9  distinguishes  between  Rc  and  Gatha  as 
divine  and  human  respectively.     According  to  the  usage  of  the 


1  viii.  32, 1 ;  71,  14  ;  98,  9  ;  ix.  99,  4 ; 
gatha,  i.  167,  6;  ix.  11,  4;  gdtha-pati, 
•  lord  of  song,'  i.  43,  4  ;  gdtha-nl,  '  lead- 
ing a  song,'  i.  190,  1  ;  viii.  92,  2  ;  rju- 
gatha,  'singing  correctly, '  v.  44,  5; 
gathin,  'singer,'  i.  7,  1.  Cf.  Hopkins, 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 

17.  65. 

2  i.  151,  2  ;  ii.  20,  5  ;  iii.  4,  4  ;  iv.  4,  6  ; 
v.  87,  8  ;  x.  20,  4  ;  122,  2. 

3  x.  85,  6. 

4  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  5,  11,  2; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  Asvamedha,  v.  2  ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  vi.  32 ;  Kausltaki 
Brahmana,  xxx.  5 ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, xi.  5,  6,  8,  where  Raibhi  does 
not  occur ;  Gopatha  Brahmana,  ii.  6, 
12. 

5  Viz. ,  Gatha.  =  Av.  xx.  127, 12  et  sea. ; 


NarasamsI  =  Av.  xx,  127,  1-3  ;  Raibhi 
=  Av.  xx.  127,  4-6;  while  ibid.,  7-10, 
are  known  as  Pariksityah  (scil.,  rcah). 

6  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  42,  238.  Bloom- 
field,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  689 
et  seq.,  seems  to  accept  the  identification 
even  for  the  Rigveda. 

7  Av.  x.  10,  20  ;  xv.  6,  4  (distinct 
from  Narasamsi)  ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, iii.  2,  4,  16  ;  xi.  5,  7,  10  ;  xiii.  1, 
5,  6  ;  4,  2,  8  ;  5,  4,  2 ;  Taittiriya  Aran- 
yaka, ii.  10  (distinct  from  Narasamsi)  ; 
Chandogya  Upanisad,  iv.  17,  9,  etc. 

8  ii.  3,  6,  with  Keith's  note ;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  xi.  5,  7,  10. 

9  vii.  18.  The  story  of  Sunahsepa 
is  described  as  sata-gdtham,  '  told  in  a 
hundred  Gathas.' 


Ii 


Gathina  ] 


NON-VEDIC  SONG— NAMES 


225 


Brahmanas  and  the  liturgical  literature,  as  stated  by  the  St. 
Petersburg  Dictionary,  the  Gathas  are,  though  religious  in 
content,  distinguished  from  Re,  Yajus,  and  Saman  as  non- 
Vedic — that  is,  are  not  Mantras.  This  view  is  consistent  with 
the  fact  that  the  phrase  Yajna-gfatha,  meaning  a  verse 
summarizing  a  sacrificial  usage,  is  not  rare.  The  Satapatha 
Brahmana10  preserves  several  Gathas,  which  generally  accord 
with  this  description  as  epitomizing  the  sacrifices  of  famous 
kings,  and  the  Maitrayani  Samhita11  states  that  a  Gatha.  is 
sung  at  a  wedding.  Sometimes12  Gatha  is  qualified  as 
Narasamsl,  where  it  must  be  a  eulogy  of  a  generous  donor. 


10  xiii.  5,  4,  etc.,  and  see  xiii.  4,  2,  8, 
where  the  Gathas  are  plainly  Danas- 
tutis,  or  'praises  of  gifts,'  just  as  the 
Narasamsi  verses  are  declared  to  be  in 
the  Brhaddevata,  iii.  154. 

11  iii.  7,  3. 

12  Taittinya  Brahmana,  i.  3,  2,  6. 
So  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 
44,  98,  takes  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  5, 
6,  8,  where  Say  ana  hesitates  between 
identifying  the  two  and  distinguishing 
them.     It  seems  reasonable  to  regard 


Gatha  as  the  wider  term  which  covers, 
but  is  not  coextensive  with,  Narasamsl. 
Cf.  Sayana's  example  of  a  Gatha  in 
his  commentary  on  Aitareya  Aranyaka, 
ii.  3,  6  :  pratah  pratar  anrtam,  te  vadanti, 
'  they  every  morning  tell  an  untruth,' 
which  is  clearly  not  a  Narasamsi. 

Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda,  689  et  seq.  ;  Weber,  Episches  im 
Vedischen  Ritual,  4  et  seq. ;  Max  Miiller, 
Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  493. 


Gathin  is  mentioned  as  the  son  of  KuSika  and  father  of 
Visvamitra  in  the  Sarvanukramani.  It  is  difficult  to  say 
whether  this  tradition  is  correct ;  it  derives  some  support  from 
the  Aitareya  Brahmana  (vii.  18),  where  reference  is  made  to 
the  divine  lore  {daiva  veda)  of  the  Gathins,  which  is  said  to  be 
shared  by  Sunahsepa  as  a  result  of  his  adoption  by  Visvamitra. 
See  Gathina. 


Gathina. — The  sons  of  Visvamitra  are  described  in  the 
Aitareya  Brahmana1  as  Gathinas,  or  descendants  of  Gathin, 
who,  according  to  tradition,  was  their  grandfather  ;2  and 
Visvamitra  himself  is  styled  Gathina  in  the  Sarvanukramani. 


1  vii.    18.      Cf.   Asvalayana    Srauta 
Sutra,    vii.    18 ;    Weber,    Episches    im 
Vedischen  Ritual,  16,  n.  3. 
VOL.  I. 


2  Cf.  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  i2,  348 
et  seq.  ;  Pargiter,  Journal  of  the  Royal 
Asiatic  Society,  1910,  32  et  seq. 

15 


226  NAMES  [  Gamdama 

Gam-dama  is  the  form  in  the  Paficavimsa  Brahmana1  of  the 
name  of  Ekayavan,  which  in  the  Taittirlya  Brahmana2  is  read 
as  Kamdama. 

1  xxi.  14,  20.  I   tions  of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts 

2  ii.  7,  ii,  2.     Cf.  Hopkins,  Transac>   \  and,  Sciences,  15,  69. 

Gandhara,  '  a  king  of  Gandhara '  named  Nagnajit,  is 
mentioned  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana.1  In  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana2  he  or  some  descendant  figures  as  Svarjit  Nagriajita 
or  Nagnajit,  and  as  giving  an  opinion  on  the  ritual,  which  is 
rejected  with  the  observation  that  the  author  was  merely  a 
princely  person  {rdjanya-bandhu). 

1  vii.  34,  in  the  list  of  teachers  who  handed  down  the  knowledge  of  the 
substitute  for  Soma. 

2  viii.  1,  4,  10. 

Gargi  Vacaknavi  is  referred  to  in  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad1  as  a  female  contemporary  and  rival  of  Yajnavalkya. 

1  iii.  6,  1  ;  8,  1.     Cf  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  10,  118. 

Gargi-putra,  'son  of  Gargi,'  occurs  as  the  name  of  three 
teachers  in  the  last  Vam£a  (list  of  teachers)  in  the  Madhyamdina 
recension  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  (vi.  4,  30).  The 
earliest  of  these  three  was  the  pupil  of  Badeyiputra  and  the 
teacher  of  the  second  Gargiputra.  The  latter  was  the  teacher 
of  Paragarlkaundiniputra,  the  teacher  of  the  third  Gargiputra. 

Gargrya,  '  descendant  of  Garga,'  is  the  patronymic  of  Balaki 
in  the  Brhadaranyaka1  and  the  Kausltaki2  Upanisads.  Two 
Gargyas  are  mentioned  in  the  second  Vam^a  (list  of  teachers) 
in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  3  :  one  of  them  is  the  pupil  of 
Gargya,  who  again  is  the  pupil  of  Gautama.  Others  occur 
in  the  Taittirlya  Aranyaka4  and  in  the  Nirukta,6  as  well  as  later 
in  the  ritual  Sutras.  Thus  the  family  was  evidently  long 
connected  with  the  development  of  liturgy  and  grammar. 


1  ii.  1,  1. 

3  iv.  1. 

3  iv.  6,  2  (Kanva). 


4  i-  7,  3- 

6  i.  3.  12  ;  iii.  13. 


Girik§it  Auccamanyava  ]     NAMES— MOUNTAIN  227 

Gargyayana,  '  descendant  of  Gargya,'  is  mentioned  as  a 
pupil  of  Uddalakayana  in  the  second  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers) 
in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  (iv.  6,  2  Kanva). 

Gargyayani,  *  descendant  of  Gargya,'  is  a  variant  reading  for 
Garigyayani  as  the  patronymic  of  Citra  in  the  Kausitaki 
Upanisad  (i.  1). 

Galava  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Vidarbhlkaundinya  in  the 
first  two  Vamsas  (lists  of  teachers)  in  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad.1  It  is  possibly  the  same  man  that  is  referred  to 
regarding  a  point  of  ritual  in  the  Aitareya  Aranyaka.2  A 
grammarian  of  this  name  is  mentioned  in  the  Nirukta.3 


1  ii.  5,  22  ;  iv.  5,  28  (Madhyamdina  = 
ii.  6,  3  ;  iv.  6,  3  Kanva). 

2  v.  3,  3- 


3  iv.  3.    Cf.  Panini,  vi.  3,  61  ;  vii.  1, 
74  ;  3.  99  ;  viii.  4,  67. 


Giri,  '  mountain  '  or  '  height,'  is  a  word  that  occurs  repeatedly 
in  the  Rigveda.1  Thus  reference  is  made  to  the  trees  on  the 
hills,  hence  called  '  tree-haired '  (vrksa-kesdh),2  and  to  the 
streams  proceeding  from  the  hills  to  the  sea  (samudra)?  The 
term  is  frequently  coupled  with  the  adjectival  parvata.4  The 
Rigveda  mentions  the  waters  from  the  hills,5  and  the  Athar- 
vaveda6  refers  to  the  snowy  mountains.  Actual  names  of 
mountains,  as  Mujavant,  Trikakud,  Himavant,  are  very  rare. 
References  to  Krauiica,  Mahameru,  and  Mainaga,  are  confined 
to  the  Taittirlya  Aranyaka,  while  Navaprabhramgana  can  no 
longer  be  considered  a  proper  name.7 


1  i.  56,  3  ;  61,  14  ;  63,  1 ;  iv.  20,  6  ; 
vi.  24,  8,  etc. 

2  Rv.  v.  41,  11. 
J  Rv.  vii.  95,  2. 

4  Rv.    i.    56,    4 ;    viii.    64,    5  ;    Av. 


see  Oldenberg,   Rgveda-Noten,   1,  411 ; 
viii.  32,  4 ;  x.  68,  1,  etc 

6  xii.  1,  11.     See  Himavant. 

7  Av.  xix.  37,  8,  with  Whitney's  note 
in  his  Translation  ;  Macdonell,  Journal 


iv.  7,  8;  vi.  12,  3;   17,  3;   ix.  1,  18,    !   of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1909,1107. 
etc.  i   Cf.  Zimmer,  Allindisches  Leben,  47. 

5  Rv.  vi.  66,  11,  on  which  passage,    ! 

Giri-ksit  Aucca-manyava,  'descendant  of  Uccamanyu,'  is 
mentioned  in  the  Paiicavimsa  Brahmana  (x.  5,  7)  as  a  con- 
temporary of  Abhipratarin  Kak§aseni. 

15—2 


228 


NAMES— BDELLIUM         [  Girija  Babhravya 


Giri-ja  Babhravya,  '  descendant  of  Babhru,'  is  mentioned  in 
the  Aitareya  Brahmana  (vii.  i)  as  having  been  taught  by 
Srauta  the  method  of  dividing   the   sacrificial  animal  (pasor 

vibhakti). 


Gugfgfulu,  '  bdellium,'  is  referred  to  in  one  passage  of  th< 
Atharvaveda1  as  produced  by  the  Sindhu2  and  by  the  sea.  The 
latter  source  presumably  alludes,  as  Zimmer3  assumes,  to  sea- 
borne trade,  bdellium  being  the  gum  of  a  tree,  not  a  product  of 
the  sea.  It  is,  however,  possible  that  in  this  passage  some 
other  substance  may  be  meant.  The  word  in  this  form  also 
occurs  elsewhere  in  the  Atharvaveda4  and  later  ;5  it  is  often6 
mentioned  in  the  older  form  of  GulgTilu,  between  which  and 
Guggulu  the  manuscripts  constantly  vary. 

Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  8,  5  ;  Panca- 
vimsa  Brahmana,  xxiv.  13  ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  iii.  5,  2,  16. 

Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 675  ;  Lassen,  Indische  Alterthums- 
kunde,  i2,  339  ;  Whitney,  Translation 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  957,  958. 


1  xix.  38,  2. 

2  Or  '  from  streams  '  (saindhava),  as 
Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 
guggulu,  suggests. 

3  A  Itindisches  Leben,  28. 

4  ii-  36,  7. 

5  Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  28. 

6  Taittirlya    Samhita,   vi.    2,    8,   6  ; 


Gurigu. — The  descendants  of  Guhgu  are  referred  to  as 
Gungus  in  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda,1  apparently  as  friends  of 
Atithigrva.     Possibly  a  people  may  be  meant. 

1  x.  48,  8.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  165. 

Gupta  is  the  name  in  the  Jaiminlya  Upanisad  Brahmana 
(iii.  42)  of  VaipaScita  Dardhajayanti  Gupta  Lauhitya.  All 
the  three  other  names  being  patronymics  show  that  he  was 
descended  from  the  families  of  Vipascit,  Drdhajayanta,  and 
Lohita. 

Gulgulu.     See  Gug-gulu. 

Gptsa-mada  is  the  name  of  a  seer  to  whom  the  Sarvanu- 
kramani  attributes  the  authorship  of  the  second  Mandala  of  the 
Rigveda.     This  tradition  is  supported  by  the  Aitareya  Brah- 


ii 


Grha] 


VULTURE— COW— HOUSE 


229 


mana1  and  the  Aitareya  Aranyaka.2  The  Kausltaki  Brahmana3 
speaks  of  him  as  a  Bhargava,  '  descendant  of  Bhygu,'  with  a 
variant  Babhrava,  '  descendant  of  Babhru,'  but  the  later 
tradition  keeps  to  the  former  patronymic.4  The  Grtsamadas 
are  often  mentioned  in  the  second  Mandala  of  the  Rigveda,5 
and  are  also  called  Sunahotras,6  but  never  Gartsamadas  or 
Saunahotras,  and  Grtsamada  himself  never  occurs  there.7 


V.  2,  4. 

2  ii.  2,  1. 

3  xxii.  4.     Cf.  Gartsamadi,  xxviii.  2. 

4  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  i2,  226  et  seq. 

5  ii.  4,  9;  19,  8;  39,  8;  41,  18. 


6  ii.  18,  6;  41,  14.  17. 


7  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft,  42,  200, 
201. 

Cf  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  118;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische 
Mythologie,  3,  287. 


Grdhra,  'the  vulture,'  is  often  mentioned  from  the  Rigveda1 
downwards.2  The  swiftness  of  its  flight3  and  its  fondness  for 
devouring  carrion  are  especially  noticed.4  More  generally  the 
word  is  used  to  designate  any  bird  of  prey,  the  eagle  (Syena) 
being  classed  as  the  chief  of  the  Grdhras.5 


1  1.  118,  4;  11.  39,  I  j  vii.  104,  22; 
x.  123,  8. 

2  Av.  vii.  95,  1  ;  xi.  2,  2  ;  9,  9  ;  10. 
8.  24  ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  4,  7,  1  ; 
v.  5,  20,  1  ;  MaitrayanI  Samhita, 
iv.  9,  19  ;  Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  iv.  29  ; 
Adbhuta  Brahmana  in  Indische  Studien, 
1,  40 ;  etc. 


3  Rv.  ii.  39,  1. 

4  Av.  xi.  10,  8.  24  ;  MaitrayanI  Sam- 
hita, loc.  cit. 

5  Rv.  ix.  96,  6. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  88  ; 
Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  1, 
225. 


Grsti,  '  a  young  cow,'  which  has  only  calved  once,  occurs  in 
the  Rigveda1  and  the  Atharvaveda,2  as  well  as  in  the  later 
Sutra  literature.3 


3  Kausika  Sutra,  19.  24,  etc. 


11.  13,  3  5  viii.  9,  24  ;  xix.  24,  5. 


Grha  is  used  in  the  singular,1  or  oftener  in  the  plural,2  to 
denote  the  '  house '  of  the  Vedic  Indian.     Dama  or  Dam  has 


1  Rv.  iii.  53,  6  ;  iv.  49,  6;  viii.  10,  I, 
etc.  ;  Av.  vii.  83,  1 ;  x.  6,  4 ;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  viii.  21. 

2  Rv.  ii.  42,  3  ;  v.  76,  4  ;  x.  18,  12  ; 
85,  26  ;   142,  4  ;   165,  2  ;  Av.  i.  27,  4  ; 


iii.  10,  11  ;  vi.  137,  1 ;  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana, ii.  31  ;  viii.  26 ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  ii.  32 ;  iv.  33  ;  xviii.  44  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  1,  2,  22  ;  6,  1, 
19,  etc. 


230 


HOUSE 


[  Grha 


the  same  sense,  while  Pastya  and  Harmya  denote  more 
especially  the  home  with  its  surroundings,  the  family  settle- 
ment. The  house  held  not  only  the  family,  which  might  be  of 
considerable  size,  but  also  the  cattle3  and  the  sheep4  at  night. 
It  was  composed  of  several  rooms,  as  the  use  of  the  plural 
indicates,  and  it  could  be  securely  shut  up.5  The  door  (Dvar, 
Dvara)  is  often  referred  to,  and  from  it  the  house  is  called 
Durona.     In  every  house  the  fire  was  kept  burning.6 

Very  little  is  known  of  the  structure  of  the  house.  Presum- 
ably stone  was  not  used,7  and  houses  were,  as  in  Megasthenes' 
time,8  built  of  wood.  The  hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda9  give 
some  information  about  the  construction  of  a  house,  but  the 
details  are  extremely  obscure,  for  most  of  the  expressions  used 
do  not  recur  in  any  context  in  which  their  sense  is  clear. 
According  to  Zimmer,10  four  pillars  (Upamit)  were  set  up  on  a 
good  site,  and  against  them  beams  were  leant  at  an  angle  as 
props  (Pratimit).  The  upright  pillars  were  connected  by  cross 
beams  (Parimit)  resting  upon  them.  The  roof  was  formed  of 
ribs  of  bamboo  cane  (vamsa),11  a  ridge  called  Visuvant,  and  a 
net  (Aksu),  which  may  mean  a  thatched  covering12  over  the 
bamboo  ribs.  The  walls  were  filled  up  with  grass  in  bundles 
{palada),  and  the  whole  structure  was  held  together  with  ties  of 


3  Rv.  vii.  56,  16 ;  Av.  i.  3,  4  ;  ix.  3, 
13. 

4  Rv.  x.  106,  5  ;  Av.  iii.  3. 

5  Rv.  vii.  85,  6. 

6  Rv.  i.  69,  2.     Cf.  the  Garhapatya 
Agni,  Av.  v.  31,  5  ;  vi.  120,  I  ;  121,  2 
viii.  io2;  ix.  6,  30;  xii.  2,  34;  xviii.  4,  8 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  iii.  39;  xix.   18 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  6.   12;  Kausi- 
taki    Brahmana,     ii.     1  ;      Satapatha 
Brahmana,    iii.    6,    1,   28  ;    vii.    1,    1, 
6,  etc. 

7  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  153. 
Muir's  view,  Sanskrit  Texts,  5,  461,  that 
clay  was  used  can  only  apply  to  the 
minor  finishing  of  the  walls  of  a  house. 

8  Arrian,  Indica,  x.  2. 

9  iii.  12  ;  ix.  3.  See  Bloomfield, 
Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  343  et  seq.  ; 
Weber,  Indische  Studien,  17,  234  et  seq.  ; 


1    Whitney,   Translation    of   the    Athar- 
vaveda, 525  et  seq. 

10  Op.  cit.,  153.  No  certainty  can 
attach  to  the  rendering  of  the  words. 

11  It  seems  likely  that,  as  the  ribs 
were  of  bamboo  and  were  probably 
fixed  in  the  ridge,  the  roof  was  wagon- 
headed,  like  the  huts  of  the  Todas  at  the 
present  day  (see  illustrations  in  Rivers, 
The  Todas,  pp.  25,  27,  28,  51),  and  the 
rock-cut  Chaityas,  or  Assembly  Halls,  of 
the  Buddhists  in  Western  India,  in  some 
of  the  earliest  of  which  the  wooden 
ribs  of  the  arched  roof  are  still  pre- 
served. See  Fergusson,  History  of 
Indian  Architecture ,2  2,  135,  cf.  126. 

12  Av.  ix.  3,  8,  where  Bloomfield, 
op.  cit.,  598,  thinks  of  a  wickerwork 
roof ;  Geldner,  Vedische  Studien,  1,  136, 
of  a  pole  with  countless  holes. 


HO  USEHOLDER—FA  MILY—t 


various  sorts  (nahana,  pranaha,  samdamsa,  parisvanjalya).13  In 
connexion  with  the  house,  mention  is  made  of  four  terms  which, 
though  primarily  sacrificial  in  meaning,  seem  to  designate  parts 
of  the  building:  Havirdhana,  'oblation-holder';  Agnisala,14 '  fire- 
place ';  Patninam  Sadana,  '  wives'  room  ';  and  Sadas,  '  sitting 
room.'  Slings  or  hanging  vessels  (Sikya)  are  also  mentioned.15 
Reedwork  (ita)  is  spoken  of,  no  doubt  as  part  of  the  finishing 
of  the  walls  of  the  house.16  The  sides  are  called  Paksa.  The 
door  with  its  framework  was  named  Ata. 


13  Av.  ix.  3,  4.  5. 

14  Zimmer  conjecturally  identifies 
the  Agnisala  with  the  central  room, 
the  Havirdhana  with  a  place  for  keep- 
ing the  grain,  etc.  (e.g.,  Av.  iii.  3,  4), 
the  Patninam  Sadana  with  the  women's 


apartments,  and   the   Sadas  with  the 
subsidiary  buildings. 

15  Av.  ix.  3,  6.     See  Whitney,  op.  cit., 
526;  Bloomfield,  op.  cit.,  597. 

16  Av.  ix.  3,  17. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  148-156. 


Grha-pa1  or  Grha-pati2  is  the  regular  name,  from  the 
Rigveda  onwards,  of  the  householder  as  master  of  the  house. 
Similarly  the  mistress  is  called  Grha-patni.3  For  the  powers 
and  position  of  the  Grhapati  see  Pitr. 


1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  11. 

2  Rv.  vi.  53,  2 ;  Av.  xiv.  1,  51  ; 
xix.  31,  13  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iv.  6, 
8,  5;  viii.  6,  1,  ii,  and  repeatedly  as  an 
epithet  of  Agni,  Rv.  i.   12,  6  ;   36,  5  ; 


60,  4  ;  vi.  48,  8 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
ii.  27  ;  iii.  39  ;  ix.  39 ;  xxiv.  24,  etc. 

3  Rv.  x.  85,  26;  Av.  iii.  24,  6.  Cf. 
Garhapatya,  Rv.  i.  15,  12;  vi.  15,  19; 
x.  85,  27.  36. 


Grhya  denotes  the  members  of  the  house  or  family  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana. 

1  ii.  5,  2,  14 ;  3,  16 ;  6,  2,  4;  iii.  4,  1,  6  ;  xii.  4,  1,  4.     Cf.  grhah,  i.  7,  4,  12. 


Gairi-ksita,  '  descendant  of  Giriksit,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
Tpasadasyu  in  the  Rigveda,1  and  of  the  Yaskas  in  the  Kathaka 
Samhita.2 


v-  33. 


Ludwig,  Translation  of 


the  Rigveda,  3,  155,  174. 


2  xiii.  12;  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  3, 
474,  475- 


1.  Go    {a)>   'ox'  or  'cow.'1     These   were   among  the   chief 
sources   of  wealth  to  the  Vedic    Indian,   and   are   repeatedly 


1  i.  83,  1  ;  135,  8  ;  ii.  23,  18,  etc.  ; 
gava  uksanah,  i.  168,  2  ;  Av.  iii.  IX,  8  ; 
Vajasaneyi    Samhita,     xxi.     20 ;    gavo 


dhenavah,  Rv.  i.  173,  1  ;  vi.  45,  28  ; 
x.  95,  6;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxi.  19, 
etc. 


232 


MILKING-TIME 


[  Go 


referred  to  from  the  Rigveda  onwards.2  The  milk  (Ksira)  was 
either  drunk  fresh  or  made  into  butter  (Ghrta)  or  curds  (Dadhi), 
or  was  mixed  with  Soma  or  used  for  cooking  with  grain 
(Kslraudana).  The  cows  were  milked  thrice  a  day,  early 
(pratar-doha),  in  the  forenoon  (Samgava),  and  in  the  evening 
(sayam-doha)?  Thrice  a  day  they  were  driven  out  to  graze, 
according  to  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana4  (prdtah,  samgave,  say  am). 
The  first  milking  was  productive,  the  last  two  scanty.3  According 
to  the  Aitareya  Brahmana,5  among  the  Bharatas  the  herds  in 
the  evening  are  in  the  Gostha,  at  midday  in  the  Samgavini. 
This  passage  Sayana  expands  by  saying  that  the  herds  go  home 
to  the  Sala,  or  house  for  animals,  at  night  so  far  as  they  consist 
of  animals  giving  milk,  while  the  others  stayed  out  in  the 
Gostha,  or  open  pasturage  ;  but  both  were  together  in  the 
cattle-shed  during  the  heat  of  the  day.  The  time  before 
the  Samgava,  when  the  cows  were  grazing  freely  on  the 
pastureland,  was  called  Svasara.6  When  the  cows  were  out 
feeding  they  were  separated  from  the  calves,  which  were,  how- 
ever, allowed  to  join  them  at  the  Samgava,7  and  sometimes  in 
the  evening.8 

While  grazing  the  cattle  were  under  the  care  of  a  herdsman 
(Gopa,  Gopala)  armed  with  a  goad,9  but  they  were  liable  to  all  sorts 
of  dangers,  such  as  being  lost,  falling  into  pits,  breaking  limbs,10 


2  The  five  sacrificial  animals  are 
man,  goat,  sheep,  ox,  horse,  Sankh- 
ayana  Srauta  Sutra,  ix.  23,  4 ;  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,  ii.  4,  3,  13  ;  iii.  1,  2, 

I3  )  iv-  5>  5,  Io;  x^v-  *i  x)  32- 

3  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  5,  3,  1. 

4  i.  4,  9,  2.  The  exact  sense  of  this 
notice  is  obscure.  Strictly  speaking,  the 
cows  were  driven  out  from  the  cattle- 
shed  in  the  morning,  spent  the  heat 
of  the  day  in  the  Samgavini,  were  then 
driven  out  during  the  evening  to  graze, 
and  finally  came  or  were  driven  home, 
as  is  often  mentioned  :  Rv.  i.  66,  5  ; 

149,  4  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xv.  41. 

5  iii.  18,  14. 

6  Rv.  ii.  2,  2  ;  34,  8  ;  v.  62,  2  ; 
viii.  88,  1 ;  ix.  94,  2.  The  going  of  the 
cows  to  their  pasture  in  the  morning 


is  often  referred  to— e.g.,  Rv.  i.  25,  16 ; 
x.  97,  8. 

7  Rv.  ii.  2,  2  ;  viii.  88,  1  ;  Taittiriya 
Brahmana,  ii.  1,  1,  3;  Sahkara  on 
Chandogya  Upanisad,  ii.  9, 4;  Jaiminiya 
Upanisad  Brahmana,  i.  12,4;  Narayana 
on  ASvalayana  Srauta  Sutra,  iii.  12,  2. 

8  Gobhila  Grhya  Sutra,  iii.  8,  7 ; 
Rv.  ii.  2,  2.  See  Geldner,  Vedische 
Studien,  2,  111-114. 

9  Pavlravan,  Rv.  x.  60,  3,  is  probably 
so  meant.  The  usual  name  was  A?lra, 
the  significant  mark  of  a  Vaisya.  Cf. 
Rv.  vii.  33,  6. 

10  Rv.  i.  120,  8  ;  vi.  54,  5-7.  Also 
Pusan  was  the  special  deity  expected  to 
guard  cattle,  and  hence  is  called  anasta- 
pasu, '  losing  nokine.'  See  Rv.  x.  17,2, 
and  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  36. 


Go] 


CATTLE  AS  WEALTH— BEEF 


233 


and  being  stolen.  The  marking  of  the  ears  of  cattle  was 
repeatedly  adopted,  no  doubt,  to  indicate  ownership.11 

Large  herds  of  cattle  were  well-known,  as  is  shown  by  the 
Danastutis,  or  '  praises  of  gifts,'  in  the  Rigveda,12  even  when 
allowances  are  made  for  the  exaggeration  of  priestly  gratitude. 
The  importance  attached  to  the  possession  of  cattle  is  shown13 
by  the  numerous  passages  in  which  the  gods  are  asked  to  prosper 
them,  and  by  the  repeated  prayers14  for  wealth  in  kine.  Hence, 
too,  forays  for  cattle  (Gavisti)  were  well  known ;  the  Bharata 
host  is  called  the  *  horde  desiring  cows  '  (gavyan  gramah)  in  the 
Rigveda  -,15  and  a  verbal  root  gup,1Q  '  to  protect,'  was  evolved  as 
early  as  the  Rigveda  from  the  denominative  go-paya,  *  to  guard 
cows.'  The  Vedic  poets17  do  not  hesitate  to  compare  their 
songs  with  the  lowing  of  cows,  or  to  liken  the  choir  of  the 
singing  Apsarases  to  cows.18 

The  cattle  of  the  Vedic  period  were  of  many  colours:  red 
(rohita),  light  (sukra),  dappled  {prsni),  even  black  (krsna).19 
Zimmer20  sees  a  reference  to  cows  with  blazes  on  the  face  in  one 
passage  of  the  Rigveda,21  but  this  is  uncertain. 

Oxen  were  regularly  used  for  ploughing  or  for  drawing 
wagons  (anadvah),  in  which  case  they  were,  it  seems,  usually 
castrated.22  Cows  were  not  properly  used  for  drawing  carts, 
though  they  at  times  did  so.23  The  flesh  of  both  cows  and 
bulls  was  sometimes  eaten  (Mamsa).     Cattle  were  certainly  the 


11  Rv.  vi.  28,  3  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita, 
iv.  2,  9,  and  cf.  Astakarni  and  Svadhiti. 

32  Rv.  viii.  5,  37,  etc.  Cf.  Panca- 
vimsa  Brahmana,  xvii.  14,  2  ;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  viii.  21.  23  ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  xiii.  5,  4,  8  et  seq. 

13  Rv.  i.  43,  2  ;  162,  22  ;  v.  4,  11  ; 
ix.  9,  9,  etc.;  Av.  i.  31,  4;  ii.  26,  4; 
v.  29,  2  ;  vi.  68,  3  ;  viii.  7,  11  ;  x.  1,  17. 
29;  xi.  2,  9.  21,  etc.  ;  Taittiriya  Sam- 
hita, iii.  2,  3,  1  ;  v.  5,  5,  1  ;  vi.  5,  10,  1  ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  iii.  59. 

14  Rv.  i.  83,  1  ;  iv.  32,  17  ;  v.  4,  11  ; 
viii.  89,  2,  etc. 


IB 


33,  ii- 


16  Rv.  vii.   103,  9;   Av.   x.   9,   7,   8; 
xix.   27,  9.   10.     Cf.    Macdonell,    Vedic 


Grammar,  p.  358,  n.  13. 


17  Rv.  vii.  32,  22  ;  viii.  95,  1 ;  106,  1  ; 
ix.  12,  2,  etc. 

18  Rv.  x.  95,  6.  It  is,  however,  un- 
certain whether  the  names  of  Apsarases 
are  meant  in  this  passage.  Cf.  Ludwig, 
Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  5,  517. 

19  Rv.  i.  62,  9.    Various  other  colours 
!   are  mentioned  in  the  lists  of  animals 

at  the  Asvamedha,  or  human  sacrifice, 
in  the  Yajurveda,  but  apparently  as 
exceptional. 

20  Altindisches  Leben,  226. 

21  i.  87,  1.  It  is  also  rendered  as 
'  the  heavens  with  stars.' 

22  Av.  iii.  9,  2 ;  vi.  138,  2 ;  Taittiriya 
Samhita,  i.  8.  9,  1  ;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  13,  151,  n.    See  Mahanirafta. 

23  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  2,  4,  13. 


234 


PRODUCTS  OF  THE  COW— COW-KILLER 


[  Go 


objects  of  individual  ownership,  and  they  formed  one  of  the 
standards  of  exchange  and  valuation  (see  Kraya). 


(b)  The  term  Go  is  often  applied  to  express  the  products  of 
the  cow.  It  frequently  means  the  milk,1  but  rarely  the  flesh2  of 
the  animal.  In  many  passages  it  designates  leather  used  as  the 
material  of  various  objects,  as  a  bowstring,3  or  a  sling,4  or 
thongs  to  fasten  part  of  the  chariot,5  or  reins,6  or  the  lash 
of  a  whip.7  See  also  Carman,  with  which  Go  is  sometimes 
synonymous.8 


1  Rv.   i.    33,    io ;    151,    8;    181,   8; 
ii.  30,  7;  iv.  27,  5;  ix.  46,  4;  71,  5. 

2  Rv.  x.  16,  7  (in  the  funeral  ritual). 

3  Rv.    vi.    75,    11;    x.    27,    22;    Av. 
i-  2,  3. 

4  Rv.  i.  121,  9. 


5  Rv.  vi.  47,  26 ;  viii.  59,  5. 

6  Rv.  vi.  46,  14. 

7  Rv.  vi.  53,  9. 

8  Rv.  x.  94,  9. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  22J 


(c)  Gavah  means  the  stars  of  heaven  in  two  passages  of  the 
Rigveda,1  according  to  Roth.2 


1  i.  154,  6;  vii.  36,  1. 


2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  5. 


2.  Go  Angirasa  ('  descendant  of  Angiras  ')  is  the  reputed 
author  of  a  Saman  or  Chant  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.1 
There  is  little  doubt  that  he  is  mythical.2 


1  xvi.  7,  7.     Cf.   Latyayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  vi.  11,  3. 

2  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  2, 


160  ;  Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the  Con- 
necticut Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences, 
15,  68. 


Go-ghata,  *  a  cow-killer,'  is  enumerated  in  the  list  of  victims 
at  the  Purusamedha,  or  human  sacrifice,  in  the  Yajurveda.1 
See  Mamsa. 

1  Vajasaneyi  Sainhita,  xxx.  18;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  16,  1. 


Gotama  is  mentioned  several  times  in  the  Rigveda,1  but 
never  in  such  a  way  as  to  denote  personal  authorship  of  any 
hymn.2     It  seems  clear  that  he  was  closely  connected  with  the 


1  Rv.  i.  62,  13  ;  78,  2  ;  84,  5  ;  85,  11 
iv.  4,  11. 


2  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutsche* 

Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  42,  215. 


Gotra  ] 


GOT  AM  A— FAMILY 


235 


Arigirases,  for  the  Gotamas  frequently  refer  to  Angiras.3  That 
he  bore  the  patronymic  Rahugana  is  rendered  probable  by  one 
hymn  of  the  Rigveda,4  and  is  assumed  in  the  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana,5 where  he  appears  as  the  Purohita,  or  domestic  priest,  of 
Mathava  Videgrha,  and  as  a  bearer  of  Vedic  civilization.  He 
is  also  mentioned  in  the  same  Brahmana6  as  a  contemporary  of 
Janaka  of  Videha,  and  Yajnavalkya,  and  as  the  author  of 
a  Stoma.7  He  occurs,  moreover,  in  two  passages  of  the 
Atharvaveda.8 

The  Gotamas  are  mentioned  in  several  passages  of  the 
Rigveda,9  Vamadeva  and  Nodhas  being  specified  as  sons  of 
Gotama.    They  include  the  Vaj  asravases.    See  also  Gautama. 


3  Cf.  Rv.  i.  62,  1;  71,  2;  74,  5; 
75-  2  :  78»  3  J  iv..  2,  5  ;  16,  8,  etc.. 

4  Rv.  i.  78,  5.  Cf.  Oldenberg,  loc. 
tit.,  236,  n.  1. 

5  i.  4,  i,  10  et  seq.  ;  xi.  4,  3,  20. 
The  former  passage  is  wrongly  cited 
by  Sayana  on  R v.  i.  81,  3.  See  Weber, 
Indische  Studien,  2,  9,  n. 

6  xi.  4,  3,  20. 

7  xiii.  5,  1,  1  ;  Asvalayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  ix.  5,  6 ;  10,  8,  etc. 


8  iv.  29,  6 ;  xviii.  3,  16.  See  also 
Sadvimsa  Brahmana  in  Indische  Studien, 
1,  38;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  2,  6. 

9  i.  60,  5;  6i,  16;  63,  9;  77,  5  ; 
78,  1;  88,  4;  92,  7;  iv.  32,  9.  12; 
viii.  88,  4.  Cf.  Asvalayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  xii.  10. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  no,  123  ;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  1,  170,  180;  Geldner,  Vedische 
Studien,  3,  151,  152. 


Gotami-putra,  '  son  of  Gotami,'  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of 
Bharadvajl-putra  in  the  Kanva  recension  of  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad  (vi.  5,  1).     See  also  Gautami-putra. 

Gotra  occurs  several  times  in  the  Rigveda1  in  the  account  of 
the  mythic  exploits  of  Indra.  Roth2  interprets  the  word  as 
'  cowstall,'  while  Geldner3  thinks  '  herd  '  is  meant.  The  latter 
sense  seems  to  explain  best  the  employment  which  the  term 
shows  in  the  later  literature  as  denoting  the  '  family '  or  '  clan,' 
and  which  is  found  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad.4 

In  the  Grhya  Sutras5  stress  is  laid  on  the  prohibition  of 


1  i-  5i,3;  ii-  17,1;  23,  18;  iii.  39,4; 
43,  7 ;  viii.  74,  5  ;  x.  48,  2  ;   103,  7. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Vedische  Studien,  2,  275,  276,  where 
he  divides  the  passages  according  as 
real  or  mythical  herds  are  meant. 

4  iv.  4,  1.  So  Sahkhayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  i.  4,  16,  etc.  ;  Asvalayana  Grhya 


Sutra,  iv.  4,  etc.  ;  Kausitaki  Brahmana, 
xxv.  15. 

5  Gobhila  Grhya  Sutra,  iii.  4,  4 ; 
Apastamba  Dharma  Sutra,  ii.  5,  n, 
15.  16,  in  Max  Miiller,  Ancient  Sanskrit 
Literature,  387.  For  sapinda,  see  Gau- 
tama Dharma  Sutra,  xiv.  13  ;  Vasistha 
Dharma  Sutra,  iv.  17-19. 


X 


236  PROHIBITED  DEGREES  IN  MARRIAGE        [  Godana 

marriage  within  a  Gotra,  or  with  a  Sapinda  of  the  mother  of 
the  bridegroom — that  is  to  say,  roughly,  with  agnates  and 
cognates.  Senart6  has  emphasized  this  fact  as  a  basis  of  caste, 
on  the  ground  that  marriage  within  a  curia,  phratria,  or  caste 
(Varna)  was  Indo-European,  as  was  marriage  outside  the  circle 
of  agnates  and  cognates.  But  there  is  no  evidence  at  all 7  to 
prove  that  this  practice  was  Indo-European,  while  in  India  the 
Satapatha8  expressly  recognizes  marriage  within  the  third  or 
fourth  degree  on  either  side.  According  to  Sayana,  the  Kanvas 
accepted  marriage  in  the  third  degree,  the  Saurastras  only  in 
the  fourth,  while  the  scholiast  on  the  Vajrasuci9  adds  to  the 
Kanvas  the  Andhras  and  the  Daksinatyas,  and  remarks  that 
the  Vajasaneyins  forbade  marriage  with  the  daughter  of  the 
mother's  brother.  All  apparently  allowed  marriage  with  the 
daughter  of  a  paternal  uncle,  which  later  was  quite  excluded. 
Change  of  Gotra  was  quite  possible,  as  in  the  case  of  Sunah- 
Sepa  and  Grtsamada,  who,  once  an  Angirasa,  became  a 
Bhargava.10 

6  Les  Castes  dans  I'Inde,  210  ct  seq.  9  See  Weber,  Indische  Siudicn,  10, 
Cf.  De  la  Vallee  Poussin,  Le  Vedisme,       73-76. 

15.  10  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  2, 

7  Keith,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic   j    157;  Festgruss  an  Roth,  108. 

Society,  1909,  471,  472.  Cf.  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  61  et  seq. ; 

8  i.  8,  3,  6.  '    Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  323. 

Go-dana  appears  to  mean  '  the  whiskers '  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana,1  where  the  person,  being  consecrated,  first  shaves 
off  the  right  and  then  the  left  '  whisker.'  Later  on  the  Godana- 
vidhi,  or  ceremony  of  shaving  the  head,  is  a  regular  part  of  the 
initiation  of  a  youth  on  the  attainment  of  manhood  and  on 
marriage  ;2  but  though  the  ceremony  is  recognized  in  the 
Atharvaveda,3  the  name4  does  not  occur  there. 


1  iii.  1,  2,  5.  6. 

2  ASvalayana  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  19 ; 
Sankhayana  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  28,  etc. 

3  vi.  68.  See  KauSika  Sutra,  liii.  17- 
20.  But  Av.  ii.  13  is  not  to  be  classed 
here  as  in  the  KauSika ;  it  refers  to  the 
giving  of  a  new  garment  to  a  child, 
and  the  removal  of  its  first  wrap.     See 


veda,  56,  57,  correcting  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  13,  173,  and  Zimmer,  Altin- 
disches Leben,  322,  323.  Cf.  Bloomfield, 
Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  306,  574,  665. 
4  The  meaning  '  whisker '  id  a  secon- 
dary one,  derived,  doubtless,  from  the 
'  gift  of  a  cow '  (go-dana),  accompanying 
the  ceremony  of  shaving  the  whiskers 


Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharva-    I   or  hair. 


Gopati  ]        BO  IVSTRING—LIZA RD—  WHEA  T—LORD 


237 


Godha. — (a)  The  sense  of  '  bowstring  '  seems  certain  in  one 
passage  of  the  Rigveda,1  and  possible  in  another.2  Roth3 
also  adopts  this  meaning  in  the  only  passage  of  the  Atharva- 
veda4  where  the  word  occurs. 


1  X.  28,   IO.   II. 

2  viii.  69,  9.     See  Hopkins,  Journal 
of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  17,  53. 


3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  1. 

4  iv.  3,  6. 


(b)  In  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda1  the  sense  of  'musical 
instrument'  is  recognized  by  Roth  and  by  Hillebrandt2  for 
this  word. 


1  viii.  69,  9. 


2  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  144,  n.  1. 


(c)  Elsewhere1  an  animal  seems  to  be  meant,  perhaps  the 
4 crocodile,'  as  Ludwig2  and  Weber3  think;  perhaps  a  large 
'  lizard,'  as  Roth  and  Zimmer4  assume.  An  animal  is  probably 
also  meant  in  the  Atharvaveda.5 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  15,  1 ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  35  ;  Pafica- 
vimsa  Brahmana,  ix.  2,  14 ;  Baudha- 
yana  Srauta  Sutra,  ii.  5 ;  Jaiminiya 
Brahmana,  i.  221  ;  Satyayanaka  in 
Sayana  on  Rv.  viii.  91  ;  Journal  of  the 
American  Oriental  Society,  18,  29. 


2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  499. 

3  Indische  Studien,  18,  15,  16.  Bloom- 
field,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  368, 
renders  the  word  vaguely  by  '  dragon.' 

4  Altindisches  Leben,  95. 

5  iv.  3,  6,  where  Whitney  offers  no 
rendering  at  all. 


Go-dhuma,  *  wheat,'  is  frequently  referred  to  in  the  plural  in 
the  Yajurveda  Samhitas1  and  Brahmanas,2  and  is  expressly 
distinguished  from  *  rice  '  (Vrihi)  or  '  barley  '  (Yava).3  ■  Groats  ' 
{saktavah)  made  of  this  grain  are  also  mentioned.4  The  word 
occurs  in  the  singular  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.5 


1  Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  2,  8 ;  Vaja- 
saneyi Samhita,  xviii.  12;  xix.  22.  89; 
xxi.  29,  etc. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xii.  7, 1,  2  ;  2, 
9 ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  3,  22 
(Madhyamdina  =  vi.  3,  13  Kanva),  etc. 


3  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  3,  7,  2. 

4  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xii.  9,  1,  5. 

5  v.  2,  1,  6. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  241. 


Go-pati,  '  lord  of  cows,'  is  freely  used  in  the  Rigveda1  to 
denote  any  lord  or  master,  a  natural  usage  considering  that 
cattle  formed  the  main  species  of  wealth. 

1  i.  101.  4  ;  iv.  24,  1 ;  vi.  45,  21 ;  vii.  18,  4,  etc.     Av.  iii.  14,  6,  etc. 


238 


NAMES— COW-HERD— RIVER  GOMATI    [  Gopavana 


Gopa-vana  is  the  name  of  a  poet  of  the  race  of  Atri  in  the 
Rigveda.1    See  Gaupavana. 

1  viii.  74,  ii.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,   i,   215;    Ludwig,  Translation  of 
the  Rigveda,  3,  107. 


Go-pa  and  Go-pala,  '  protector  of  cows,'  occur  in  the 
Rigveda1  and  later,  but  the  former  is  usually  metaphorical  in 
sense,  applying  to  any  protector,  while  the  latter  has  the  literal 
force  of '  cow-herd.' 


1  Gopd:  Rv.  i.  164,  21;  ii.  23,  6; 
iii.  10,  2;  v.  12,  4,  etc. ;  Gopala:  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  11;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  iv.  1,  5,  4.  Gopa,  in  the 
sense  of  •  guardian,  *  occurs  in  the 
PancavimSa  Brahmana,  xxiv.  18,  in  a 


compound.  Gopitha,  in  the  sense  of 
'protection,'  occurs  in  Rv.  v.  65,  6; 
x.  35,  14,  etc.  Goptr,  'protector,'  first 
occurs  in  Av.  x.  10,  5,  and  is  thereafter 
common. 


Go-bala  ('  ox-strength ')  Varsna  ('  descendant  of  Vrsni ')  is 
mentioned  as  a  teacher  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita  (iii.  11,  9,  3) 
and  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana  (i.  6,  1). 

Go-mati,  '  possessing  cows,'  is  mentioned  as  a  river  in  the 
Nadi-stuti,  or  '  Praise  of  Rivers,'  in  the  tenth  Mandala  of  the 
Rigveda.1  In  that  hymn  a  river  flowing  into  the  Indus  must 
be  meant,  and  its  identification2  with  the  Gomal,  a  western 
tributary  of  the  Indus,  cannot  be  doubted.  In  one  other  passage 
of  the  Rigveda3  the  accentuation  of  Gomati  shows  that  a  river  is 
meant.  It  is  possible  that  in  a  third  passage*  the  reading 
should  be  changed  to  gomatir  from  gomatir.  Geldner5  suggests 
that  in  the  two  last  passages  the  Gumti,  or  rather  its  four 
upper  arms  (hence  the  use  of  the  plural)  is  meant :  this  accords 
well  with  the  later  use  of  the  name  and  with  the  general 
probability  of  the  river  here  intended  being  in  Kuruksetra,  as 
the  centre  of  Vedic  civilization.6 


I 


1  x.  75,  6. 

2  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  14  ; 
Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda, 
3,  200. 

3  viii.  24.  30. 

4  v.  61,  19.  See  Oldenberg,  Rgveda- 
Noten,  1,  355.356- 


5  Vedische  Studien,  3,  152,  n.  2. 

6  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  2,  218  ; 
Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  19,  19  et  seq.  ;  Macdonell, 
Sanskrit  Literature,  174  ;  Keith,  Journal 
of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1908,  1141. 


Gosrati  Vaiyaghrapadya  ]  GA  YA  L—H  UNTSMA  N—NA  MES  239 

Go-mayu,  '  lowing  like  a  cow,'  does  not  occur  as  the  name  of 
the  'jackal '  till  the  late  Adbhuta  Brahmana.1 

1  Indische  Studien,  1,  40. 

Go-mrgfa,  a  species  of  ox,  now  called  Gayal  (Bos  gavaeus),  is 
mentioned  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the  Asvamedha,  or  horse 
sacrifice,  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas1  and  Brahmanas.2  In  the 
Taittiriya  Samhita3  it  is  declared  to  be  neither  a  wild  nor  a 
tame  animal ;  this  presumably  means  that  it  was  semi- 
domesticated,  or  perhaps  that  it  was  both  tamed  and  found 
wild.  With  the  name  of  this  animal  may  be  compared  the 
Mrga  Mahisa,  which  is  clearly  mentioned  as  wild  in  the 
Rigveda.4    See  also  Gayava. 


1  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  11; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  1.  30. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  3,  4,  3  ; 
5,  2,  10 ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  8, 
20,  5. 


3  ii.  1,  10,  2. 

4  ix.  92,  6. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  83, 
84  ;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 
44,  338,  n.  1. 


Golattika  is  the  name  of  some  unknown  animal  in  the  list  of 
victims  at  the  Asvamedha,  or  horse  sacrifice,  in  the  Yajurveda.1 

1  Taittiriya   Samhita,   v.    5,    16,    1  ;   I   saneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  37.    Cf.  Zimmer, 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  18;  Vaja-  |   Altindisches  Leben,  99. 

Go-vikartana  ('  cow- butcher ')  designates  the  '  huntsman  '  in 
the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (v.  3,  1,  io).1     See  Gogfhata. 

1  Cf.  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  16,  1;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  18; 
Weber,  Indische  Streifen,  1,  82.  * 

Go-vyaca.    See  Vyaea. 

Go£arya  is  the  name  of  a  protege"  of  the  Asvins  in  the 
Rigveda  (viii.  8,  20  ;  49,  1 ;  50,  10). 

Go-6ru  Jabala  is  mentioned  as  a  sage  in  the  Jaiminiya 
Upanisad  Brahmana  (iii.  7,  7). 

Go-Sruti  Vaiyagrhra-padya  ('  descendant  of  Vyaghrapad  ')  is 
mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Satyakama  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad 
(v.  2,  3).  In  the  Sankhayana  Aranyaka  (ix.  7)  the  name  appears 
as  Gosruta. 


240 


BIRD— NAMES— GRAZING  GROUND 


[  Gosadl 


Go-sadI  (*  sitting  on  a  cow  ')  is  the  name  of  a  bird  in  the  list 
of  victims  at  the  Asvamedha,  or  horse  sacrifice,  in  the 
Yajurveda.1 

1  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  5  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  24.     Cf.  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  94. 


Go-suktin  is  mentioned  in  the  Sarvanukramani  as  the  author 
of  Rigveda  viii.  14  and  15,  and  a  Saman  or  Chant  of  his  seems 
to  be  referred  to  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana  (xix.  4,  9),  under 
the  title  of  Gausukta.     But  see  Gausukti. 


Go-stha,  '  standing-place  for  cows,'  denotes  not  so  much  a 
'cowstall '  as  the  *  grazing  ground  of  cows,'  as  Geldner1  shows 
from  a  passage  of  the  Aitareya  Brahmana2  and  from  a  note  of 
Mahidhara  on  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.3  This  sense  suits 
adequately  all  the  passages  of  the  Rigveda4  where  it  occurs, 
and  it  greatly  improves  the  interpretation  of  a  hymn  of  the 
Atharvaveda,5  besides  being  acceptable  elsewhere.6   See  also  Go. 


1  Vedische  Studien,  3,  112,  113. 

2  iii.  18,  14. 

3  iii.  21. 

4  i.  191,  4;  vi.  28,  1  ;  viii.  43,  17. 

8  iii.   14,    1.   5.   6,  where  Whitney's 
rendering    '  stall '   is   very   unsatisfac- 


tory, and  Bloomfield's  •  stable '  is  no 
better. 

B  Av.  ii.  26,  2 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
iii.  21  ;  v.  17 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
xi.  8,  3,  2,  etc.  ;  Kathaka  Samhita, 
vii.  7;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iv.  2,  11. 


Gautama,  'descendant  of  Gotama,'  is  a  common  patro- 
nymic, being  applied  to  Aruna,1  Uddalaka  Aruni,2  KuSri,3 
Sati,4  Haridrumata.5 

Several  Gautamas  are  mentioned  in  the  Vamsas  (lists  of 
teachers)  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  as  pupils  of  Agfni- 
veSya,6  of  Saitava  and  Praclnayogrya,7  of  Saitava,s  of  Bharad- 


1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  x.  6,  1,  4. 

2  Ibid.,  xi.  4,  1,  3;  5,  1,  2;  Brhad- 
aranyaka Upanisad,  vi.  1,  7;  Chan- 
dogya  Upanisad,  v.  3, 6  et  seq. ;  Kausitaki 
Upanisad,  i.  1  ;  Jaiminlya  Upanisad 
Brahmana,  i.  42,  1. 

3  Satapatha  Brahmana,  x.  5,  5,  1. 


4  Vamsa  Brahmana  in  Indische  Studien, 

4.  373. 

5  Chandogya  Upanisad,  iv.  4,  3. 

6  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  6,   1 
(Kanva). 

7  Ibid.,  ii.  6,  2. 

8  Ibid.,  iv.  6,  2. 


Gaura  ] 


PA  TRONYMICS—OX 


241 


vaja,9  of  Gautama,10  and  of  Vatsya.11    A   Gautama  is  also 
referred  to  elsewhere. 

ii.  5,  20.  22 ;  iv.  5,  26  Madhyamdina). 
The  Madhyamdina,  ii.  5,  20 ;  iv.  5,  26, 
knows  a  Gautama,  pupil  of  Vaijavapa- 
yana  and  Vaisthapureya. 


9  Ibid.,  ii.    6,    2  (Kanva  =  ii.    5,  22 
iv.  5,  27  Madhyamdina). 

10  Ibid.,  ii.  6,  3;  iv.  6,  3  (Kanva  = 
ii.  5,  22 ;  iv.  5,  28  Madhyamdina). 

11  Ibid.,  ii.  6,  3;  iv.  6,  3  (Kanva= 


Gautami-putra  ('  son  of  a  female  descendant  of  Gotama ') 
is  mentioned  in  the  Kanva  recension  of  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad  (vi.  5,  2)  as  a  pupil  of  Bharadvajlputra.  In  the 
Madhyamdina  (vi.  4,  31)  a  Gautamiputra  is  a  pupil  of  Atreyi- 
putra,  pupil  of  a  Gautamiputra,  pupil  of  Vatsiputra.  See  also 
Gotamiputra. 

Gaupa-vana  {'  descendant  of  Gopavana ')  is  mentioned  as  a 
pupil  of  Pautimasya  in  the  first  two  Vamsas  (lists  of  teachers) 
in  the  Kanva  recension  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  (ii.  6, 
1 ;  iv.  6,  1). 

Gaupayana  ('descendant  of  Gopa').  The  Gaupayanas 
appear  in  the  legend  of  Asamati,  Kirata,  and  Akuli,  which  is 
first  met  with  in  the  Brahmanas.1 


1  PaiicavimSa  Brahmana,  xiii.  12,  5  ; 
Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  iii.  167  (Journal 
of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  18,  41) ; 
Satyayanaka  in  Sayan  a  on  Rv.  x.  57 


(Max  Miiller's  edition,  42,c  et  seq.) ; 
Brhaddevata,  vii.  83  et  seq.,  with  Mac- 
donell's  notes. 


Gaupalayana  ('  descendant  of  Gopala ')  is  the  patronymic  of 
Sucivrksa  in  the  Maitrayani  Samhita.1  It  is  also  the  patro- 
nymic of  Aupoditi,  Sthapati  of  the  Kurus,  in  the  Baudhayana 
Srauta  Sutra,2  and,  as  Gaupaleya,  of  Upoditi  or  Aupoditi  in  the 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana.3 


1  iii.  10,  4  (p.  135,  line  9).  Cf.  Aita- 
reya  Brahmana,  iii.  48,  9,  where 
Aufrecht  reads  Gaupalayana . 


^  xx.  25. 
3  xii.   13, 

Upoditi. 


11.  where  the  edition  has 


Gaura,  a  species  of  ox  (Bos  gaurus),  is  frequently  mentioned 
with  the  Gavaya  from  the  Rigveda1  onwards.2  As  the  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita3  expressly  mentions  wild  (dranya)  Gauras,  they 

1  i.  16,  5  ;  iv.  21,  8  ;  58,  2  ;  v.  78,  2  ;       Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  28  ;  Aitareya 
vii.  69,  6;  98,  1,  etc.  Brahmana,  iii.  34,  etc. 

2  Maitrayani   Samhita,   iii.    14,    10;  3  xiii.  48. 

VOL.  I.  16 


542 


A  SEER— TEA  CHERS         [  Gauriviti  gaktya 


must  usually  have  been  tame.  The  female,  Gauri,  is  also  often 
referred  to.4  The  compound  term  Gaura-mrga  (*  the  Gaura 
wild  beast ')  is  sometimes  met  with.5 


*  Rv.  i.  84,   10;    iv.    12,  6;    ix.   12, 
3  ;    and  in  the  obscure  verse  i.   164, 


5  Vajasaneyi     Samhita,     xxiv.     32 ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  8. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  A  Itindisches  Leben,  83,  224 


Gauri- viti  £aktya  (<  descendant  of  Sakti ')  or  Gauriviti,  as 
the  name  is  also  spelt,1  is  the  Ksi,  or  Seer,  of  a  hymn  of  the 
Rigveda,2  and  is  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Brahmanas.3 
According  to  the  Jaiminiya  Brahmana,4  he  was  Prastotr  at  the 
Sattra,  or  sacrificial  session,  celebrated  by  the  Vibhinduklyas 
and  mentioned  in  that  Brahmana. 


1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xii.  8,  3,  7; 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xi.  5;  xii.  13; 
xxv.  7. 

2  v.  29,  11. 

3  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iii.  19  ;  viii.  2  ; 
and  see  n.  1 . 


4  iij  233  (Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society \  18,  38). 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  126  ;  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der 
Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft, 
42,  215. 


Gau£ra  ('  descendant  of  Gusri ')  is  the  name  of  a  teacher 
*t*rf*t**fa9e  "mentioned  in  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana  (xvi.  9;  xxiii.  5).     See 


t\ 


^5.«»i.; 


GauSla. 


GauSrayani  ('  descendant  of  Gausra  ')  is  the  patronymic  of  a 
teacher,  Citra,  in  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana  (xxiii.  5). 

GauSla,  a  variant  ol  GauSra,  is  the  name  of  a  teacher  repre- 
sented as  in  disagreement  with  Budila  ASvatara  Agvi  in  the 
Aitareya  Brahmana.1 

1  vi.  30.     Cf.  Gopatha  Brahmana,  ii.  6,  9  (GoSla). 


Gau-sukti  is  the  name  of  a  pupil  of  Isa  Syavasvi  according 
to  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana1  in  a  Vamsa  (list  of 
teachers).     It  is  also  the  name,  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,2 


1  iv.  16,  1. 

2  xix.     4,     9.      Cf.     St.     Petersburg 
Dictionary,  s.v.  ;  Hopkins,  Transactions 


of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and 
Sciences,  15,  30. 


Grata  ] 


PLANETS 


243 


of  a  teacher  who  appears  to  have  been  needlessly  invented  to 
explain  the  Gausukta  Saman  (chant),  which  is  really  the  Saman 
of  Gosuktin. 


Graha  ('  seizing ')  is  a  term  applied  to  the  sun  in  the  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,1  most  probably  not  in  the  later  sense  of 
1  planet,'  but  to  denote  a  power  exercising  magical  influence.2 
The  sense  of  '  planet '  seems  first  to  occur  in  the  later  literature, 
as  in  the  MaitrayanI  Upanisad.3  The  question  whether  the 
planets  were  known  to  the  Vedic  Indians  is  involved  in 
obscurity.  Oldenberg4  recognizes  them  in  the  Adityas,  whose 
number  is,  he  believes,  seven  :  sun,  moon,  and  the  five  planets. 
But  this  view,  though  it  cannot  be  said  to  be  impossible  or  even 
unlikely,  is  not  susceptible  of  proof,  and  has  been  rejected  by 
Hillebrandt,5  Pischel,6  von  Schroeder,7  Macdonell,8  and  Bloom- 
field,9  among  others.  Hillebrandt10  sees  the  planets  in  the  five 
Adhvaryus  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda,11  but  this  is  a  mere  con- 
jecture. The  five  bulls  (uksanah)  in  another  passage  of  the 
Rigveda12  have  received  a  similar  interpretation  with  equal 
uncertainty,13  and  Durga,  in  his  commentary  on  the  Nirukta,14 
even  explains  the  term  bhumija,  '  earth-born,'  which  is  only  men- 
tioned by  Yaska,  as  meaning  the  planet  Mars.15  Thibaut,16 
who  is  generally  sceptical  as  to  the  mention  of  planets  in  the 
Veda,  thinks  that  Brhaspati  there  refers  to  Jupiter ;  but  this  is 
extremely  improbable,  though  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita17 
Brhaspati  is  made  the  regent  of  Tisya.     A  reference  to  the 


1  iv.  6,  5,  i. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  ; 
Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  26, 
432,  n.  2. 

3  vi.  16.  See  Weber,  Indian  Litera- 
ture, 98,  n. 

4  Religion  des  Veda,  185  et  seq. ;  Zeit- 
schrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen 
Gesellschaft,  50,  56  et  seq. 

5  Vedische  Mythologie,  3,  102  et  seq. 

6  Gbttingische  Gelehrte  Anzeigen,  1895, 

447- 

7  Vienna  Oriental  Journal,  9,  109. 

8  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  44. 


9  Religion  of  the  Veda,  133  et  seq. 

10  Vedische  Mythologie,  3,  423. 

11  iii.  7,  7. 

12  i.  105,  10.     Cf.  also  i.  105,  16,  with 
Oldenberg 's  note. 

13  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  24,  36. 

1*  i.  14. 

15  See  Weber,  Jyotisa,  10,  n.  2. 

16  Astronomie,  Astrologie,  und  Mathe- 
matik,  6. 

17  iv.  4    10,  1.     Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic 
Mythology,  pp.  J02-104. 

l6 — 2 


244 


THROW  OF  DICE— VILLAGE 


[  Grabha 


planets  is  much  more  probable  in  the  seven  suns  (sapta  surydh) 
of  the  late  Taittiriya  Aranyaka.18  On  the  other  hand,  Ludwig's 
efforts  to  find  the  five  planets  with  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the 
twenty- seven  Naksatras  (lunar  mansions)  in  the  Rigveda,  as 
corresponding  to  the  number  thirty-four  used  in  connexion  with 
light19  (jyotis)  and  the  ribs  of  the  sacrificial  horse,20  is  far- 
fetched.    See  also  Sukra,  Manthin,  Vena. 


i.  7. 


See  on  them  Weber.  Omina 


und  Portenta,  339 ;  Indische  Studien,  2, 
238  ;  9,  363  ;  10,  240,  271  ;  Jyotisa,  10  ; 
Ramayana,  28,  n.  2. 

19  x.  55,  3.  20  i.  162,  18. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 


veda, 3,  183  et  seq.  ;  Zimmer,  Altin- 
disches  Leben,  354  et  seq.  ;  Max  Miiller, 
Rgveda,  iv.2,  xxx.  et  seq.  ;  Whitney, 
Oriental  and  Linguistic  Essays,  2,  412,  n. 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society 
1 6,  lxxxviii. 


Grabha  (lit.  '  grasping  ')  designates  the  '  throw '  of  dice  in  the 
Rigveda.1     See  also  Glaha. 

1  viii.  81,  1  ;  ix.  106,  3.     Cf.  Liiders,  Das  Wurfelspiel  im  alien  Indien,  49,  50. 


Grama. — The  primitive  sense  of  this  word,  which  occurs 
frequently  from  the  Rigveda1  onwards,  appears  to  have  been 
'  village.'  The  Vedic  Indians  must  have  dwelt  in  villages  which 
were  scattered  over  the  country,  some  close  together,2  some  far 
apart,  and  were  connected  by  roads.3  The  village  is  regularly 
contrasted  with  the  forest  (aranya),  and  its  animals  and  plants 
with  those  that  lived  or  grew  wild  in  the  woods.4  The  villages 
contained  cattle,  horses,  and  other  domestic  animals,  as  well  as 
men.5  Grain  was  also  stored  in  them.6  In  the  evening  the 
cattle  regularly  returned  thither  from  the  forest.7  The  villages 
were  probably  open,   though  perhaps  a  fort   (Pur)  might  on 


1  i.  44,  10;  114,  1 ;  ii.  12,  7  (perhaps 
to  be  taken  as  in  n.  10);  x.  146,  1; 
149,  4,  etc.  ;  Av.  iv.  36,  7.8;  v.  17, 
4 ;  vi.  40,  2,  etc. ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
hi.  45  ;  xx.  17,  etc. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  2,  4,  2  ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  hi.  44. 

3  Chandogya  Upanisad,  viii.  6,  2. 

4  Animals :  Rv.  x.  90,  8  ;  Av.  ii.  34, 4  ; 
iii.  10,  6;  31,  3;  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
vii.  2,  2,  1 ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  vii.  7; 


xiii.  1 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  ix.  32 ; 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xvi.  1,  9  ;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  iii.  8.  4,  16,  etc. 
Plants:  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  2,  5,  5  ; 
vii.  3,  4,  1,  etc. 

5  Av.  iv.  22,  2  ;  viii.  7,  11,  etc. 

6  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  3,  13 
(Kanva  =  22,  Madhyamdina). 

7  Rv.  x.  149,  4  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita, 
iv.  1,  1. 


Grama  ] 


VILLAGE 


245 


occasion  be  built  inside.8  Presumably  they  consisted  of 
detached  houses  with  enclosures,  but  no  details  are  to  be  found 
in  Vedic  literature.    Large  villages  (mahdgrdmdh)  were  known.9 

The  relation  of  the  villagers  is  difficult  to  ascertain  with 
precision.  In  several  passages10  the  word  occurs  with  what 
appears  to  be  the  derivative  sense  of  '  body  of  men.'  This 
sense  presumably  started  from  the  use  of  the  word  to  denote 
the  'village  folk,'  as  when  Saryata  Manava  is  said  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana11  to  have  wandered  about  with  his 
'  village'  (gramena) ;  but,  as  Zimmer12  observes,  this  restricted 
sense  nowhere  appears  clearly  in  the  Rigveda,13  where  indeed 
the  '  folk  '  (jana)14  of  the  Bharatas  is  in  one  passage15  called 
the  '  horde  seeking  cows  '  (gavyan  gramah).  Zimmer16  tends  to 
regard  the  Grama  as  a  clan,  and  as  standing  midway  between 
the  family  and  the  tribe  (Vis).  The  Grama  may,  however, 
perhaps  be  regarded  more  correctly17  as  an  aggregate  of  several 
families,  not  necessarily  forming  a  clan,  but  only  part  of  a  clan 
(Vis),  as  is  often  the  case  at  the  present  day.18 

Vedic  literature  tells  us  very  little  about  the  social  economy 
of  the  village.  There  is  nothing  to  show  that  the  community 
as  such  held  land.  What  little  evidence  there  is  indicates  that 
individual  tenure  of  land  was  known  (see  Urvara,  Ksetra),  but 
this,  in  effect  though  not  in  law,  presumably  meant  tenure  by  a 
family  rather  than  by  an  individual  person.     The  expression 


8  As  nowadays.  See  Zimmer,  Altin- 
disches  Leben,  144,  citing  Hiigel,  Kashmir, 
2,  45- 

9  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana, 
iii.  13,  4. 

10  Rv.  i.  100,  10 ;  iii.  $$,  11  ;  x.  27,  1  ; 
127,  5;  Av.  iv.  7,  5  ;  v.  20,  3  (where, 
however,  '  villages  '  is  quite  probable) ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  iv.  1,  5,  2 ;  vi.  7, 
4,  9;  xii.  4,  1,  3.     Cf,  n.  1. 

11  iv.  1,  5,  2.  7. 

12  Altindisches  Leben,  161. 

13  See  passages  cited  in  n.  10. 

14  Rv.  iii.  53,  12. 

15  Rv.  iii.  33,  11. 

16  Op.  cit.,  159,  160,  where,  however, 
his  language  is   not   very   clear.     Cf. 


Hopkins,  Religions  of  India,  27,  who 
points  out  that  Zimmer  is  inaccurate 
in  identifying  the  tribe  with  Vis.  It  is 
the  clan,  a  division  below  that  of  the 
tribe  (Jana). 

17  A  village  might  contain  a  whole 
clan,  but  probably  it  contained  at  most 
a  section  of  a  clan.  By  family  is  meant 
a  Hindu  joint  family ;  but  the  extent 
to  which  such  families  existed,  and  the 
number  of  persons  included,  cannot 
even  be  conjectured  from  the  avail- 
able evidence.  Cf.  Schrader,  Prehistoric 
Antiquities,  393;  Leist,  Altarisches  Jus 
Gentium,  34. 

18  Cf.  Baden  Powell,  Village  Com- 
munities in  India,  85  et  seq. 


246  VILLAGE  [  Grama 

*  desirous  of  a  village  '  (grama-kdma) ,  which  occurs  frequently  in 
the  later  Samhitas,19  points,  however,  to  the  practice  of  the  king's 
granting  to  his  favourites  his  royal  prerogatives  over  villages  so 
far  as  fiscal  matters  were  concerned.  Later20  the  idea  developed 
that  the  king  was  owner  of  all  the  land,  and  parallel  with  that 
idea  the  view  that  the  holders  of  such  grants  were  landlords. 
But  of  either  idea  there  is  no  vestige  in  Vedic  literature  beyond 
the  word  grama-kdma,  which  much  more  probably  refers  to  the 
grant  of  regalia  than  to  the  grant  of  land,  as  Teutonic  parallels 
show.21  Such  grants  probably  tended  to  depress  the  position 
of  the  actual  cultivators,  and  to  turn  them  into  tenants,  but 
they  can  hardly  have  had  this  effect  to  any  appreciable  extent 
in  early  times. 

The  village  does  not  appear  to  have  been  a  unit  for  legal 
purposes  in  early  days,22  and  it  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  been 
a  political  unit.  The  village  no  doubt,  as  later,  included  in  its 
members  various  menials,  besides  the  cultivating  owners,  and 
also  the  Brahmanas  and  Ksatriyas  who  might  hold  interest 
in  it  by  royal  grant  or  usage  without  actually  cultivating  land, 
such  as  chariot-makers  (Ratha-kara),  carpenters  (Tak§an), 
smiths  (Karmara),  and  others,  but  they  did  not  presumably,  in 
any  sense,  form  part  of  the  brotherhood.23  All  alike  were 
politically  subject  to  the  king,  and  bound  to  render  him  food  or 
service  or  other  tribute,  unless  he  had  transferred  his  rights  to 


19  Taittirlya  Samhita,  ii.  1,  1,  2  ;  |  Powell,  Village  Communities  in  India, 
3,  2  ;  3,  9,  2  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  I  83 ;  Rhys  Davids,  Buddhist  India, 
ii.  1,9;  2,  3  ;  iv.  2,  7,  etc.  ;  Hopkins,  I  48.  It  may  be  mentioned  that  we  have 
Transactions  of  the  Connecticut  Academy  |  no  Vedic  evidence  as  to  the  non-sale 
of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15,  32,  thinks  that  of  land  by  the  members  of  a  family, 
grama  here  means  '  herd  '  (of  cattle).  except  the  indications  mentioned  under 

20  Cf.  Baden  Powell,  Indian  Village  ;  Urvara.  The  later  evidence  is  over- 
Community,  207  et  seq.  Whether  or  not  i  whelming  for  grama,  meaning  '  village.' 
the  idea  is  already  found  in  Manu,  Cf.  Chandogya  Upanisad,  iv.  2,  4  ; 
ix.  34,  is  disputed  and  uncertain.  See  |  Sankhayana Grhya  Sutra, i.  14 ;  KauSika 
Raj  an.     The  germ  of  it  lies  in  a  differ-  Sutra,  94. 


ent  sphere — the  right  of  the  K§atriya, 
with  the  consent  of  the  clan,  to  appor- 
tion land   (Satapatha   Brahmana,    vii. 


-  Cf.  Foy,  Die  konigliche  Geivalt, 
20,  n.  ;  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  93  ; 
Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 


1,  1,  8).  I   Society,  13,  78,  128. 

21  Cf.  Pollock  and  Maitland,  History  "  Cf.  Baden  Powell,  Indian   Village 

of  English  Law,  2,  237  et  seq.  ;    Baden       Community,  17,  18. 


Grama  ] 


VILLAGE 


■47 


others  of  the  royal  family  or  household,  as  was  no  doubt  often 
the  case,  either  in  whole  or  part.  The  king's  share  in  a  village 
is  referred  to  as  early  as  the  Atharvaveda.24 

At  the  head  of  the  village  was  the  Grama-ni,  or  '  leader  of 
the  village,'  who  is  referred  to  in  the  Rigveda,25  and  often  in 
the  later  Samhitas  and  in  the  Brahmanas.26  The  exact 
meaning  of  the  title  is  not  certain.  By  Zimmer27  the  GramanI 
is  regarded  as  having  had  military  functions  only,  and  he  is 
certainly  often  connected  with  the  Senani,  or  '  leader  of  an 
army.'  But  there  is  no  reason  so  to  restrict  the  sense :  pre- 
sumably the  GramanI  was  the  head  of  the  village  both  for  civil 
purposes  and  for  military  operations.  He  is  ranked  in  the 
^atapatha  Brahmana28  as  inferior  to  the  Suta,  or  *  charioteer,' 
with  whom,  however,  he  is  associated29  as  one  of  the  Ratnins, 
the  '  jewels  '  of  the  royal  establishment.  The  post  was  especially 
valuable  to  a  Vaisya,  who,  if  he  attained  it,  was  at  the  summit 
of  prosperity  (gatasrT).30  The  Gramani's  connexion  with  the 
royal  person  seems  to  point  to  his  having  been  a  nominee  of 
the  king  rather  than  a  popularly  elected  officer.  But  the  post 
may  have  been  sometimes  hereditary,  and  sometimes  nomi- 
nated or  elective :  there  is  no  decisive  evidence  available. 
The  use  of  the  singular  presents  difficulties :  possibly  the 
GramanI  of  the  village  or  city  where  the  royal  residence  was 
situated  was  specially  honoured  and  influential.31 


24  iv.  22,  2.      Cf.  n.  20. 
81  x.  62,  11 ;   107,  5. 

28  Av.  iii.  5,  7 ;  xix.  31,  12  ;  Taittiriya 
Samhita,  ii.  5,  4,  4 ;  MaitrayanI  Sam- 
hita, i.  6,  5  (grama- ijlthya,  '  the  rank  of 
GramanI' :  cf.  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  4, 
5,  2);  Kathaka  Samhita,  viii.  4;  x.  3; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xv.  15;  xxx.  20; 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  1,  4,  8  ;  7,  3,  4  ; 
ii.  7,  18,  4  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii.  4, 
1,  7;  v.  4,  4,  8;  viii.  6,  2,  1  (grama- 
mthya) ;  Bihadaranyaka  Upanisad,  iv.  3, 
37.  38,  etc. 

27  Altindisches  Lcbcn,  171. 
«  v.  4,  4,  18. 

29  ISatapatha  Brahmana,  v.  3,  1,  5. 

w  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  4,  4  ; 
MaitrayanI  Samhita,  i.  6,  5.  Cf.  Weber, 
Indische  Studicn,  10,  20,  n.  2. 


81  Presumably,  there  must  have  been 
many  Gramams  in  a  kingdom,  but  the 
texts  seem  to  contemplate  only  one  as 
in  the  royal  entourage.  Cf.  also  Eggel- 
ing,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  41,  60,  n.  ; 
Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  13,  96;  Rhys  Davids,  op.  cit., 
48,  thinks  that  he  was  elected  by  the 
village  council  or  a  hereditary  officer, 
because  the  appointment  is  only  claimed 
for  the  king  in  late  authorities  like 
Manu,  vii.  115.  But  there  is  not  even 
so  much  authority  for  election  or 
heredity,  and  we  really  cannot  say 
how  far  the  power  of  the  early  princes 
extended  :  it  probably  varied  very 
much.     Cf.  Eajan  and  Citraratha. 


248 


JUDGE— DISEASES— DICE— PRIEST     [  Gramyavadin 


Gramyavadin  apparently  means  a  'village  judge'  in  the 
Yajurveda.1  His  Sabha,  '  court,'  is  mentioned  in  the  MaitrayanI 
Samhita. 

1  Taittinya  Samhita,  ii.  3,  1,3;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xi.  4  ;  MaitrayanI  Samhita, 
ii.  2,  1. 

Graha,  ■  the  seizer,'  is  the  name  of  a  disease  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana.1  In  the  Atharvaveda2  it  perhaps  means  *  paralysis' 
of  the  thigh.3 


■ 


1  iii.  5,  3,  25  ;  6,  1,  25. 

2  xi.  9,  12. 

3  If  the  reading  of  the  commentary 
uru-grahaih  be  adopted  ;  but  Whitney, 
Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,   653, 


retaining  the  reading  of  the  text  uru- 
grahaih,  renders  the  compound  as  an 
adjective,  '  wide-gripping.'  Cf.  Bloom- 
field,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  635. 


Grahi,  'the  seizer,'  appears  in  the  Rigveda1  and  the  Athar- 
vaveda2 as  a  female  demon  of  disease.  Her  son  is  sleep 
(svapna)  .3 


1  1.  161, 1. 

2  ii.  9,  1  ;  10,  6.  8  ;  vi.  112,  1 ;  113,  1  ; 
viii.  2,  12;  3,  18;  xvi.  7,  1;  8,  1; 
xix.  45,  5. 


3  xvi.  5,  1 ;  or  perhaps  '  dream  '  is 
meant. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  13, 
154- 


Grisma.     See  Rtu. 

Graivya.  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  appears  to  denote  '  tumours  on 
the  neck '  (grivdfi), 

1  vi.  25,  2;   vii.  76,  2.      Cf.  Bloomfield,  Proceedings  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  October,  1887,  xix.  ;  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  472. 

Glaha  denotes  the  '  throw '  at  dice,  like  Grabha,  of  which  it 
is  a  later  form,  occurring  in  the  Atharvaveda.1 

1  iv.  28,  1  et  seq.     Cf.  Liiders,  Das  Wilrfelspiel  im  alten  Indien,  49. 

Glava  Maitreya  ('  descendant  of  Maitri ')  is  mentioned  in  the 
Chandogya  Upanisad,1  where  he  is  said   to   be  the   same  as  1 
Vaka  Dalbhya.     He  appears  as  Pratistotr  at  the  snake  festival 
of    the    Pancavimsa    Brahmana,2   and   is   referred    to   in   the 
Sadvimsa  Brahmana.3 


1  i.    12,    1.   3.     Cf.   Gopatha   Brah- 
mana, i.  1,  31. 

2  xxv.  15,  3. 


1.4. 


Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  35,  38. 


Ghrnlvant  ] 


BOILS— MILK-POT— FODDER 


249 


Glau  occurs  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  in  the  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana2 as  the  name  of  some  symptom  of  a  disease,  probably, 
as  Bloomfield3  thinks,  *  boils.'  In  the  one  passage  of  the 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,4  where  it  is  found  the  sense  is  obscure, 
some  part  of  the  sacrificial  victim  being  perhaps  meant.5 
Cf.  Galunta. 


1  vi.  83,  3. 

2  i.  25. 

3  Proceedings  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  October,  1887,  xv.  ;  Hymns  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  17,  503  ;  Whitney, 
Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  343. 


4  xxv.      8  ;      Maitrayaiii     Samhita, 

iii.  15,  7- 

5  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  ; 
Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda, 
3,  500,  takes  glau  as  '  owl.' 


GH. 

Gharma  denotes  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  the  pot  used  for 
heating  milk,  especially  for  the  offering  to  the  Asvins.  It  hence 
often3  denotes  the  hot  milk  itself,  or  some  other  hot  drink. 


iii.  53,  14;  v.  30,  15;  43,  7;  76,  1, 


etc. 


2  Av.  vii.  73,  6 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
viii.  61 ;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  18.  22, 
etc. 

3  Rv.  i.  119,  2;  180,  4;  vii.  70,  2  ;    i 


viii.  9,  4,  etc. ;  Av.  iv.  1,  2  ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxxviii.  6,  etc. 

Cf.  Nirukta,  vi.  32  ;  xi.  42  ;  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  271;  St.  Petersburg 
Dictionary,  s.v. 


Ghasa  means  *  fodder'  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  later.2  In 
the  Rigveda3  Ghasi  is  used  of  the  fodder  of  the  horse  victim 
at  the  Asvamedha. 


1  Av.  iv.  38,  7  ;  viii.  7,  8 ;  xi.  5,  18, 
etc. 

2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xi.  75 ;  xxi.  43  ; 


Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  5,  9,  3 ;  Tait- 
tirlya  Brahmana,  i.  6,  3,  10,  etc. 
3  i.  162,  14. 


Ghrnlvant  is  the  name  of  some  animal  in  the  list  of  victims 
at  the  Asvamedha,  or  horse  sacrifice,  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.1 
In  the  parallel  passage  of  the  MaitrayanI  Samhita2  Ghrnavant 
is  the  reading.     Elsewhere  the  word  is  adjectival.3 


xxiv.  39. 
iii.  14,  20. 


3  Rv.  x.  176,  3. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  99. 


250 


MELTED  BUTTER— TEACHERS 


[  Ghrta 


Ghrta,  the  modern  Ghee  or  'clarified  butter,'  is  repeatedly 
mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  both  as  in  ordinary  use 
and  as  a  customary  form  of  sacrifice.  According  to  a  citation 
in  Sayana's  commentary  on  the  Aitareya  Brahmana,3  the  dis- 
tinction between  Ghrta  and  Sarpis  consisted  in  the  latter  being 
butter  fully  melted,  while  the  former  was  butter  melted  and 
hardened  (gham-bhuta),  but  this  distinction  cannot  be  pressed. 
Because  the  butter  was  thrown  into  the  fire,  Agni  is  styled 
'butter-faced'  (ghrta-pratika),4  'butter-backed'  (ghrta-prstha) ,5 
and  '  propitiated  with  butter '  (ghrta-prasatta)  ,6  and  '  fond  of 
butter  '  (ghrta-pri7).  Water  was  used  to  purify  the  butter  :  the 
waters  were  therefore  called  '  butter-cleansing '  {ghrta-pu).8  In 
the  Aitareya  Brahmana9  it  is  said  that  Ajya,  Ghrta,  Ayuta,  and 
Navanlta  pertain  to  gods,  men,  Pitrs,  and  embryos  respectively. 


;  53, 


1  i.   134,  6;  ii.   10,  4;  iv.  io, 
5.  7.  9;  v.  12,  1,  etc. 

2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  ii.  22,  etc.  ; 
Av.  iii.  13,  5,  etc.  ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, i.  8,  1,  7  (with  Dadhi,  Mastu, 
Amiksa) ;  ix.  2,  1,  1  (Dadhi,  Madhu, 
Ghjrta),  etc. 

3  i.  3  (p.  240,  edition  Aufrecht). 


4  Rv.  i.   143,  7;  iii.  1,  18;  v.  11, 
x.  2i,  7,  etc. 

5  Rv.  i.  164,  1 ;  v.  4,  3  ;  37,  1  ;  vii. 
4,  etc. 

6  Rv.  v.  15,  1. 

7  Av.  xii.  i,  20  ;  xviii.  4,  41. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  22; 


Ghrta-kau£ika  is  mentioned  in  the  first  two  Vamsas  (lists  of 
teachers)  of  the  Madhyamdina  recension  of  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad1  as  a  pupil  of  ParaSaryayana. 

1  ii.  5,  21 ;  iv.  5,  27.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  4,  384. 


Ghora  Angirasa  is  the  name  of  a  mythical  teacher  in  the 
Kausitaki  Brahmana1  and  the  Chandogya  Upanisad,2  where  he 
is  teacher  of  the  strange  Krsna  Devaklputra.  That  the  name 
is  certainly  a  mere  figment  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  this 
'  dread  descendant  of  the  Ahgirases '  has  a  counterpart  in 
Bhisaj  Atharvana,3  'the  healing  descendant  of  the  Atharvans,' 
while  in  the  Rigveda  Sutras4  the  Atharvdno  vedah  is  connected 


1  xxx.    6.      Cf.    Asvalayana    Srauta 
Siitra,  xii.  10. 

2  iii.  17,  6. 

3  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  3,  459. 


4  ASvala^ana  Srauta  Sutra,  x.  7  ; 
Sahkhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  2  ; 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
17,  181. 


Caka  ] 


GHOSA— PRIEST 


251 


with  bhesajam  and  the  Afigiraso  vedah  with  ghoram.  He  is 
accordingly  a  personification  of  the  dark  side  of  the  practice 
of  the  Atharvaveda.5  He  is  also  mentioned  in  the  Asvamedha 
section  of  the  Kathaka  Samhita.6 


5  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, xx,  xxi,  xxxviii ;  Atharvaveda,  8, 
23  ;  Macdonell,  Sanskrit  Literature,  189, 


190;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,2, 
160,  n.  4. 


Ghosa.     See  Ghosa. 


Ghosavant.     See  Svara. 


Ghosa  is  mentioned  as  a  protegee  of  the  Asvins  in  two 
passages  of  the  Rigveda,1  probably  as  the  recipient  of  a  husband, 
who  is  perhaps  referred  to  in  another  passage2  as  Arjuna, 
though  this  is  not  likely.  Sayana  finds  a  reference  there  to 
a  skin  disease,  which  is  considered  in  the  later  tradition  of  the 
Brhaddevata3  to  have  been  the  cause  of  her  remaining  unwed, 
but  this  view  is  not  tenable.  According  to  Sayana,  her  son, 
Suhastya,  is  alluded  to  in  an  obscure  verse  of  the  Rigveda4; 
Oldenberg,5  however,  here  sees  a  reference  to  Ghosa  herself, 
while  Pischel6  thinks  that  the  form  (ghose)  is  not  a  noun  at  all, 
but  verbal. 


1  i.  117,  7;  x.  40,  5.     Cf.  x.  39,  3.  6. 

2  i.  122,  5.  See  Oldenberg,  Rgveda- 
Noten,  1,  123. 

3  vii.  41-48,  with  Macdonell's  notes. 

4  i.  120,  5. 

5  Op.  cit. ,119.  Suhastya  is  apparently 
invented  from  x.  41,  3,  probably  assisted 
by  the  fact  that  Vadhrimati  was  given 


a  son,  Hiranyahasta,  by  the  Asvins 
(Rv.  i.  117,  24). 

6  Vedische  Studien,  1,4;  2,  92. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  143  ;  fiber  Methode  bei  Inter- 
pretation des  Rigveda,  43 ;  Muir,  Sanskrit 
Texts,  5, 247 ;  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology, 
P.  52. 


c. 

Caka  is  mentioned  with  Pisahga  as  one  of  the  two  Unnetr 
priests  at  the  snake  festival  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.1 

1  xxv.   15,  3.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  35,  who  reads  Cakka ;  10,  142, 
n.  3,  144 


252  WHEEL— BRAHM ANY  DUCK  [  Cakra 

Cakra,  the  '  wheel '  of  a  chariot  or  wagon,  is  repeatedly 
mentioned  from  the  Rigveda1  onwards,  often  in  a  metaphorical 
sense.  The  wheel  was  fixed  on  the  axle  (Aksa)  when  the 
chariot  was  required  for  use  ;  this  required  considerable 
strength,  as  is  shown  by  a  reference  in  the  Rigveda.2  The 
wheel  consisted  normally  of  spokes  (Ara),  and  a  nave  (Nabhi),3 
in  the  opening  (Kha)  of  which  the  end  of  the  axle  (Ani)  was 
inserted.  An  indication  of  the  importance  attached  to  the 
strength  of  the  wheel  is  the  celebration  of  the  car  of  the  god 
Ptisan  as  having  a  wheel  that  suffers  no  damage.4  The  usual 
number  of  wheels  was  two,5  but  in  seven  passages  of  the  Rigveda6 
a  chariot  is  called  '  three-wheeled,'  in  a  few  others  '  seven- 
wheeled,'7  while  in  one  of  the  Atharvaveda8  it  is  styled  '  eight- 
wheeled.'  Zimmer9  argues  that  these  epithets  do  not  refer  to 
real  chariots,  pointing  out  that  in  all  the  passages  where 
tri-cakra,  l  three- wheeled,'  occurs  there  is  a  mythical  reference. 
On  the  other  hand,  Weber10  thinks  that  there  might  have  been 
chariots  with  three  wheels,  one  being  in  the  centre  between  the 
two  occupants.  This  is  not  very  conclusive ;  at  any  rate,  the 
seven-wheeled  and  the  eight-wheeled  chariots  can  hardly  be 
regarded  as  indicating  the  existence  of  real  vehicles  with  that 
number  of  wheels. 

In  the  Satapatha  Brahmana11  the  potter's  wheel  (kauldla- 
cakra)  is  referred  to. 

1  i.  130,  9;  155,  6;  164,  2.  11.  14;  I  by  the  Rbhus,  who  are  three  in 
J74>  5  ;  iv-  i>  3.  etc.  number). 

2  Av.  xi.  7,  4  ;  xix.  53,  1.  2,  etc.  7  Rv.  i.  164,  3.  12 ;  ii.  40,  3. 

3  Rv.  viii.  41,  6.  8  xi.  4,  22. 

4  Rv.  vi.  54,  3.  9  Altindisches  Leben,  viii.,  ix. 

6  Rv.  viii.  5,  29;  Chandogya  Upani-  '  10  Proceedings  of  the  Berlin  Academy, 
sad,  iv.  16,  5  ;  Kausitaki  Upanisad,  i.  4.       1898,  564,  quoting  Virchow,  Zeitschrift 

6  i.  118,  2;  157,  3;  183,  1;  viii.  58,  3;      fur  Ethnologie,  5,  200. 

x.   41,   1  ;    85,    14   (all   of  the  ASvins'  j       **  xi.  8,  1,  1. 
chariot);  iv.  36,  1  (of  a  chariot  made  Cf.  Zimmer,  op.  cit.,  247. 

Cakra-vaka  is  the  name,  apparently  derived  from  the  nature 
of  its  cry,  of  a  species  of  gander  (Anas  casarca),  the  modern 
Chakwa,  as  it  is  called  in  Hindi,  or  Brahmany  duck  in  English.1 
It  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda2  and  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the 

1  Griffith,  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  1,  309,  n.  4.  2  ii.  39,  3. 


Candala,  Candala  ]    EVIL  EYE— CANDALA  CASTE 


253 


Asvamedha,  or  horse  sacrifice,  in  the  Yajurveda,3  while  in  the 
Atharvaveda4  it  already  appears  as  the  type  of  conjugal  fidelity, 
its  characteristic  in  the  classical  literature. 


3  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  3.  13 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  22.  32 
xxv.  8. 


4  xiv.  2,  64. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  89. 


Caksus,  '  eye.'  The  '  evil  eye '  {ghorain  caksus)  was  well 
known  in  the  Atharvaveda,  which  contains  spells  to  counteract 
its  influence.1  As  remedies  against  it  are  mentioned  salve  from 
Mount  Trikakubh2  and  the  Jangfida  plant.3  In  the  wedding 
ceremony  the  wife  is  entreated  not  to  have  the  evil  eye  (aghora- 
caksus).4  The  structure  of  the  eye,  and  its  division  into  white 
(sukla),  dark  {krsna),  and  the  pupil  (kamnaka)  are  repeatedly 
referred  to  in  the  later  Brahmanas.5  The  disease  Alaji  appears 
to  have  been  an  affection  of  the  eyes. 


1  ii.  7  ;  xix.  45,  are  so  employed  in 
the  ritual. 

2  Av.  iv.  9,  6. 

3  Av.  xix.  35,  3. 

4  Paraskara  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  4 ;  Sankh- 
ayana  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  16. 

5  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xii.  8,  2, 
26  ;  Jaiminlya  Brahmana,  i.  254.  324  ; 
Jaiminlya  Upanisad  Brahmana,  i.  26, 1 ; 
34, 1 ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  2,  2 ; 
Aitareya  Aranyaka,  ii.   1,  5,  etc.     So 


the  man  {purusa)  in  the  eye  is  repeatedly 
mentioned  :  Chandogya  Upanisad,  i.  7, 
5;  iv.  15,  1;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad, 
ii-  3»  5;  iv.  2,  2;  v.  5,  2.  4,  etc.; 
Jaiminlya  Upanisad  Brahmana,  i.  27,  2, 
The  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  2,  3, 
adds  the  water  (apah)  in  the  eye,  the 
upper  and  the  lower  lids  (vartanl),  and 
seven  red  lines  (lohinyo  rajayah). 
Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  13,  149. 


Candala,1  Candala,2  are  the  variant  forms  of  the  name  of  a 
despised  caste,  which  in  origin  was  probably  a  tribal  body,3  but 
which  in  the  Brahminical  theory  was  the  offspring  of  Sudra 
fathers  and  Brahmin  mothers.4  The  references  to  the  caste  in 
the  Yajurveda  Samhitas  and  in  the  Upanisads  show  clearly 
that  it  was  a  degraded  one,  but  they  yield  no  particulars. 

1  Chandogya   Upanisad,   v.    10,    7 ;    I       3  Fick,    Die    sociale    Gliederung,    204 
24,  4  ;  Asvalayana  Grhya  Sutra,  iv.  9  ;       et  seq. 


Sankhayana  Grhya  Sutra,  ii.  12;  vi.  i, 
etc. 

2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  21 ;  Tait- 
tiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  17,  1  ;  Brhad- 
aranyaka Upanisad,  iv.  /,  22. 


4  Apparently  accepted  for  the  Vedic 
period  by  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben, 

-21J. 

Cf.  von  Schroeder,  Indiens  Liter atur 
und  Cultur,  433. 


Q  UA  DR  UPED— MOON— GOLD 


[  Catu§pad 


Catus-pad,  '  quadruped,'  is  a  regular  name  for  animals  from 
the  Rigveda1  onwards,  being  frequently  contrasted  with  Dvipad, 
1  biped.'2  Catus-pada,  as  an  adjective  applying  to  pasavah, 
*  animals,'  is  also  found.3 


1  Rv.  i.  49,  3 ;  94,  5 ;  119,  1  ;  iii.  62, 
14,  etc. ;  Av.  iv.  11,  5;  x.  8,  21  ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  viii.  30 ;  ix.  31 ;  xiv.  8. 
25,  etc. ;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vi.  2  ; 
viii.  20,  etc. 


2  Rv.  x.  117,  8 ;  Av.  vi.  107,  1,  etc. 

3  Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  18 ;  vi.  2 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii.  7,  3,  2  ;  vi.  8 
2,  17,  etc. 


i.  Candra,1  Candra-mas,2  are  the  names  of  the  '  moon,'  the 
latter  occurring  from  the  Rigveda  onwards,  but  the  former 
being  first  used  in  this  sense  by  the  Atharvaveda.  Very  little  is 
said  about  the  moon  in  Vedic  literature,  except  as  identified 
with  Soma,3  both  alike  being  described  as  waxing  and  waning. 
Reference  is,  however,  made  to  the  regular  changes  of  the 
moon,  and  to  its  alternation  with  the  sun,6  to  which  it,  as  Soma, 
is  declared  in  the  Rigveda  to  be  married.6  Mention  is  also 
made  of  its  disappearance  at  the  time  of  new  moon,7  and  of  its 
birth  from  the  light  of  the  sun.8  In  the  Atharvaveda9  reference 
is  made  to  demons  eclipsing  the  moon  (grahds  candramasah). 

For  the  phases  of  the  moon,  and  the  month  as  a  measure  of 
time,  see  Masa.    For  the  moon  and  its  mansions,  see  Naksatra. 


1  Av.  ii.  15,  2  ;  22,  1  ;  iii.  31,  6,  etc. ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxii.  28  ;  xxxix.  2  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  vi.  2,  2,  16,  etc. 

2  Rv.  i.  105,  1  ;  viii.  82,  8 ;  x.  64,  3  ; 
85,  19 ;  Av.  xi,  6,  7 ;  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 
hita, i.  28;  xxiii.  10.  59,  etc. 

3  See  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology, 
pp.  112,  113.  The  identification  is 
clearly  found  in  the  later  parts  of  the 
Rigveda. 

4  Rv.  x.  55,  5.     Cf.  Av.  x.  8,  32. 

5  Rv.  x.  68,  10.    Cf.  i.  62,  8;  72,  10. 

6  x.  85,  18.  19. 

7  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  6,  4,  18; 


iv.  6,  7,  12  ;  xi.  1,  6,  19 ;  xiv.  4,  2,  13  ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  28,  8  ;  perhaps 
Rv.  x.  138,  4. 

8  Rv.  ix.  71,  9;  76,  4;  86,  32; 
Samaveda,  ii.  9,  2,  12,  1  ;  Hillebrandt, 
Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  463  et  seq.  Cf. 
Surya. 

9  xix.  9,  10.  Av.  vi.  128  is  also 
regarded  by  the  KauSika  Sutra,  c.  3, 
as  referring  to  an  eclipse  of  the  moon. 
See  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 533. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  349, 
350,  352- 


2.  Candra  appears  to  denote  'gold'  in  a  certain  number  of 
passages  from  the  Rigveda  onwards.1 

1  Rv.  ii.  2,  4;  iii.  31,  5;  Av.  xii.  2,  Brahmana,    vi.    6;    Satapatha    Brah- 

53;    Jaittiriya    Samhita,    i.    2,    7,    1;  mana,     iii.     3,    3,    4,    etc.       Cf.     the 

Kathaka   Samhita,    ii.    6 ;    Vajasaneyi  adjective  candrin  in  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 

Samhita,  iv.  26;  xix.  93;    Pailcavimsa  |    hita,  xx.  37;  xxxi.  31. 


Camu  ]        SACRIFICIAL  AND  DRINKING  VESSELS 


255 


Capya  is  found  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita1  and  the  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana2  as  the  name  of  a  sacrificial  vessel. 

1  xix.  88  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,   iii.    I 
2,  9 ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxxviii.  3. 


xii.  7,  2,  13;  9,  1,  3. 


Camasa  denotes  a  'drinking  vessel,'  usually  as  employed  for 
holding  Soma  at  the  sacrifice.  It  is  frequently  mentioned  from 
the  Rigveda  onwards.1  It  was  made  of  wood  (vrksa),2  and  is 
hence  called  dru.3  According  to  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,4  it 
was  made  of  Udumbara  wood. 


1  Rv.  i.  20,  6;  no,  3;  viii.  82,  7; 
x.  16,  8;  68,  8;  96,  9,  etc.;  Av.  vii.  73, 
3;  xviii.  3,  54;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xxiii.  13,  etc.  ;  Nirukta,  xi.  2  ;  xii.  38. 

2  Rv.  x.  68,  8. 


3  Rv.  i.  161,  1. 

4  vii.  2,  11,  2. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  A  Itindisches  Leben,  280 ; 
Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  167, 
168. 


Camu  is  a  term  of  somewhat  doubtful  sense  occurring 
repeatedly  in  the  Rigveda,  and  connected  with  the  preparation 
of  Soma.  Zimmer1  considers  that  in  the  dual  it  denotes  the 
two  boards  between  which,  in  his  opinion,  the  Soma  was 
crushed  (cf.  Adhisavana).  Roth,2  however,  appears  to  be  right 
in  taking  the  normal  sense  to  designate  a  vessel  into  which  the 
Soma  was  poured  from  the  press,  and  Hillebrandt3  shows 
clearly  that  when  it  occurs  in  the  plural4  it  always  has  this 
sense,  corresponding  to  the  Graha-patras  of  the  later  ritual, 
and  that  sometimes  it  is  so  used  in  the  singular5  or  dual6  also. 
In  some  cases,7  however,  he  recognizes  its  use  as  denoting  the 
mortar  in  which  the  Soma  was  pressed  :  he  may  be  right  here, 
as  this  mode  of  preparation  was  probably  Indo-Iranian.8 

In  a  derivative  sense  Camu  appears  in  the  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana9 to  denote  a  trough,  either  of  solid  stone  or  consisting  of 


1  Altindisches  Leben,  277,  278. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s. v.  Cf. 
Grassmann,  Rigveda,  1,  15. 

3  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  164-175. 

4  Rv.  iii.  48,  5  ;  viii.  2,  8  ;  82,  7.  8  ; 
ix.  20,  6;  62,  16;  63,  2;  92,  2;  93,  3; 
97,  21.  37.  46;  99,  6.  8. 

5  Rv.  ix.  107,  18 ;  x.  91,  15. 

6  Rv.  ix.  69,  5 ;  71,  1  ;  72,  5 ;  86,  47 ; 
96,  20.  21  ;  97  2.  48  ;  103,  4  ;  107,  10  ; 
108,  i°- 


7  Singular:  Rv.  v.  51,  4;  viii.  4,  4; 
76,  10;  ix.  46,  3;  x.  24,  1.  Dual: 
i.  28,  9;  iv.  18,  3;  vi.  57,  2;  ix.  36,  1. 

8  Hillebrandt,  op.  cit.,  1,  158-164. 

9  xiii.  8,  2,  1  ;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books 
of  the  East,  44,  430,  n.  1.  In  Sankh- 
ayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xiv.  22,  19,  the 
sense  is  doubtful. 

Cf  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  pp. 
105  et  seq. 


256 


YAJURVEDA  SCHOOL— POT 


[  Caraka 


bricks,  used  by  the  Eastern  people  to  protect  the  body  of  the 
dead  from  contact  with  the  earth,  like  modern  stone-lined 
graves  or  vaults. 


Caraka  primarily  denotes  a  *  wandering  student,'  a  sense 
actually  found  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.1  More 
especially  it  denotes  the  members  of  a  school  of  the  Black 
Yajurveda,  the  practices  of  which  are  several  times  referred  to 
with  disapproval  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.2  In  the  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita3  the  Caraka  teacher  (Carakacarya)  is  enumerated 
among  the  sacrificial  victims  at  the  Purusamedha,  or  human 
sacrifice.  His  dedication  there  to  ill-doing  is  a  clear  hint  of  a 
ritual  feud. 


1  in.  3,  i. 

2  iii.  8,  2,  24  (where  the  reference  is 
to  Taittiriya  Samhita  vi.  3,  9,  6 ;  10,  2, 
or  some  parallel  passage) ;  iv.  1,  2,  19  ; 

2»   3.   I5 1    4<   *•    IO !    yi-    2»  2»   *•    IO  > 
viii.  1,  3,  7  ;  7,  1,  14.  24. 

3  xxx.  18;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4, 
16.  1.     Its  occurrence  in  the  latter  text 


renders  improbable  von  Schroeder's 
view,  Indiens  Liter atur  und  Caltur,  188, 
that  Caraka  included  all  the  Black 
Yajurveda  schools. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  2,  287, 
n.  2  ;  3,  256,  257,  454  ;  Indian  Literature, 
87;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  212. 


Caraka-brahmana  is  the  name  of  a  work  from  which  Sayana 
quotes  in  his  commentary  on  the  Rigveda.1 

1  viii.  66,  10;  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  41. 

Caracara  ('  running  about '),  a  term  found  classed  with 
Sarisrpa  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas,1  must  apparently  denote 
some  kind  of  animal. 

1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  i.  8,  13,  3  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xv.  3 ;  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  iii.  12,  10  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxii.  29. 


Caru  designates  a  '  kettle '  or  '  pot '  from  the  Rigveda 
onwards.1  It  had  a  lid  (apidhana)  and  hooks  (anka)  by  which 
it  could  be  hung  over  a  fire.2     It  was  made  of  iron  or  bronze3 

1  Rv.  i.  7,  6  ;  vii.  104,  2  ;  ix.  52,  3  ;  I    1,2;  Kathaka  Samhita,  v.  6 ;  xxxii.  6  ; 

x.  86,  18  ;  167,  4  ;  Av.  iv.  7,  4  ;  ix.  5,  6 ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  4,  4.  9,  etc. 

xi.  1,  16 ;  3,  18  ;  xviii.  4,  16  et  seq.,  etc.  2  Rv.  i.  162,  13 ;  Av.  xviii.  4,  53. 

It  is  called  panca-bila,  '  with  five  open-  3  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  3,  4,  5. 

ings,' in  the  Taittiriya   Samhita,  i.  6,  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  271. 


I 


Car?ani  ] 


HIDE— PEOPLE 


257 


(ayasmaya).     The  word  is  also  secondarily  used4  to  denote  the 
contents  of  the  pot,  the  mess  of  grain  which  was  cooked  in  it. 


4  Taittiriya    Samhita,    i.    8,    10,    1  ;    I   3,  1,  etc. 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.   1 ;    Satapatha      9,  216. 
Brahmana,  i.  7,  4,  7  ;  ii.  5,  3,  4  ;  iii.  2,    | 


Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studitn, 


Carman,  denoting  '  hide '  in  general,  is  a  common  expression 
from  the  Rigveda  onwards.1  The  oxhide  was  turned  to  many- 
uses,  such  as  the  manufacture  of  bowstrings,  slings,  and  reins 
(see  Go).  It  was  especially  often  employed  to  place  above  the 
boards  2  on  which  the  Soma  was  pressed  with  the  stones.3  It 
was  possibly  also  used  for  making  skin  bags.4  Carmanya 
denotes  leather-work  generally  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana.6 

The  art  of  tanning  hides  (mid)  was  known  as  early  as  the 
Rigveda,6  where  also  the  word  for  '  tanner '  (carmamna)  occurs.7 
Details  of  the  process  are  lacking,  but  the  Satapatha  Brahmana8 
refers  to  stretching  out  a  hide  with  pegs  (sankubhih) ,  and  the 
Rigveda9  mentions  the  wetting  of  the  hide. 


1  Rv.  i.  85,  5;  no,  8;  161,  7; 
iii.  60,  2 ;  iv.  13,  4,  etc. ;  Av.  v.  8,  13 ; 
x.  9,  2 ;  xi.  1,  9,  etc. ;  Taittinya  Sam- 
hita, iii.  1,  7,  1 ;  vi.  1,  9,  2,  etc.  The 
stem  carma,  neuter  (loc,  carme),  is  found 
in  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  ii.  7,  2,  2. 

2  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  i, 
148-150;  181-183. 

3  Rv.  x.  94,  9 ;  116,  4. 

4  Rv.  x.  106,  10,  is  so  taken  by 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  228,  who 
compares  Odyssey,  x.  19. 


5  v.  32.  Cf.  paricarmanya,  Sankha- 
yana  Aranyaka,  ii.  1. 

6  viii.  55,  3  (a  late  hymn). 

7  viii.  5,  38 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xxx.  15 ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4, 
13,  1.  For  the  form,  cf.  Macdonell, 
Vedic  Grammar,  p.  38,  n.  1  ;  p.  249, 
n.  4. 

8  ii.  1,  I,  9. 

9  i-  85.  5- 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  228, 

253- 


Car§ani,  used  in  the  plural,  denotes  in  the  Rigveda1  '  men ' 
in  general  or  *  people,'  conceived  either  as  active  beings2  or  as 
cultivators3  in  opposition  to  nomads.  The  expression  'king  of 
men  '  (raja  carsanlnam)  is  frequently  found.4     The  '  people  '  are 


1  Rv.  i.  86,  5  ;  184,  4  ;  iii.  43,  2  ; 
iv.  7,  4;  v.  23,  1  ;  vi.  2,  2 ;  x.  180,  3, 
etc. 

2  If  derived  from  car,  '  move,'  which 
is  probable. 

VOL.  I. 


8  If  derived  from  krs,  '  plough  '  or 
■  till.' 

4  Rv.  iii.  10,  1  ;  v.  39,  4 ;  vi.  30,  5  ; 
viii.  70,  1  ;  x.  139,  1,  etc. 


17 


258  TOP  OF  SACRIFICIAL  POST— NAMES  [  Ca§ala 

also  mentioned  in  connexion  with  war.6     In  the  Atharvaveda6 
'  animals  '  (pasu)  and  *  men  '  (carsani)  are  spoken  of  together. 
For  the  five  carsanayah,7  see  Panca  Janasah. 


6  Rv.  i.  55,  i ;   109,  6 ;   iv.  31,  4  ; 
37,  8 ;  vi.  31,  1,  etc. 

6  xiii.  1,  38. 

7  Rv.  v.  86,  2 ;  vii.  15,  2  ;  ix.  ioi,  9. 


For  the  derivation,  see  Macdonell, 
Vedic  Grammar,  185,  and  especially  122, 
ia  (from  car,  *  move ') ;  Monier  Williams, 
Dictionary,  s.v.  (from  hrs,  '  plough  '). 


Casala,  the  mortar-shaped  top-piece  of  the  sacrificial  post 
(Yupa),  is  mentioned  from  the  Rigveda  onwards.1  In  one 
passage  of  the  Satapatha  Brahmana2  it  is  directed  to  be  made 
of  wheaten  dough  (gaudhuma). 


1  Rv.  i.  162,  6 ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi. 
3,  4,  2.  7  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxvi.  4, 
etc.  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  11,  8,  etc. 


2  v.  2,  1,  6. 

Cf.  Eggeling,  Sacred  Boohs  of  the  East, 
26,  168,  n.  1 ;  41,  31,  n.  1. 


Cakra  is  the  name  of  a  man,  variously  styled  Revottaras 
Sthapati  Patava  Cakra1  and  Revottaras  Patava  Cakra  Sthapati,2 
who  is  mentioned  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  only.  He  is 
there  said  to  have  been  expelled  by  the  Srnjayas,  but  to  have 
restored  to  them  their  prince  Dustaritu  despite  the  opposition 
of  the  Kauravya  king  Balhika  Pratipiya.2  He  must  have  been 
a  sage  rather  than  a  warrior,  as  the  first  passage  of  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana1  shows  him  in  the  capacity  of  a  teacher  only.  Cf. 
Sthapati. 


1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xii.  8,  1,  17. 

2  Ibid. ,  xii.  9,  3,  1  et  seq. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,   1,  205- 


207  ;  10,  85,  n.  i  ;  Indian  Literature,  123  ; 
Eggeling,  Sacred  Boohs  of  the  East,  44, 269 
et  seq.,  whose  version  is  followed  above. 


Cakraya$a,  *  descendant  of  Cakra,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
Usasta  or  Usasti.1 

1  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  iii.  5,  1 ;  Chandogya  Upanisad,  i.  10,  1 ;  11,  1. 

Candala.     See  Candala. 

Caksusa,  a  word  occurring  once  only  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  is, 
according  to  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  a  patronymic  (of 
Suyaman,  a  personification).  Whitney2  treats  it  as  probably 
a  simple  adjective  ('  of  sight '). 

1  xvi.  7,  7.  2  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  800. 


Caturmasya  ] 


SEASONAL  SACRIFICES 


259 


Catur-masya,  'four-monthly,'  denotes  the  festival  of  the 
Vedic  ritual  held  at  the  beginning  of  the  three  seasons  of  four 
months  each,  into  which  the  Vedic  year  was  artificially  divided.1 
It  is  clear  that  the  sacrifices  commenced  with  the  beginning 
of  each  season,2  and  it  is  certain  that  the  first  of  them,  the 
Vaisvadeva,  coincided  with  the  Phalguni  full  moon,3  the  second, 
the  Varuna-praghasas,  with  the  Asadhi  full  moon,4  and  the 
third,  the  Saka-medha,  with  the  Karttiki  full  moon.6  There 
were,  however,  two  alternative  datings :  the  festivals  could  also 
be  held  in  the  Caitri,  the  Sravani,  and  Agrahayani  (Margasirsi) 
full  moons,6  or  in  the  Vaisakhi,  BhadrapadI,  and  Pausi  full 
moons.7  Neither  of  the  later  datings  is  found  in  a  Brahmana 
text,  but  each  may  well  have  been  known  early,  since  the 
Taittiriya  Samhita8  and  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana9  both 
recognize  the  full  moon  in  the  month  Caitra  as  an  alternative 
to  the  full  moon  in  the  month  Phalguna,  for  the  beginning  of 
the  year. 

Jacobi  considers  that  the  commencement  of  the  year  with  the 
full  moon  in  the  asterism  Phalguni,  which  is  supported  by  other 
evidence,10indicates  that  the  year  at  one  time  began  with  the  winter 
solstice  with  the  moon  in  Phalguni,  corresponding  to  the  summer 
solstice  when  the  sun  was  in  Phalguni.  These  astronomical 
conditions,  he  believes,  existed  in  the  time  of  the  Rigveda,11 
and  prevailed  in  the  fourth  millennium  B.C.     The  alternative 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  i.  6,  io,  t,  ; 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  4,9,5;  ii.  2, 
2,2;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  6,  3,  36  ; 
ii.  5,  2,  48;  6,  4,  1  ;  v.  2,  3,  10;  xiii.  2, 
5,  2 ;  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  v.  1,  etc. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  6,  3,  36 
(cf.  xiv.  1,  1,  28) ;  Kausitaki  Brahmana, 
v.  1. 

3  In  the  month  Phalguna,  or  Feb- 
ruary-March. 

4  In  the  month  Asadha,  or  June- 
July. 

5  That  is,  in  the  month  Karttika, 
when  the  moon  is  in  the  asterism 
Krttika  :  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  6,  3, 
13  ;  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  v.  1,  etc. 

6  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  hi.  13,  1 ; 
14,   1.  2;   15,  1.    These  are  the  full- 


moon  days  in  the  months  Caitra 
(March-April),  Sravana  (July-August), 
and  Margasirsa  (November-December) 
respectively. 

7  Deva's  Paddhati  on  Katyayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  pp.  430,  450,  497.  These 
are  the  full-moon  days  in  the  months 
Vaisakha  (April  -  May),  Bhadrapada 
(August- September),  and  Pausa  (De- 
cember-January) respectively. 

8  vii.  4,  8,  1.  2. 

9  v.  9,  8.  11. 

10  Indian  Antiquary,  23,  156  et  seq.  ; 
Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen 
Gesellschaft,  49,  223  et  seq.  ;  50,  72-81. 

11  vii.  103,  9  ;  x.  85,  13.  Cf.  Festgruss 
an  Rudolf  von  Roth,  68  et  seq. 

17 — 2 


26o  BEGINNING  OF  THE  YEAR— NAMES    [  Candhanayai 

dates  would  then  indicate  periods  when  the  winter  solstice 
coincided  with  the  Caitri  or  the  Vaisakhl  full  moon.  But 
Oldenberg12  and  Thibaut13  seem  clearly  right  in  holding  that 
the  coincidence  of  Phalguni  with  the  beginning  of  spring,14 
which  is  certain,  is  fatal  to  this  view,  and  that  there  is  no 
difficulty  in  regarding  this  date  as  consistent  with  the  date  of 
the  winter  solstice  in  the  new  moon  of  Magna,  which  is  given 
by  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana,15  and  which  forms  the  basis  of 
the  calculations  of  the  Jyotisa.16  The  full  moon  in  Phalguna 
would  be  placed  about  one  month  and  a  half  after  the  winter 
solstice,  or,  say,  in  the  first  week  of  February,  which  date, 
according  to  Thibaut,  may  reasonably  be  deemed  to  mark  the 
beginning  of  a  new  season  in  India  about  800  B.C.  At  the 
same  time  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  date  was  necessarily 
artificial,  inasmuch  as  the  year  was  divided  into  three  seasons, 
each  of  four  months,  and  the  Indian  year  does  not  in  fact 
consist  of  three  equal  seasons.  The  variations  of  the  other 
datings  would  then  not  be  unnatural  if  any  school  wished  to 
defer  its  spring  festival,  the  Vaisvadeva,  to  the  time  when 
spring  had  really  manifested  itself.     See  also  Samvatsara. 


12  Zeitschrift    der    Deutschen    Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  48,  630  et  seq.  ; 

49.  475-  476;  50.  453-457- 

18  Indian  Antiquary,  24,  86  et  seq. 
14  See  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  i,  2, 
6.  8;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  4,  1, 
2-4.      So   the  Phalguni   full   moon  is 


ii.  1,  3,  1;  vii.  2,  4,  26;  xi.  2,  7,  32; 
xii.  8,  2,  34;  xiii.  5,  4,  28;  Taittiriya 
Samhita,  ii.  i,  2,  5;  Kathaka  Samhita, 
xiii.  1.  7,  etc.     See  Weber,  Naxatra, 

2,  352. 

15  xix.  3. 

16  Thibaut,  Astronomie,  Astrologie,  und 


called    'the    mouth    of    the    seasons         Mathematik,  17,  ii 


(rtunam  mukham)  —  e.g.,  Paficavimsa 
Brahmana,  xxi.  15,  2;  Kathaka  Sam- 
hita, viii.  1  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  6, 
9 ;  and  the  first  season  is  always  spring : 
Satapatha  Brahmana,   i.   5,    3,   8-14 ; 


Cf.  Weber,  Naxatra,  2,  329  et  seq.  ; 
Whitney ,  Journal  of  the  A  merican  Oriental 
Society,  16,  lxxxvi.,  lxxxvii.  ;  Keith, 
Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1909, 
1101-1104. 


Candhanayana  is  the  patronymic  of  Anandaja  in  the  Vamsa 
Brahmana.1 

1  Indische  Studien,  4,  372,  383. 


Cayamana  is  the  patronymic  in  the  Rigveda  (vi.  27,  5.  8)  of 
Abhyavartin. 


Citraratha  ] 


BIRDS— NAMES 


261 


Casa,  the  *  blue  woodpecker '  (Coracias  indica),  is  mentioned 
in  the  Rigveda,1  as  well  as  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the  Asva- 
medha,  or  horse  sacrifice,  in  the  Yajurveda.2 

1  x.  97,  13. 

2  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  4;  15,  9 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  23;  xxv.  7. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  92. 


Ciceika  is  a  bird  mentioned  with  the  equally  unknown 
Vpsarava  in  one  hymn  of  the  Rigveda.1  It  may  perhaps  be 
compared  with  the  Citaka  mentioned  by  Darila  in  his  commen- 
tary on  the  Kausika  Sutra.2 


1  X.   I46,   2. 

2  xxvi.  20;  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  266. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  90 
Griffith,  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  2,  589. 


Citra  is  the  name  of  several  persons,  (a)  The  Rigveda1  con- 
tains a  Danastuti  ('  Praise  of  Gifts ')  of  a  prince  Citra.  The 
later  legend2  attributes  this  panegyric  to  Sobhari,  and  describes 
Citra  as  king  of  the  rats. 

1  viii.  21,  18. 

2  Brhaddevata,  vii.  58  et  seq,,  with  Macdonell's  notes. 

(b)  Citra  Gangyayani  or  Gargyayani  is  mentioned  in  the 
Kausitaki  Upanisad1  as  a  contemporary  of  Aruni  and  Svetaketu. 

1  i.    1.     Cf.   Weber,   Indische   Studien,    1,   395;    Keith,  Sahkhayana  Aranyaka, 
16,  n.  1. 


(c)  Citra  Gausrayani  is  mentioned  as  a  teacher  in  the  Kausi- 
taki Brahmana.1 

1  xxiii.  5.     Cf.  Weber,  loc.  cii. 


Citra-ratha  ('having  a  brilliant  car')  is  the  name  of  two 
persons. 

(a)  It  designates  an  Aryan  prince,  who,  with  Arna,  was 
defeated  by  Indra  for  the  Turvasa-Yadus  on  the  Sarayu  (per- 
haps the  modern  Sarju  in  Oudh),  according  to  the  Rigveda  (iv. 
30,  18).  The  locality  would  accord  with  the  close  connexion 
of  Turvasa  and  Krivi  or  Paneala. 


262  NAMES— MEDICINAL  WOOD  [  Citra 

(b)  Citraratha  is  also  the  name  of  a  king  for  whom  the 
Kapeyas  performed  a  special  kind  of  sacrifice  (dvirdtra) ,  with 
the  result,  according  to  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,1  that  in  the 
Caitrarathi  family  only  one  member  was  a  Ksatra-pati,  the  rest 
dependents.  Apparently  this  must  mean  that  the  Caitrarathis 
were  distinguished  from  other  families  of  princes  by  the  fact 
that  the  chief  of  the  clan  received  a  markedly  higher  position 
than  in  most  cases,  in  which  probably  the  heads  of  the  family 
were  rather  an  oligarchy  than  a  monarch  and  his  dependents. 
See  Raj  an. 

1  xx.  12,  5.   Cf.  Hopkins,  Transactions   I  Sciences,    15,    52,    53 ;    Weber,  Indische 
of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and  I  Studien,  1,  32;  Indian  Literature ,  68,  n. 

Citra.     See  Naksatra. 

Cilvati  is  the  name  of  an  unknown  animal  in  the  Gopatha 
Brahmana  (i.  2,  7). 

Cipudru  designates  some  substance  mentioned  in  a  hymn  of 
the  Atharvaveda1  as  of  use  in  healing.  The  commentator 
Sayana  reads  Cipadru,  and  explains  the  word  as  a  kind  of  tree. 
This  interpretation  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  the  Kausika 
Sutra2  refers  to  the  employment  of  splinters  of  Palasa  wood  in 
the  ritual  application  of  this  hymn.3  Whitney4  suggests  that 
the  form  of  the  word  should  be  Cipudu. 

Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 350-352;  Atharvaveda,  62; 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  386.  The 
text  of  Roth  and  Whitney  reads  by 
error  Slpudru. 

Cumuri  is  the  name  of  an  enemy  of  Dabhiti,  for  whom  he, 
along  with  his  friend  Dhuni,  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1  as 
having  been  defeated  by  Indra.  Elsewhere2  the  two  are  spoken 
of,  along  with  Sambara,  Pipru,  and  Susna,  as  having  been 
crushed  by  Indra,  who  destroyed  their  castles.  It  is  impossible 
to  say  whether  real  men  or  demons  are  meant,  but  in  favour  of 

1  vi.  20,  13 ;  x.  113,  9.  In  vi.  26,  6, 
Cumuri  alone  is  mentioned,  and  Dasas 
or  Dasyus  generally  are  stated  to  have 


1 

vi.  127,  2. 

2 

xx  vi.  34. 

3 

Av.  vi.  127^ 

4 

Translation 

of 

the 

Atharvaveda, 

376 

been  subdued  for  Dabhiti  in  iv.  30,  21 ; 
ii.  13,  9.     See  also  ii.  15,  9 ;  vii.  19,  4. 
2  Rv.  vi.  18,  8. 


Caikitaneya  ]  NAMES— THE  CEDI  PEOPLE  263 

a  man  being  denoted  by  Cumuri  is  the  form  of  the  name,  which 
seems  not  to  be  Aryan.3 


3  Wackernagel,  A  Itindische  Grammatik, 
1,  xxii. 
Cf.  Hillebrandt,   Vedische  Mythologie, 


3,    275  ;    Macdonell,    Vedic   Mythology, 
p.  162. 


Cuda  Bhagavitti  ('  descendant  of  Bhagavitta')  is  mentioned  in 
the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad1  as  a  pupil  of  Madhuka  Paingya. 

1  vi.  3,  9  (Kanva  =  vi.  3,  17.   18  Madhyamdina).     The  text  of  the  Kanva  has, 
as  usual,  Cula. 

Curna  appears  to  denote  an  aromatic  powder  in  the  phrase 
curna-hasta,  used  of  the  Apsarases  in  the  Kausltaki  Upanisad  (i.  4). 

Cedi  is  the  name  of  a  people  who,  with  their  king  Ka§u,  the 
Caidya,  are  mentioned  only  in  a  Danastuti  ('  Praise  of  Gifts'), 
occurring  at  the  end  of  one  hymn  of  the  Rigveda,1  where  their 
generosity  is  celebrated  as  unsurpassed.  They  occur  later  in 
the  Epic  with  the  Matsyas,  and  lived  in  Bandela  Khanda 
(Bundelkhand).2  In  Vedic  times  they  were  probably  situated 
in  much  the  same  locality. 

129 ;    Pargiter,    Journal    of   the    Royal 
Asiatic  Society,  1908,  332;    Oldenberg, 


1  vm.  5,  37-39. 

2  Lassen,  Indische  Alterthumskunde,  i2, 


688,  n.  3 ;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,       Buddha,  402. 

Celaka Sandilyayana  ('descendant  of  Sandilya ')  is  mentioned 
as  a  teacher  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (x.  4,  5,  3). 

Caikitaneya  ('descendant  of  Cekitana')  is  mentioned  as  a 
teacher  in  the  Jaiminlya  Upanisad  Brahmana.1  The  Caikita- 
neyas  are  also  referred  to  there2  in  connexion  with  the  Saman 
which  they  worshipped.  Brahmadatta  Caikitaneya  is  brought 
into  connexion  with  the  Saman  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,3 
and  Vasistha  Caikitaneya  is  known  to  the  Sadvimsa4  and 
Vamsa  Brahmanas.5     The  word  is  a  patronymic,  formed  from 


i-  37.  7;  n.  5.  2. 

i.  42,  1. 

i.  3.  24. 


5  Indische  Studien,  4,  373,  384. 


264  NAMES— THIEF  [  Caikitayana 

Caikitana,   according  to    Sankara,6   but   more   probably   from 
Cekitana,7  a  name  found  in  the  Epic. 

6  On    Brhadaranyaka    Upanisad,    I       7  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 
loc.  cit. 

Caikitayana,  'descendant  of  Cikitayana1  or  Cekita,'2  is  the 
patronymic  of  Dalbhya  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad.3 

1  Sankara  on  Chandogya  Upanisad,    I       2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 
i.  8,  1.  3  i.  8,  1. 

Caitra  is  the  patronymic  of  Yajiiasena  in  the  Kathaka 
Samhita  (xxi.  4). 

Caitra-rathi.     See  Citraratha  and  Satyadhivaka. 

Caitriyayana  is  the  patronymic  or  metronymic  of  the  teacher 
Yajiiasena  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita  (v.  3,  8,  1). 

Caidya.     See  Cedi. 

Cailaki,  '  descendant  of  Celaka,'  is  the  patronymic  of  Jlvala 
in  the  ^atapatha  Brahmana  (ii.  3,  1,  34). 

Cora,  'thief,'  is  only  found  in  the  Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  a  late 
work,  in  its  last  book  (x.  65).  The  Vedic  terms  are  Taskara 
Tayu,  Stena,  and  Paripanthin. 

Cyavatana  Marutasva  ('  descendant  of  Marutasva  ')  is 
apparently  the  name  of  a  prince  in  a  Danastuti  ('  Praise  of 
Gifts  '),  in  the  Rigveda.1  Two  distinct  persons  may,  however, 
be  meant. 

1  v-  33»  9-     Cf-  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3.  155. 

Cyavana,1  Cyavana,2  are  variant  forms  of  the  name  of  an 
ancient  Rsi,  or  seer.  The  Rigveda3  represents  him  as  an  old 
decrepit  man,  to  whom  the  Asvins  restored  youth  and  strength, 
making  him  acceptable  to  his  wife,  and  a  husband  of  maidens. 


1  This  form  is  found  even  in  the 
Nirukta  (iv.  19),  regularly  in  all 
the  Vedic  texts  other  than  the  Rigveda, 
and  in  the  Epic. 


2  The   Rv.   has  this  form  through- 
out. 

3  i.  116,  10  ;  117,  13  ;  118,  6 ;  v.  74,  5 ; 
vii.  68,  6;  71,  5 ;  x.  39,  4. 


Chadis  ] 


AN  ANCIENT  SEER— GOAT 


265 


The  legend  is  given  in  another  form  in  the  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana,4  where  Cyavana  is  described  as  wedding  Sukanya, 
the  daughter  of  Saryata.  He  is  there  called  a  Bhrgu  or 
Ahgirasa,  and  is  represented  as  having  been  rejuvenated  by 
immersion  in  a  pond — the  first  occurrence  of  a  motive,  later 
very  common  in  Oriental  literature.  Another  legend  about 
Cyavana  is  apparently  alluded  to  in  an  obscure  hymn  of  the 
Rigveda,5  where  he  seems  to  be  opposed  to  the  Paktha  prince 
Turvayana,  an  Indra  worshipper,  while  Cyavana  seems  to 
have  been  specially  connected  with  the  Asvins.  This  explana- 
tion of  the  hymn,  suggested  by  Pischel,6  is  corroborated  by  the 
Jaiminiya  Brahmana,7  which  relates  that  Vidanvant,  another 
son  of  Bhrgu,  supported  Cyavana  against  Indra,  who  was 
angry  with  him  for  sacrificing  to  the  Asvins ;  it  is  also  note- 
worthy that  the  AsVins  appear  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana8  as 
obtaining  a  share  in  the  sacrifice  on  the  suggestion  of  Sukanya. 
But  a  reconciliation  of  Indra  and  Cyavana  must  have  taken 
place,  because  the  Aitareya  Brahmana9  relates  the  inauguration 
of  Saryata  by  Cyavana  with  the  great  Indra  consecration 
(aindrena  mahabhisekena).  In  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana10 
Cyavana  is  mentioned  as  a  seer  of  Samans  or  Chants. 

xix.  3,  6;   xiv.  6,   10; 


4  iv.  1,  5,  1  et  seq. 
6  x.  61,  1-3. 

6  Vedische  Studien,  1,  71-77 ;  accepted 
by  Griffith,   Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  2, 

465- 

7  iii.  121-128  ;  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  11,  cxlvi ;  26,  43  et  seq. 

8  iv.  1,  5,  13  et  seq. 

9  viii.  21,  4;  Pischel,  op.  cit.,  1,  75. 


±v  xni.  5,   12 
xi.  8,  11. 

Cf.  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  5,  243, 
250-254 ;  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the 
Rigveda,  3,  156 ;  Macdonell,  Vedic 
Mythology,  pp.  51,  52;  Hopkins,  Journal 
of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  26,  43 
et  seq. ;  Transactions  of  the  Connecticut 
Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15,  56,  57. 


CH. 

Chaga  is  the  name  of  the  *  goat '  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita 
(v.  6,  22,  1).     Cf.  Aja  and  Chaga. 


Chadis  is  used  once  in  the  Rigveda,1  and  not  rarely  later,2  to 
denote  the  covering  of  a  wagon  or  the  thatch  of  a  house,  or 


1  x.  85,  10  (of  Surya's  bridal  car). 

2  Taittiriya    Samhita,    vi.    2,    9,    4 
io»  5-  7 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  v.  28 


Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  29;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  iii.  5,  3,  9,  etc. 


266 


CONSTELLATION— VEDIC  HYMN 


[  Chandas 


something  analogous  to  these.  Weber3  thinks  that  in  one 
passage  of  the  Atharvaveda4  the  word  designates  a  constella- 
tion, and  Whitney,6  who  does  not  decide  whether  that  interpre- 
tation is  necessary,  suggests  that  the  constellation  7,  £,  77,  tt 
Aquarii  may  be  meant,  since  the  next  verse  mentions  Vicrtau, 
which  is  the  constellation  \  and  v  Scorpionis,  and  is  not  far 
from  Aquarius.     See  also  Chardis. 


3  Indische  Studien,  17,  208. 

4  iii.  7.  3- 

5  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  95. 


Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, 336. 


i.  Chandas  in  the  Rigveda  usually  denotes  a  '  song  of 
praise  '  or  '  hymn.' l  The  original  sense  of  the  word,  as  derived 
from  the  verb  chand,  'to  please,'  was  probably  'attractive 
spell,'  'magic  hymn,'2  which  prevailed  on  the  gods.  In  a  very 
late  hymn  of  the  Rigveda,3  as  well  as  in  one  of  the  Atharvaveda,4 
the  word  is  mentioned  in  the  plural  (chandamsi),  beside  Be 
(rcah),  Saman  (samani),  and  Yajus,  and  seems  to  retain  its 
original  meaning,  not  improbably  with  reference  to  the  magical 
subject-matter  of  the  Atharvaveda.  From  denoting  a  (metrical) 
hymn  it  comes  to  mean  'metre'  in  a  very  late  verse  of  the 
Rigveda,5  in  which  the  '  Gayatri,  the  Tristubh,  and  all  (sarva) 
the  metres  (chandamsi)  are  mentioned.  In  the  later  Samhitas 
three6  or  seven7  metres  are  enumerated,  and  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana8  eight.  By  the  time  of  the  Rigveda  Pratisakhya(J 
the  metres  were  subjected  to  a  detailed  examination,  though 
much  earlier  references  are  found  to  the  number  of  syllables  in 
the  several  metres.10  Later  the  word  definitely  denotes  a  Vedic 
text  generally,  as  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.11 


1  Rv.  x.  85,  8  (an  obscure  verse) ; 
114,  5;  Av.  iv.  34,  i;  v.  26,  5; 
vi.  124,  1 ;  xi.  7,  8,  etc. 

2  Cf.  Roth  in  St.  Petersburg  Dic- 
tionary, 8.V. 

3  Rv.  x.  90,  9. 

4  Av.  xi.  7,  24. 
6  x.  14,  16. 

6  Av.  xviii.  1,  17;  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 
hita, i.  27,  etc. 


7  Av.  viii.  9,  17.  19,  etc. 

8  viii.  3,  3,  6,  etc. 

9  xvi.  1  et  seq.  Cf.  Max  Muller, 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32,  xcv.  et 
seq. 

10  Kathaka  Samhita,  xiv.  4  ;  Jaitti- 
rlya  Samhita,  vi.  1,  2,  7. 

11  xi.  5,  7,  3.  So  Gobhila  Grhya 
Sutra,  iii.  3,  4.  15,  etc. 


Chaga  ] 


ROOF— CHANTER-DWELLING— GOAT 


267 


2.  Chandas  occurs  in  one  passage  of  the  Atharvaveda1  in  the 
adjectival  compound  brhac-chandas,  which  is  used  of  a  house, 
and  must  mean  'having  a  large  roof.'  Bloomfield2  accepts  the 
reading  as  correct,  but  Whitney3  considers  emendation  to 
Chadis  necessary. 


1  iii.  12,  3. 

2  Hymns    of    the    Atharvaveda, 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  150. 


345 


3  Translation 
105. 


of  the   Atharvaveda, 


Chando-ga,  ■  metre-singing,'  is  the  term  applied  to  reciters  of 
the  Samans,  no  doubt  because  these  chants  were  sung  according 
to  their  order  in  the  Chandaarcika  of  the  Samaveda.  It  is 
only  found  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,1  and  often  in  the 
Sutras.2 


1  X.  5,  2,   IO. 

2  Baudhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  ii.  2  ; 
xxii.  4 ;  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
x.  8,  33 ;  xiii.  1,  etc. 


Cf.   Oldenberg,   Gottingische    Gelehrte 
Anzeigen,  1908,  720. 


Chardis  occurs  often  in  the  Rigveda,1  and  occasionally  later,2 
denoting  a  secure  dwelling-place.  The  word  appears  to  be 
incorrectly  written,  because  the  metre  shows  that  the  first 
syllable  is  always  short.  Roth3  accordingly  suggested  that 
Chadis  should  be  read  instead.  But  Chadis  means  '  roof,'  while 
Chardis  never  has  that  sense.  Bartholomae4  is  therefore  prob- 
ably right  in  suggesting  some  other  form,  such  as  Chadis. 


1  i.  48,  15;  114,  5;  vi.  15,  3;  46,  9. 
12,  etc. 

2  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  2,  9,  2 ; 
3,6,  1  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xiii.  19 ; 
xiv.  12. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  \ 
Oldenberg,  Prolegomena,  477. 


4  Studien,  1,  47;  2,  58.  Cf.  Wacker- 
nagel,  Altindische  Grammatik,  1,  xii. 
n.  2 ;  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der  Deu- 
tschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  55, 
312. 


Chaga,  '  goat,'  is  found  in  the  Rigveda,1  and  not  rarely  later.2 
See  Aja  and  Chaga. 


1  i-  162,  3. 

2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xix.89;  xxi.  40. 


41 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii.  3,  3,  4 ; 
v.  1, 3, 14 ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  11, 2. 


268  DOMESTIC  ANIMALS— HEALING  PLANT— BAT     [  Jagat 


J. 

Jagat,  '  moving,'  is  applied  sometimes  in  the  Atharvaveda, 
and  later  to  the  domestic  animals  in  particular,  as  opposed  to 
wild  animals  (svapad)}  Occasionally  the  cow  is  mentioned 
separately,  when  the  word  jagat  covers  the  rest  of  the  domesti- 
cated animals.2 


1  Av.  viii.  5,  ii,  etc. 

2  Av.  i.  31,  4;  x.  1,  29;  xix.  47,  10; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  iii.  59.  In  the 
Rv.  the  sense  of  animal  in  general  is 


usually    sufficient ;    but    cf.   jagafi    in 
i.  157.  5;  vi.  72,  4. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  150,  n. 


Jarigida  is  the  name  of  a  healing  plant  mentioned  in  the 
hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda.1  It  was  used  as  an  amulet  against 
the  diseases,  or  symptoms  of  disease,  Takman,  Balasa, 
ASarika,  ViSarlka,  Prstyamaya,2  fevers  and  rheumatic  pains, 
Viskandha  and  Samskandha,3  Jambha,  and  so  on.  But  it  is 
also  regarded  as  a  specific  against  all  diseases,  and  as  the  best 
of  healing  powers.4  It  is  said  to  be  produced  from  the  juices 
(rasa)  of  ploughing  (krsi),5  but  this  need  only  mean  that  it  grew 
in  cultivated  land,  not  that  it  was  itself  cultivated.  What  plant 
the  name  designates  is  quite  uncertain,  for  it  disappears  in  the 
later  literature.  Caland6  takes  it  in  the  Kau^ika  Sutra  to  be 
the  Terminalia  arjuneya. 


1  11.  4 ;  xix.  34.  35. 

2  Av.  xix.  34,  10. 

3  Av.  ii.  4,  1 ;  xix.  34,  1.  5. 

4  Av.  xix.  34,  9.  7. 

5  Av.  ii.  4,  5. 

6  Altindisches  Zauberritual,  15,  render- 
ing KauSika  Sutra,  viii.  15. 


Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 433 ;  Whitney,  Translation  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  42 ;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  13,  141;  Grohmann,  ibid.,  9, 
417;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  65, 
66,  390. 


Jatu,  the  'bat,'  occurs  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  and  is  mentioned 
as  one  of  the  victims  at  the  Asvamedha,  or  horse  sacrifice,  in 
the  Yajurveda.2 

1  ix.  2,  22. 

2  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  6;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  25.  26. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  86. 


Jana 


PEOPLE 


269 


Jana,  besides  meaning  *  man '  as  an  individual,  with  a 
tendency  to  the  collective  sense,  commonly  denotes  a  *  people  ' 
or  '  tribe  '  in  the  Rigveda  and  later.  Thus,  the  '  five  tribes  ' 
(Panea  Janah  or  Janasah)  are  frequently  referred  to,  and  in 
one  hymn  of  the  Rigveda1  the  '  people  of  Yadu '  (yadva  jana) 
and  the  Yadus  (yddvah)  are  synonymous.  Again,  the  king 
(raj an)  is  described  as  '  protector  {gopd)  of  the  people  (janasya),'2 
and  there  are  other  references  to  king  and  Jana.3  The  people 
of  the  Bharatas  (bhdrata  jana)  is  also  mentioned  ;4  there  is  no 
ground  to  assume  with  Hopkins5  that  Jana  in  this  case  means 
a  clan  or  horde  (Grama),  as  distinguished  from  a  people. 

It  is  difficult  to  say  exactly  how  a  people  was  divided. 
Zimmer6  argues  from  a  passage  in  the  Rigveda7  that  a  people 
was  divided  into  cantons  (ViS),  cantons  into  joint  families  or 
clans,  or  village  communities  (Grama,  Vrjana),  and  these  again 
into  single  families.  He  thinks  that  the  four  divisions  are 
reflected  in  the  passage  in  question  by  Jana,  Vis,  Janman,  and 
Putralj,  or  sons,  and  argues  that  each  village  community  was 
originally  founded  on  relationship.  But  it  is  very  doubtful 
whether  this  precise  division  of  the  people  can  be  pressed.  The 
division  of  the  Jana  into  several  Vis  may  be  regarded  as 
probable,  for  it  is  supported  by  the  evidence  of  another  passage 
of  the  Rigveda,8  which  mentions  the  Vis  as  a  unit  of  the  fighting 
men,  and  thus  shows  that,  as  in  Homeric  times  and  in  ancient 
Germany,  relationship  was  deemed  a  good  principle  of  military 
arrangement.  But  the  subdivision  of  the  Vis  into  several 
Gramas  is  very  doubtful.   Zimmer9  admits  that  neither  Grama10 


1  viii.  6,  46.  48. 

2  Rv.  iii.  43,  5.  So  Soma  is  called 
gopati  janasya,  '  protector  of  the  people,' 
Rv.  ix.  35,  5. 

3  Rv.  v.  58,  4. 

4  Rv.  iii.  53,  12.  See  also  Bharata. 
Cf.  also  x.  174,  5  =  Av.  i.  29,  6. 

5  Religions  of  India,  26,  27.  It  is  true 
that  the  Bharatas  are  called  a  gavyan 
gramah,  '  a  horde  eager  for  booty,'  in 
Rv.  iii.  33,  n;  but  Grama  has  there 
merely  a  general  application .   See  n .  10 . 

6  Altindisches  Leben,  159,  160. 


7  ".  26,  3. 

8  x.  84,  4.  Viiah  may  have  the  same 
sense  in  several  other  passages — iv.  24, 
4;  v.  61,  1;  vi.  26,  1;  vii.  79,  2; 
viii.  12,  29 — but  it  need  not  necessarily 
bear  this  sense.  But  in  x.  91,  2,  there 
is  a  clear  contrast  between  Vis  and 
Jana. 

9  Op.  cit.,  161.  He  also  relies  on 
Ry-  v-  53.  I][>  where  the  Maruts  are 
divided  into  sardha,  vrata,  and  gana; 
but  these  words  are  vague. 

10  Rv.  iii.  33.  11.     See  n.  5. 


270  DIVISIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE  [  Jana 

nor  Vrjana11  has  the  special  sense  of  a  subdivision  of  the  Vis 
when  used  for  war,  for  both  words  only  denote  generally  an 
armed  host.  He  finds  other  designations  of  the  village  host  in 
Vra12  and  in  Vraja,13  but  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that  the  former 
passage  is  of  extremely  doubtful  import,14  and  that  the  latter 
has  no  reference  to  war  at  all.  It  is  therefore  impossible  to  state 
in  what  exact  relation  the  Grama  in  Vedic  times  stood  to  the 
Vis  or  to  the  family  (Kula  or  Gotra).  The  confusion  is  increased 
by  the  vagueness  of  the  sense  of  both  Grama  and  Vis.  If  the 
latter  be  regarded  as  a  local  division,  then  no  doubt  the  Grama 
must  have  been  a  part  of  a  district ;  but  if  a  Vis  was  a  unit  of 
relationship,  then  a  Grama  may  have  contained  families  of 
different  Vises,  or  may  have  sometimes  coincided  with  a 
Vis',  or  have  contained  only  a  part  of  a  Vis.  But  in  any 
case  the  original  state  of  affairs  must  have  been  greatly 
modified  by  the  rise  of  the  system  of  caste,  and  the  substitu- 
tion of  a  hierarchical  for  a  political  point  of  view.  The 
elements  of  the  people  were  represented  by  the  family — either 
as  an  individual  family  inhabiting  one  home  (Kula),  and  con- 
sisting often,  no  doubt,  of  a  joint  family  of  brothers,  or  as  a 
patriarchal  family  of  sons  who  still  lived  with  their  father — and 
by  the  clan,  the  later  Gotra,  which  included  all  those  who 
claimed  a  common  ancestor.  The  Gotra  may  be  regarded  as 
roughly  corresponding  to  the  Latin  gens  and  the  Greek  yevos, 
and  possibly  the  Vis  may  be  the  equivalent  of  the  curia  and 
(j>prjTprj,  and  the  Jana  of  the  tribus  and  <\>vkov  or  (j)v\rj.L6  These 
three  divisions  may  also  be  seen  in  the  Vis,  Zantu,  and  Daqyu 
of  the  Iranian  world,  where  the  use  of  Vis  suggests  that  in  the 
Indian  Vis  a  relationship  based  on  blood  rather  than  locality  is 
meant — and  perhaps  even  in  the  vicus,  pagus,  and  civitas  of  the 
old  German  polity  described  in  the  Germania10  of  Tacitus. 
The  family  in  some  form  appears  as  the  third  element  of  the 
Jana  in  a  passage  of  the  Rigveda,17  where  the  house  (grha)  is 

equations,  for  which  cf.  Schrader, 
Prehistoric  Antiquities,  393  et  seq.  The 
exact  parallelism  cannot  in  any  case 
be  pressed. 

17  x.  91,  2,  where  janam  janam  and 
viiam  viiam  occur,  and  where  a  con- 
trast must  be  meant. 


11  Rv.  vii.  32,  27 ;  x.  42,  10. 

12  Rv.  i.  126,  5  {yisya  iva  vrah). 

13  Rv.  x.  179,  2  =  Av.  vii.  72,  2. 

14  Cf.  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  2,  121, 

319. 

15  Cf.  Iliad,  2,  362. 

16  Chap.  vii.     Zimmer  gives  other 


Janaka  J        PEOPLE  AND  FAMILY— KING  JANAKA 


271 


contrasted  with  the  Jana  and  the  Vis.  Possibly,  too,  another 
passage18  contrasts  the  adhvara,  or  family  sacrifice,  with  that  of 
the  Jana  or  Vis,  rather  than,  as  Zimmer19  thinks,  the  village 
with  the  two  larger  units.  But  it  is  significant  of  the  particu- 
larism of  the  Vedic  Indians  that  while  the  king  maintained  a 
fire  which  might  be  regarded  as  the  sacred  fire  of  the  tribe, 
there  is  no  sure  trace20  of  any  intermediate  cult  between  that  of 
the  king  and  that  of  the  individual  householder.  The  real 
elements  in  the  state  are  the  Gotra  and  the  Jana,  just  as 
ultimately  the  gens  and  tribus,  the  yevos  and  (j>v\ovf  are  alone 
important.  It  may  be  that  Vis  sometimes  represents  in  the 
older  texts  what  later  was  known  as  the  Gotra.     See  Vi£. 

This  appears  clearly  when  the  constitution  of  society  in  the 
Brahmana  period  is  considered.  The  tribe  or  people  still  exists, 
and  is  presupposed,  but  the  division  into  Vis  disappears.  The 
real  division  is  now  the  separate  castes  (Varna),  but  the 
numerous  sections  into  which  each  of  them  is  divided  appear  to 
be  based  in  part  on  the  ancient  Gotra. 


is  RV.  vii.  82,  1. 

19  Altindisches  Leben,  435. 

20  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  2, 
126. 

Cf.    Macdonell,    Sanskrit    Literature, 


158 ;  von  Schroeder,  Indiens  Liter atur 
und  Cultur,  32,  33 ;  Jolly,  Zeitschrift 
der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesell- 
scha/t,  50,  512  et  seq. 


2.  Jana  Sarkaraksya  ('  descendant  of  Sarkaraksa  ')  is 
mentioned  as  a  teacher  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (x.  6,  1,  1. 
et  seq.)  and  the  Chandogya  Upanisad  (v.  II,  1 ;  15,  1).  He  was 
a  contemporary  of  Asvapati  Kaikeya,  and  of  Aruna  AupaveSi 
and  his  son  Uddalaka  Aruni. 


Janaka,  king  of  Videha,  plays  a  considerable  part  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana1  and  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,2 
as  well  as  in  the  Jaiminiya  Brahmana3  and  the  Kausltaki 
Upanisad.4     He  was  a  contemporary  of  Yajiiavalkya  Vaja- 


1  xi.    3,    i,    2  ;    4,   3,   20 ;    6,   2,    1 
et  seq. 

2  iii.  i,  1 ;   iv.  1,  1  ;   2,  1 ;   4,  7 ;  v. 

14.8. 


3  i.  19,  2  (Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  23,  329);  ii.  76  (ibid., 
15,  238). 


272 


KING  JANAKA  OF  VIDE  HA 


[  Janaka 


saneya,5  of  Svetaketu  Aruneya,  and  of  other  sages.6  He  had 
become  famous  for  his  generosity  and  his  interest  in  the  dis- 
cussion of  the  nature  of  Brahman,  as  ultimate  basis  of  reality, 
in  the  life-time  of  Ajatasatru  of  Kasi.7  It  is  significant  that 
he  maintained  a  close  intercourse  with  the  Brahmins  of  the 
Kuru-Pancalas,  such  as  Yajnavalkya  and  Svetaketu ;  for  this 
indicates  that  the  home  of  the  philosophy  of  the  Upanisads 
was  in  the  Kuru-Pancala  country  rather  than  in  the  east. 
There  is  a  statement  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana8  that  he 
became  a  Brahmin  (brahmd).  This  does  not,  however,  signify 
a  change  of  caste,  but  merely  that  in  knowledge  he  became 
a  Brahmin  (see  Ksatriya).  Janaka  is  occasionally  mentioned 
in  later  texts :  in  the  Taittirlya  Brahmana9  he  has  already 
become  quite  mythical;  in  the  ^ankhayana  £rauta  Sutra10 
a  sapta-rdtra  or  seven  nights'  rite  is  ascribed  to  him. 

It  is  natural  to  attempt  to  date  Janaka  by  his  being  a  con- 
temporary of  Ajatasatru,  and  by  identifying  the  latter  with  the 
Ajatasattu  of  the  Pali  texts11:  this  would  make  the  end  of  the 
sixth  century  B.C.  the  approximate  date  of  Janaka.12  But  it  is 
very  doubtful  whether  this  identification  can  be  supported : 
Ajatasatru  was  king  of  Kaii,  whereas  Ajatasattu  was  king  of 
Magadha,  and  his  only  connexion  with  Kasi  was  through  his 
marriage  with  the  daughter  of  Pasenadi  of  Kosala.13  More- 
over, the  acceptance  of  this  chronology  would  be  difficult  to 
reconcile  with  the  history  of  the  development  of  thought ;  for 
it  would  make  the  rise  of  Buddhism  contemporaneous  with  the 
Upanisads,  whereas  it  is  reasonably  certain  that  the  older 
Upanisads  preceded  Buddhism.14  Nor  do  the  Vedic  texts  know 
anything  of  Bimbisara  or  Pasenadi,  or  any  of  the  other  princes 
famed  in  Buddhist  records. 


6  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  3,  1,  2; 
4,  3,  20  ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  loc. 
tit. ;  Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  loc.  cit. 

6  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  6,  2,  1 
et  seq. 

7  Kausitaki  Upanisad,  loc.  cit. ; 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  1,  1. 


10. 


8  xi.  6,  2, 

9  iii.  10,  9,  9. 
10  xvi.  26,  7. 


n  Vincent  Smith,  Early  History  of 
India,  26  et  seq. 

12  Hoernle,  Osteology,  106. 

13  Rhys  Davids,  Buddhist  India,  3  et 
seq. 

14  See  e.g.,  von  Schroeder,  Indiens 
Literatur  and  Cultury  243  ;  Macdonell, 
Sanskrit  Literature,  224  ;  Deussen, 
Philosophy  of  the  Upanisads,  23  et  seq.  ; 
Keith,  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  25,  29. 


Janamejaya  ] 


PEOPLE— KING  JANAMEJAYA 


273 


The  identification15  of  Janaka  of  Videha  and  the  father  of 
Sita  is  less  open  to  objection,  but  it  cannot  be  proved,  and  is 
somewhat  doubtful.  In  the  Sutras  Janaka  appears  as  an 
ancient  king  who  knew  of  a  time  when  wifely  honour  was  less 
respected  than  later.16 


15  Cf.  Weber,  Indian  Literature,  135  ; 
Von  Schroeder,  op.  cit.,  189  ;  Mac- 
donell,  op.  cit.,  214. 

16  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  48. 

Cf.  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  5,  426  et  seq. ; 
Max  Muller,  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature, 
421  et  seq.  ;    Von   Schroeder,   op.   cit., 


187-189  ;  Weber,  IndischeStudien,  1, 175, 
231 ;  Oldenberg,  Buddha,  31,  n.,  who 
properly  emphasizes  the  difficulty  of 
attaching  much  importance  to  the 
names  of  the  leaders  of  the  thought  of 
the  Upanisads. 


Janata,  a  word  frequently  found  in  the  later  Samhitas1  and 
the  Brahmanas,2  denotes  the  people  as  a  community  (cf. 
Sabha)  or  as  a  religious  unit. 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  2,  1,4;  6,  4 ; 
3,  4,  2  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  ix.  17 ;  Av. 
v.  18,  12,  etc. 

2  Taittiriya  Brahmana,   i.    4,   6,    1  ; 


ii.  3,  1,  3 ;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  7.  9  ; 
iii.  31  ;  v.  9,  etc. 

Cf.    Weber,     Indische    Studien,     13, 
153,  n. 


Jana-pada  in  the  Brahmanas  denotes  both  the  '  people,'  as 
opposed  to  the  king,1  and  the  'land'  or  *  realm.'2  The 
'  subjects  '  are  also  denoted  by  the  adjectival  jdnapada.3 


1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  14  (plural); 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  4,  2,  17. 

2  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  ii.   3,  9,  9 ; 


Brhadaranyaka    Upanisad,  ii.    1,    20; 

Chandogya  Upanisad,  v.  1 1,  5  ;  viii.  1,  5. 

3  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiv.  5,  1,  20. 


i.  Janam-ejaya  ('man-impelling')  is  the  name  of  a  king, 
a  Pariksita,1  famous  towards  the  end  of  the  Brahmana  period. 
He  is  mentioned  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana2  as  owning 
horses  which  when  wearied  were  refreshed  with  sweet  drinks, 
and  as  a  performer  of  the  Asvamedha,  or  horse  sacrifice.3  His 
capital,  according  to  a  Gatha  quoted  in  the  Satapatha4  and 
the  Aitareya  Brahmanas,5  was  Asandivant.  His  brothers 
Ugrasena,  Bhimasena,  and  Srutasena  are  mentioned  as  having 


1  Satapatha    Brahmana,    xiii.    5,    4, 
1  et  seq. ;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  34  ; 
viii.  11.  21  ;  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
:xvi.  8,  27,  etc. 
VOL.  I. 


2  *i.  5,  5.  13- 
*  xiii.  5,  4,  1-3. 

4  xiii.  5,  4,  2. 

5  viii.  21. 


18 


274 


NAMES— WIFE 


[  Janamejaya 


by  the  horse  sacrifice  purified  themselves  from  sin.  The  priest 
who  performed  the  sacrifice  for  him  was  Indrota  Daivapi 
Saunaka.6  On  the  other  hand  the  Aitareya  Brahmana,7  which 
also  mentions  his  Asvamedha,  names  Tura  Kavaseya  as  his 
priest.  It  also  contains  an  obscure  tale  stating  that  at  one 
sacrifice  of  his  he  did  not  employ  the  Kasyapas,  but  the 
Bhutaviras,  being,  however,  induced  by  the  Asitamrgfas  to 
have  recourse  to  the  Kasyapas  again.8  He  was  a  Kuru  prince; 
see  Pariksit.  The  Gopatha  Brahmana9  tells  an  absurd  tale 
about  him,  evidently  as  of  an  ancient  hero. 

6  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  5,  4,  1 ;    i       9  i.  2,  5. 

Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  loc.  cit.  Cf.    Weber,    Indian   Literature,    123- 

7  viii.  21.     Cf.  iv.  27  ;  vii.  34.  j  125  ;  134-136  ;  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der 

8  vii.  27.  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  \  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft, 
1,  204 ;  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  i2,  438,  j  37,  65  et  seq. ;  42,  239 ;  Pargiter,  Journal 
n.  229;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Boohs  of  the  j  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1910,  28 
East,  43,  345,  n.  I  et  seq. 

2.  Janam-ejaya  is  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana1  the  name 
of  a  priest  who  officiated  at  the  snake  sacrifice. 

1  xxv.  15,  3.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  35. 

Jana-Sruta  ('  famed  among  men  ')  Kandviya  is  the  name  of 
a  pupil  of  Hrtsvaiaya,  mentioned  in  a  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers) 
in  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana  (iii.  40,  2),  and  of 
Varakya,  a  pupil  of  Jayanta,  referred  to  in  the  same  Brah- 
mana (iii.  41,  1 ;  iv.  17,  1).     Cf.  Jana£ruti. 


Jani,  Jam. — These  words  appear  to  denote  'wife,'  usually 
applying  to  her  in  relation  to  her  husband  (Pati).  The  more 
general  sense  of  '  woman  '  is  doubtful ;  for  when  Usas  is  called 
a  fair  Jam,1  '  wife  '  may  be  meant,  and  the  other  passage2  cited 
for  this  sense  by  Delbriick,3  which  refers  to  the  begetting  of 
children,  seems  to  demand  the  sense  of  '  wives.'  Since  the 
words  usually  appear  in  the  plural,4  it  is  possible  they  may 


1  Rv.  iv.  52,  I. 

2  v.  61,  3- 

3  Die  indogermanischen  Verwandschafts- 
nanten,  413. 

4  i.  85,  1 ;  iv.  5,  5  ;  19,  5  ;  vii.  18,  2  ; 


26,  3  ;  ix.  86,  32  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xii.  35  ;  xx.  40.  43,  etc.  Cf.  Rv.  x.  43,  1. 
In  x.  no,  5,  the  phrase  is  patibhyo  na 
janayah,  where  both  plurals  may  be 
generic. 


Jabala  ]     PARENTS— MAN— RELATIONS— BRIDESMAN  275 

refer  not  to  '  wives '  proper,  but  to  Hetairai.  This  is,  how- 
ever, rendered  unlikely  because  the  Rigveda5  uses  the  phrase 
patyur  janitvarn,  denoting  'wifehood  to  a  husband,'  as  well 
as  the  expression  janayo  na  patnih,6  Mike  wives  (who  are) 
mistresses,'7  besides  containing  passages  in  which  the  word  has 
reference  to  marriage.8  The  singular  occurs  in  the  dialogue  of 
Yama  and  Yarn!.9 


5  x.  18,  8.  Cf.  janitvana  in  viii.  2, 
42. 

6  i.  62,  10;   186,  7. 

7  The  distinction  of  sense  was  prob- 
ably this  :  jani  meant '  wife,'  as  bearing 
children    (from   jan,    '  beget  '),    while 


patnl  was  'wife,'  as  being  'mistress' 
of  the  house  (feminine  of  pati,  'lord,' 
'  husband '). 

8  v.  61,  3.     So  in  x.  40,  10,  the  word 
seems  certainly  to  refer  to  marriage. 


Janitr1  and  Janitri2  are  frequent  words,  in  the  Rigveda  and 
later,  for  ■  father  '  and  '  mother  '  regarded  as  the  '  begetter  ' 
and  the  '  bearer  '  respectively  of  the  child.     See  Pitr,  Matr. 


1  Rv.  i.  129,  11  ;  164,  33  ;  iii.  I,  10; 
54,  9,  etc.;  Av.  iv.  1,  7;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xix.  87,  etc. 


2  Rv.  iii.  48,  2;  54,  14;  Av.  vi.  no, 
13  ;  ix.  5,  30,  etc. 


Jantu,  besides  the  general  sense  of  '  man,'  has  also  in  a  few 
passages1  the  more  restricted  sense  of  'follower'  or  'subject.' 
The  '  followers  of  Svaitreya ' 2  may  be  compared  with  the 
'  subjects  (visah)  of  Tp^askanda.'3 

1  Rv.  1.  94,  5  ;  x.  140,  4.  2  Rv.  v.  19,  3.  3  Rv.  i.  172,  3. 

Janman  appears  to  have  the  sense  of  '  relations '  in  two 
passages  of  the  Rigveda,1  being  used  collectively  in  the  second 
of  them. 

1  iii.  15,  2;  ii.  26,  3  (where  janena,  I  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  160,  and 
visa,  janmana,  putraih,   is  the  series).    |   see  Jana  and  Vis\ 

Janya  has  in  the  Rigveda  (iv.  38,  6)  and  the  Atharvaveda 
(xi.  8,  1)  the  special  sense  of  '  bridesman.' 

Jabala  is  the  name  of  the  mother  of  an  illegitimate  son, 
Satyakama,  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad  (iv.  4,  1.  2.  4). 

1 8—2 


276 


INSECT— AN  ANCIENT  SAGE— DISEASE      [  Jabhya 


Jabhya,   '  snapper,'  denotes  in  the  Atharvaveda1  an  insect 
destructive  to  grain. 

1  vi.  50,  2.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  237. 


Jamad-agui  is  one  of  the  somewhat  mythical  sages  of  the 
Rigveda,  where  he  is  frequently  mentioned.  In  some  passages1 
his  name  occurs  in  such  a  way  as  to  indicate  that  he  is  the 
author  of  the  hymn;  once2  he  is  thus  associated  with  Visva- 
mitra.  In  other  passages3  he  is  merely  referred  to,  and  the 
Jamadagnisare  mentioned  once.4  In  the  Atharvaveda,5  as  well 
as  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas6  and  the  Brahmanas,7  he  is  quite  a 
frequent  figure.  Here  he  appears  as  a  friend  of  Visvamitra8 
and  a  rival  of  Vasistha.9  He  owed  his  prosperity  to  his  catu- 
ratra,  or  '  four-night '  ritual,  with  which  his  family  were  also 
very  successful.10  In  the  Atharvaveda11  Jamadagni  is  connected 
with  Atri  and  Kanva,  as  well  as  Asita  and  Vitahavya.  He  was 
Adhvaryu  priest  at  the  proposed  sacrifice  of  Sunahsepa.12 


1  Rv.  iii.  62,  18  ;  viii.  101,  8 ;  ix.  62, 
24  5  65,  25. 

2  Rv.  x.  167,  4. 

3  Rv.  vii.  96,  3 ;  ix.  97,  51. 

4  Rv.  iii.  53,  15.  16. 

5  ii.  32,  3  (cf.  Taittiriya  Aranyaka, 
iv.  36 ;  Mantra  Brahmana,  ii.  7,  1)  ; 
iv.  29,  3 ;  v.  28,  7 ;  vi.  137,  1 ;  xviii.  3, 
15.  16. 

6  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  2,  12,  4 ; 
iii-  I.  7.  3;  3.  5.  2;  v.  2,  10,  5;  4,  11,  3; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  7,  19 ;  iv.  2,  9 ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xvi.  19  ;  xx.  9  ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  iii.  62  ;  xiii.  56. 

7  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  ix.  4,  14 ; 
xiii.  5,  15  ;  xxi.  10,  5-7 ;  xxii.  7,  2 ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  16  ;  Satapatha 


Brahmana,  xiii.  2,  2,  14;  Taittiriya 
Aranyaka,  i.  9,  7  ;  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad,  ii.  2,  4 ;  Jaiminiya  Upanisad 
Brahmana,  iii.  3,  11  ;  iv.  3,  1,  etc. 

8  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  1,  7,  3  ; 
v.  4,  11,  3;  Pancavhpsa  Brahmana, 
xiii.  5,  15. 

9  Taittiriya  Samhita,  loc.  cit. 

10  Pancavimsa   Brahmana,    xxi.    10, 

5-7. 

11  ii.  32,  3;  vi.  137,  1. 

12  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  16. 

Cf.  Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the  Con- 
necticut Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15, 
53,  54  ;  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  A  thar- 
vaveda,  319 ;  Weber,  Indische  Studien, 
10,  95- 


Jambha  occurs  twice  in  the  Atharvaveda  as  the  name  of  a 
disease  or  a  demon  of  disease.  In  one  passage1  it  is  said  to  be 
cured  by  the  Jahgida  plant;  in  the  other2  it  is  described  as 
samhanuh,  '  bringing  the  jaws  together.'     Weber3  argued  from 


1  ii.  4,  2. 


viii.  i,  16. 


3  Indische  Studien,  13,  142. 


Jarabodha  ]  NAMES  OF  TEACHERS  277 

the  Kausika  Sutra4  that  it  was  a  child's  ailment,  especially 
'  teething.'  Bloomfield5  considers  it  to  mean  '  convulsions,' 
while  Caland6  thinks  it  denotes  '  tetanus.'  Whitney7  decides 
for  '  lockjaw  '  or  '  convulsions.' 


4  xxxii.  1. 

5  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  283. 

6  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  53,  224  ;  Altin- 
disches  Zauberritual,  103. 


7  Translation    of  the   Atharvaveda, 
42. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindischss  Leben,  392. 


Jambhaka,  as  the  name  of  a  demon,  presumably  identical 
with  the  demon  causing  Jambha,  is  mentioned  in  the  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita1  and  the  Sahkhayana  Aranyaka.2 

1  xxx.  16. 

2  xii.  25.      Cf.  Keith,  Sahkhayana  Aranyaka,  67,  n.  7. 

Jayaka  Lauhitya  ('  descendant  of  Lohita ')  is  mentioned  in  a 
Vamsa  (list  of  teachers)  of  the  Jaiminlya  Upanisad  Brahmana 
(iii.  42,  1)  as  a  pupil  of  Yasasvin  Jayanta  Lauhitya. 

Jayanta  is  the  name  of  several  teachers  in  the  Jaiminlya 
Upanisad  Brahmana : 

(a)  Jayanta  Parasarya  ('descendant  of  Para£ara')  is  mentioned 
as  a  pupil  of  VipaSeit  in  a  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers).1 

(b)  Jayanta  Varakya  ('  descendant  of  Varaka ')  appears  in  the 
same  Vamsa1  as  a  pupil  of  Kubera  Varakya.  His  grandfather 
is  also  mentioned  there  as  a  pupil  of  Kamsa  Varakya. 

(c)  A  Jayanta  Varakya,  pupil  of  Suyajna  Sandilya,  perhaps 
identical  with  the  preceding,  is  found  in  another  Vamsa.2 

(d)  Jayanta  is  a  name  of  YaSasvin  Lauhitya.3 
See  also  Daksa  Jayanta  Lauhitya. 


1  in.  41, 1. 

2  iv.  17,  1. 

3  iii.  42,  1.     Not  only  is  the  forma- 
tion of  the  name  a  late  one  {cf.  Whitney, 


Sanskrit  Grammar,  xzogd,  and  Mac- 
donell,  Vedic  Grammar,  igia),  but  the 
Upanisad  in  which  it  occurs  is  also  a 
late  one. 


Jara-bodha,  a  word  occurring  only  once  in  the  Rigveda,1  is 
of  doubtful  meaning.     It  is  held  by  Ludwig2  to  be  the  name  of 

1  i.  27,  10.  2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  103. 


278  EMBRYONIC  MEMBRANE— SINGER  [  Jarayu 

a  seer.  Roth3  regards  it  as  a  mere  adjective  meaning  '  attending 
to  the  invocation,'  which  is  perhaps  the  most  probable  inter- 
pretation. Oldenburg,4  however,  thinks  that  the  word  is  a 
proper  name,  the  literal  sense  being  '  alert  in  old  age.' 


3  St.     Petersburg    Dictionary,    s.v. 
Cf.  Nirukta,  x.  8. 

4  Rgveda-Noten,  i,  23.    He  compares 


the  rsi  bodha-pratlbodhau  of  Av.  v.  30, 
10. 


Jarayu  is  found  once  in  the  Atharvaveda1  in  the  sense  of 
a  '  serpent's  skin.'  Usually2  it  denotes  the  outer  covering 
(chorion)  of  the  embryo,  as  opposed  to  the  ulva,  the  inner 
covering  (amnion). 

Living  things  are  occasionally  classified  according  to  their 
mode  of  origin.  In  the  Chandogya  Upanisad3  they  are  divided 
into  (a)  anda-ja,  *  egg-born ' ;  (6)  jiva-ja,  *  born  alive,'  or  born 
from  the  womb ;  (c)  udbhij-ja,  '  propagated  by  sprouts.'  In  the 
Aitareya  Aranyaka4  the  division  is  fourfold :  (a)  anda-ja ; 
(b)  Jaru-ja,  that  is,  jarayu-ja  (found  in  the  Atharvaveda,6  and 
needlessly  read  here  by  Bohtlingk6)  ;  (c)  udbhij-ja;  and  (d) 
sveda-ja,  '  sweat-born,'  explained  as  'insects.' 


1  i-  27, 1. 

2  Rv.  v.  78,  8;  Av.  i.  n,  4;  vi.  49,  1  ; 
ix.  4,  4  ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  5,  6,  3  ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  x.  8 ;  xix.  76 ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  3  ;  £atapatha 
Brahmana,  hi.  2,  1,  11,  etc  ;  Chan- 
dogya Upanisad,  iii.  19,  2,  etc. 

3  vi.  3,  1. 


4  ii.  6. 

5  i.  12,  1. 

6  See  jaru  in  Jaiminiya  Brahmana, 
ii.  430,  6. 

Cf.  Deussen,  Philosophy  of  the  Upani- 
shads,  196,  292 ;  Keith,  Aitareya  Aran- 
yaka, 235. 


1.  Jaritr  is  the  regular  term  in  the  Rigveda,1  and  occasion- 
ally later,2  for  a  singer  of  hymns  of  praise  or  worshipper. 

1  i.  2,  2;   165,  14;  ii.  33,  11;  iii.  60,    I  2  Av.  v.  11,  8;  xx.  135,  1,  etc. 

7,  etc. 

2.  Jaritr. — According  to  Sieg,1  mention  is  made  in  one 
hymn  of  the  Rigveda2  of  Jaritr,  one  of  the  Sarhgas.  That 
hymn  he  seeks  to  bring  into  connexion  with  the  epic3  tradition 

1  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  44  et  seq.  2  x.  142. 

3  Mahabharata,  i.  222,  1  et  seq. 


Jala§abh.e§aja  ]  NAMES— SESAMUM  279 

of  the  Rsi  Mandapala,  who  wedded  Jarita,  a  female  Sarriga 
bird — apparently  a  hen  sparrow  (cataka) — and  had  four  sons. 
These  being  abandoned  by  him  and  exposed  to  the  danger  of 
being  consumed  by  a  forest  fire,  prayed  to  Agni  with  the  hymn 
Rigveda  x.  142.  This  interpretation  is  very  doubtful,  though 
Sayana4  appears  to  have  adopted  it. 

4  On  Rv.  x.  142,  7.  8. 

Jarutha,  mentioned  in  three  passages  of  the  Rigveda,1 
appears  to  denote  a  demon  defeated  by  Agni.2  Ludwig,  how- 
ever, followed  by  Griffith,3  sees  in  him  a  foe  slain  in  a  battle  in 
which  Vasistha,  the  traditional  author  of  the  seventh  Mandala 
of  the  Rigveda,  was  Purohita,  or  domestic  priest. 

1  vii.  1,  7;  9,  6;  x.  80,  3. 

2  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  ;  Nirukta,  vi.  17. 

3  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  2,  n,  n. 

Jartila,  '  wild  sesamum,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Taittirlya 
Samhita  (v.  4,  3,  2)  as  an  unsuitable  sacrificial  offering.  In 
the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (ix.  I,  1,  3)  sesamum  seeds  are 
regarded  as  combining  the  qualities  of  cultivation  (viz., 
edibility)  with  those  of  wild  growth  (because  they  are  produced 
on  unploughed  land). 

Jarvara  was  Grhapati  or  '  householder '  at  the  snake  festival 
described  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.1 

1  xxv.  15,  3.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  35. 

Jala  Jatukarnya  ('descendant  of  Jatukarna'),  is  mentioned  in 
the  Sahkhayana  Srauta  Sutra  (xvi.  29,  6)  as  having  obtained 
the  position  of  Purohita,  or  domestic  priest,  of  the  three  peoples 
or  kings  of  Kaii,  Videha,  and  Kosala. 

Jalasa-bhesaja,  '  whose  remedy  is  Jalasa,'  is  an  epithet  of 
Rudra   in    the   Rigveda1   and   the   Atharvaveda.2      The  word 

1  i.  43,  4  ;  viii.  29,  5.  |  3,  and  jalasa  as  an  adjective  is  found  in 

2  ii.    27,    6.      It   also   occurs   in   the   |  Rv.  ii.  ^^,  7  ;  viii.  35,  6. 
Nilarudra  Upanisad  (a  very  late  work), 


28o 


REMEDY— DOLPHIN— POLECA  T 


[  Jasa 


Jalasa  occurs  in  a  hymn  of  the  Atharvaveda,3  where  it  denotes 
a  remedy,  perhaps,  for  a  tumour  or  boil.4  The  commentator 
on  this  passage  and  the  Kausika  Sutra5  regard  Jalasa  as 
meaning  '  urine,'  which  seems  a  probable  interpretation.6  But 
Geldner7  thinks  that  rain-water,  conceived  as  urine,  is  meant ; 
and  the  Naighantuka8  identifies  jalasa  and  udaka  '  water.' 


3  vl  57. 

4  Bloomfield,  American  Journal  of 
Philology,  11,  321  et  seq.  ;  Hymns  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  489. 

5  xxxi.  11. 

6  Bloomfield,    American    Journal 
Philology,  12,  425  et  seq. 


of 


7  Vedische  Studien,  3,  139,  n.  2. 

8  i.  12. 

Cf.  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  323,  324  ;  Macdonell, 
Vedic  Mythology,  pp.  76,  77 ;  Hopkins, 
Proceedings  of  the  A  merican  Oriental  Society, 
1894,  cl. 


Jasa  is  the  name  of  some  aquatic  animal  or  fish  in  the 
Atharvaveda1  and  the  Taittiriya  Samhita.2  The  commentary 
on  the  latter  text  explains  it  by  makara,  probably  meaning 
'  dolphin.'  The  word  also  occurs  in  the  Gopatha  Brahmana.3 
Cf.  Jhasa. 


1  xi.  2,  25.     There  are  various  read- 
ings :  jhasa,  jakha,  jagha. 
3  v.  5,  13,  1. 
3  "•  2,  5. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  96; 
Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, 624. 


Jahaka,  the  '  polecat,'  is  mentioned  as  a  victim  at  the 
Asvamedha,  or  horse  sacrifice,  in  the  Yajurveda.1  Sayana2 
thinks  it  means  a  jackal  living  in  holes  (vila-vdsl  krosta). 


1  Taittiriya   Samhita,    v.    5,    18,    1 ;    I  saneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  36. 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  17;  Vaja-    I  Altindisches  Leben,  86. 
2  On  Taittiriya  Samhita,  loc.  cit. 


Cf.  Zimmer, 


Jahnu  occurs  only  in  the  plural  in  the  legend  of  Sunahgepa, 
who  is  said  to  have  obtained,  as  Devarata,  both  the  lordship 
of  the  Jahnus  and  the  divine  lore  of  the  Gathins.1  A  Jahnava, 
or  descendant  of  Jahnu,  was,   according  to  the   Pancavimsa 


1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  18  {Jah- 
nunam  cadhipatye  daive  vede  ca  Gaihinam) ; 
AsValayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xii.  14 ; 
Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  27  (p.  195, 
i.  21,  ed.  Hillebrandt,  where  the  read- 


ing is  different  and  the  sense  altered  : 
Jahnunam  cddhitasthire  daive  vede  ca 
Gathinah.  The  two  ca?s  cannot  be 
justified,  and  the  text  must  be  in- 
correct). 


Jati  ] 


KING  JAHNU— GOLD— FAMILY 


281 


Brahmana,2  Visvamitra,  who  is  said,  by  means  of  a  certain 
catd-rdtra  or  '  four-night '  ritual,  to  have  secured  the  kingdom 
for  the  Jahnus  in  their  conflict  with  the  Vrcivants.  He  is 
here  described  as  a  king.  Again,  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana,3 
Visvamitra  is  addressed  as  a  raja-putra,  *  prince,'  and  Bharata- 
rsabha,  'bull  of  the  Bharatas.'  It  is  therefore  clear  that  the 
Brahmanas,  though  not  the  Samhitas,  saw  in  him  at  once  a 
priest  and  a  prince  by  origin,  though  there  is  no  trace  whatever 
of  their  seeing  in  him  a  prince  who  won  Brahmanhood  as  in 
the  version  of  the  later  texts.4 

A  Jahnavi  is  mentioned  twice  in  the  Rigveda,5  being  either 
the  wife  of  Jahnu,  or,  as  Sayana  thinks,  the  race  of  Jahnu. 
The  family  must  clearly  once  have  been  a  great  one,  later 
merged  in  the  Bharatas. 


9  xxi.  12.  Cf.  Hopkins,  Transactions 
of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and 
Sciences,  15,  54,  who  correctly  explains 
the  passage  which  Sayana  misunder- 
stands. 


3  vii.  17,  6.  7. 

4  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  i,2  337  et  seq. 

5  i.  116,  19;  iii.  58,  6.     Cf.  Ludwig, 
Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  153. 


Jata  Sakayanya  ('  descendant  of  Saka ')  is  ^mentioned  as  a 
ritual  authority  and  contemporary  of  Sarikha  in  the  Kathaka 
Samhita  (xxii.  7). 


Jata-rupa,  *  possessing  native  beauty,'  is  the  name  of  '  gold  ' 
in  the  later  Brahmanas1  and  the  Sutras.2 


1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  13  (jata- 
rupa  -  may  a,  'composed  of  gold'); 
Bi-hadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  4,  25  ; 
Naighantuka,  i.  2. 

2  Rajata-jatarupe,   'silver  and   gold,' 


Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  i.  6,  24.  Cf. 
viii.  1,  3  ;  Kausika  Sutra,  x.  16 ; 
xiii.  3,  etc.  ;  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
iii.  19,  9. 


Jati,  which  in  the  Pali 1  texts  is  the  word  denoting  '  caste,' 
does  not  occur  at  all  in  the  early  Vedic  literature ;  when  it  is 
found,  as  in  the  Ka.tya.yana  Srauta  Sutra,2  it  has  only  the 
sense  of  '  family  '  (for  which  cf.  Kula,  Gotra,  and  Vis).  For 
the  influence  of  the  family  system  on  the  growth  of  caste,  see 
Varna.     To  assume  that  it  was  the  basis  of  caste,  as  does 


1  Fick,  Die  sociale  Gliederung,  22,  n.  4. 


xv.  4,  14.     So  jatiya,  xx.  2,  11,  etc. 


282 


PATRONYMICS 


[  Jatukarnya 


Senart,3  is  difficult  in  face  of  the  late  appearance  of  words  for 
family  and  of  stress  on  family.4 


3  Les  Castes  dans  VInde  (1896). 

4  Fick,  op.  cit.,  3;  Oldenberg,  Zeit- 


schrift    der    Deutschen    Morgenldndischen 
Gesellschaft,  51,  267  et  seq. 


Jatu-karnya,  '  descendant  of  Jatukarna,'  is  the  patronymic 
of  several  persons. 

(a)  A  pupil  of  Asurayana  and  Yaska  bears  this  name  in 
a  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  in 
the  Kanva  recension.1  In  the  Madhyamdina2  he  is  a  pupil 
of  Bharadvaja. 

(b)  A  Katyayani-putra,  '  son  of  Katyayani,'  bears  this  name 
in  the  Sankhayana  Aranyaka.3 

(c)  A  Jatukarnya  is  mentioned  in  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana4 
as  a  contemporary  of  AHkayu  Vacaspatya  and  other  sages. 

(d)  Jatukarnya  is  in  the  Sutras5  frequently  a  patronymic  of 
teachers  whose  identity  cannot  be  determined.  The  same 
person  or  different  persons  may  here  be  meant. 


1  ii.  6,  3 ;  iv.  6,  3. 

2  ii.  5,  21 ;  iv.  5,  27. 

3  viii.  10. 

4  xxvi.   5   (Jatukarnya^  in   Lindner's 
index,  159,  is  a  misprint). 

5  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  v.  3,  3  ;  Sankh- 


ayana Srauta  Sutra,  i.  2,  17;  iii.  16, 
14 ;  20, 19 ;  xvi.  29,  6  (Jala) ;  Katyayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  iv.  1,  27 ;  xx.  3,  17 ; 
xxv.  7,  34,  etc. 

Cf.   Weber,    Indian    Literature,    138- 
I40. 


Jatu-sthira  occurs  in  one  verse  of  the  Rigveda1  where 
Sayana  and  Ludwig2  interpret  the  word  as  a  proper  name. 
Roth3  renders  it  as  an  adjective  meaning  'naturally  powerful.'4 


1  n.  13,  11. 

2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  152. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  (with 
a  wrong  reference,  ii.  23,  it). 


4  Urkraftig.  Grassmann,  Worterhuh, 
similarly  explains  the  word  as  '  power- 
ful by  nature  or  birth  '  (jatu). 


Jana,  '  descendant  of  Jana,'  is  the  patronymic  of  Vrsa  in  the 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana1  and  apparently  in  the  Satyayanaka.2 


1  xiii.  3,  12. 

2  In  Sayana  on  Rv.  v.  5.    Cf.  Brhad- 
devata,  v.  14  et  seq.,  with  Macdonell's 


notes ;  Sieg,  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgvcda, 
64  et  seq. 


Jabala  ]  PATRONYMICS  AND  METRONYMICS  283 

Janaka,  'descendant  of  Janaka,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
Kratuvid  in  some  MSS.  of  the  Aitareya  Brahmana.1  In  the 
Taittiriya  Samhita2  the  name  appears  instead  as  Kratujit 
Janaki.  Janaka  is  also,  according  to  some  manuscripts  of  the 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,3  the  patronymic  of  Ayasthuna,  but 
is  here  no  doubt  a  misreading  of  Janaki. 

1  vii.  34.  2  ii.  3,  8,  1  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xi.  1.  3  vi.  3,  to  (Kanva). 

Janaki,  '  descendant  of  Janaka,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
Kratujit  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita,1  of  Kratuvid  in  the  Aitareya 
Brahmana,2  and  of  Ayasthuna  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,3 
where  he  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Cuda  Bhagavitti,  and  as 
teacher  of  Satyakama  Jabala. 

1  ii.  3,  8,  1  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xi.  1.  2  vii.  34. 

3  vi.  3,  10  (Kanva  =  vi.  3,  18.  19,  Madhyamdina). 

Janam-tapi,  '  descendant  of  Janamtapa,'  is  the  patronymic 
of  Atyarati  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana  (viii.  23). 

Jana-pada.     See  Janapada. 

Jana-sruti,  ■  descendant  of  Janasruta,'  is  the  patronymic  ot 
Pautrayana  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad  (iv.  1,1;  2,  1). 

Jana-sruteya,  '  descendant  of  Janasruti '  or  of  '  Janasruta/ 
is  the  patronymic  or  metronymic  of  several  persons — Upavi1 
or  Aupavi,2  Ulukya,3  Nagrarin,4  and  Sayaka.5 


1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  25,  115. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  1,  1,  5.  7 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  4,  5. 


3  Jaiminiya     Upanisad     Brahmana, 
i.  6,  3. 

4  Ibid.,  iii.  40,  2.  5  Ibid. 


Jabala,  '  descendant  of  Jabala,'  is  the  metronymic  of  Maha- 
J&xla1  and  Satyakama.2  Jabala  is  also  mentioned  as  a  teacher 
in   the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad   Brahmana,3  which   refers  to  the 

1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  x.  3,  3,  1  ;  1  dogya  Upanisad,  iv.  4,  i,etc;  Aitareya 
6,  1,  1.  I  Brahmana,  viii.  7. 

2  Ibid.,  xiii.  5,  3,  1 ;  Brhadaranyaka  |  3  iii.  9,  9. 
Upanisad,  iv.  1,  14;  vi.  3,  19;  Chan-  j 


284         NAMES—SON-IN-LAW— BLOOD  RELATION    [Jabalayana 

Jabalas4  as  well.     The  Jabala  Grhapatis  are  spoken  of  in  the 
Kausltaki  Brahmana.5 


4  iii.  7,  2. 


xxm.  5. 


Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  395. 

Jabalayana,  '  descendant  of  Jabala,'  is  the  patronymic  of  a 
teacher,  a  pupil  of  Madhyamdinayana,  who  is  mentioned  in 
the  second  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers)  of  the  Kanva  recension  of 
the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  (iv.  6,  2). 


JamadagTiiya  is  the  patronymic  of  two  '  descendants  of 
Jamadagni '  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita.1  It  appears  from  the 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana2  that  the  Aurvas  are  meant,  and  that 
Jamadagni's  descendants  were  ever  prosperous. 


1  vii.  1,  g,  1. 

2  xxi.  10,  6. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  12,  251,  n. 


Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the  Connecticut 
Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15,  54. 


Jamatp  is  a  rare  word  denoting  '  son-in-law '  in  the  Rigveda,1 
where  also  occurs  the  word  Vijamatr,  denoting  an  '  unsatis- 
factory son-in-law,'  as  one  who  does  not  pay  a  sufficient  price, 
or  one  who,  having  other  defects,  must  purchase  a  bride. 
Friendly  relations  between  son-in-law  and  father-in-law  are 
referred  to  in  the  Rigveda.2 


1  viii.  2,  20.  Vayu  is  called  the 
jamatr  of  Tvastr  in  viii.  26,  21.  22. 
Cf.  Delbriick,  Die  indogermanischen  Ver- 
wandtschaftsnamen,  517  ;  Pischel,  Vedische 
Studien,  2,  78,  79. 


2  x.  28,  1.  Cf.  Bloomfield,  Journal 
of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  15, 
255- 


Jami,  a  word  which  appears  originally  to  have  meant 
1  related  in  blood,'  is  not  rarely  used  as  an  epithet  of '  sister ' 
(Svasr),  and  sometimes  even  denotes  '  sister '  itself,  the 
emphasis  being  on  the  blood-relationship.1  So  it  appears  in 
a  passage   of  the   Atharvaveda,2  where    '  brotherless    sisters ' 


1  Cf,  Delbriick,  Die  indogermanischen 
Verwandtschaftsnamen,  463, 464.  As '  rela- 
tion,' it  occurs,  e.g.,  Rv.  i.  31,  10; 
75,    3.    4 ;    100,    11  ;    124,    6,    etc.  ;    as 


'sister,'  Rv.  i.  65,  7;  x.  10,  10,  etc. 
with  svasa,  i.  123,  5;    185,  5;  iii.  I,  11 
ix.  65,  1  ;  89,  4,  etc. 
2  i-  17,  I- 


Jaya]    FAMILY  FEUDS— HOLLOW  OF  THE  KNEE— WIFE     285 


(abhratara  iva  jamayah)  are  referred  to.  The  word  is  similarly 
used  in  the  dispute  occurring  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana3  as  to 
the  precedence  of  Raka,  or  of  the  wives  of  the  gods,  in  a  certain 
rite.  One  party  is  there  described  as  holding  that  the  sister 
should  be  preferred  (j  amy  at  vai  purva-peyam) — apparently  at  a 
ceremonial  family  meal — to  the  wife,  presumably  as  being  of 
one  blood  with  the  husband,  while  the  wife  is  not  (being  anyo- 
darya,  '  of  another  womb  ').4  In  the  neuter5  the  word  means 
1  relationship,'  like  jami-tva,  which  also  occurs  in  the  Rigveda.6 


"  in.  37- 

4  Delbriick,  loc.  cit. 

5  Rv.  iii.  54,  9  ;  x.   10,  4  ;  jami-krt, 


'making  relationship,'  Av.   iv.    19,    1. 
Cf.  Aitareya  Brahmana,  loc.  cit. 

6  i.  105,  9 ;   166,  13  ;  x,  55,  4 '.  64,  13. 


Jami-gamsa,  the  '  imprecation  by  a  sister '  or  '  relation,'  is 
mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  showing  that  family  disputes 
were  not  rare.  This  is  also  indicated  by  the  word  Bhratrvya, 
which,  while  properly  meaning  'father's  brother's  son,'  regularly 
denotes  simply  '  enemy.' 

1  ii.  10,  1  ( =  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  ii.  5,  6,  3),  and  personified  in  ix.  4,  15. 
Cf.jamyah  sapathah,  Av.  ii.  7,  2  ;  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  362. 


Jambila,  '  hollow  of  the  knee,'1  occurs  once  in  the  MaitrayanI 
Samhita.2  The  word  also  occurs  in  the  form  of  Jambila  in  the 
Kathaka  Samhita3  and  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.4  Mahldhara, 
in  his  commentary  on  the  latter  text,  interprets  the  word  as 
'  knee-pan,'  which  he  says  is  so  named  because  of  its  resemblance 
to  the  citron,  jambira. 


1  Perhaps   for  janu-bila.     Cf.    Mac- 
donell,  Vedic  Grammar,  p.  11,  n.  4. 


111.  15.  3- 
v.  13,  1. 


xxv.  3. 


Jayanti-putra,  '  son  of  Jayanti,'  is  mentioned  in  the  last 
Vamsa  (list  of  teachers)  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad1  as  a 
pupil  of  Mandukayaniputra. 

1  vi.  5,  2  (Kanva  =  vi.  4,  32  Madhyamdina). 


Jaya  regularly  denotes  '  wife,'  and,  as  opposed  to  Patni,  wife 
as  an  object  of  marital  affection,  the  source  of  the  continuance 


286 


DISEASE— LOVER 


[  Jayanya,  Jayenya 


of  the  race.1  So  it  is  used  of  the  wife  of  the  gambler,  and  of 
the  wife  of  the  Brahmana  in  the  Rigveda  ;2  it  is  also  frequently 
combined  with  Pati,  'husband,'3  both  there  and  in  the  later 
literature.4  Patnl,  on  the  other  hand,  is  used  to  denote  the 
wife  as  partner  in  the  sacrifice  f  when  no  share  in  it  is  assigned 
to  her,  she  is  called  Jaya.6  The  distinction  is,  of  course, 
merely  relative ;  hence  one  text7  calls  Manu's  wife  Jaya, 
another8  Patni.     Later  on  Jaya  is  superseded  by  Dara. 


1  Delbruck,  Die  indogermanischen  Ver-   |   vii.     13,    10  ;    Satapatha    Brahmana, 


ivandtschaftsnamen,  411,  412.  Cf.  Rv. 
i.  105,  2  ;  124,  7  ;  iii.  53,  4  ;  iv.  3,  2  ; 
18,  3  ;  ix.  82,  4 ;  x.  10,  7  ;  17,  1  ;  71,  4, 
etc.  ;  Av.  iii.  30,  2 ;  vi.  60,  1,  etc. 

2  x.  34,  2.  3.  13,  and  x.  109. 

3  Rv.  iv.  3,  2 ;  x.  149,  4. 

4  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iii.  23,  1.    Cf. 


iv.  6,  7,  9.     Cf.  MaitrayanI  Samhita, 
i.  6,  12. 

5  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  9,  2,  14. 

6  i-  i,4.  13- 

7  Ibid.,  i.  1,4,  16. 

8  MaitrayanI  Samhita,  iv.  8,  1. 


Jayanya,1  Jayenya,2  are  variant  forms  of  the  name  of  a 
disease  mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda  and  the  Taittiriya  Sam- 
hita. In  one  passage  of  the  former  text3  it  is  mentioned  with 
jaundice  (harimd)  and  pains  in  the  limbs  (anga-bhedo  visalpakah).^ 
Zimmer4  thinks  these  are  its  symptoms,  and  identifies  it  with  a 
kind  of  Yaksma,  or  disease  of  the  lungs.  Bloomfield 5  prefers 
to  identify  it  with  syphilis,  in  accordance  with  certain  indica- 
tions in  the  ritual  of  the  Kausika  Sutra.6  Roth  conjectures 
1  gout,'  but  Whitney7  leaves  the  nature  of  the  disease  doubtful. 


1  Av.  vii.  76,  3-5  ;  xix.  44,  2. 

2  ii-  3.  5.  2  ;  5.  6,  5. 

3  xix.  44,  2. 

4  Altindisches  Leben,  377,  following 
Wise,  Hindu  System  of  Medicine,  321, 
describing  Aksata. 

5  American  fournal  of  Philology,   11, 


320  et  seq.  ;  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
559-56I. 

6  xxxii.  11.  Cf.  also  the  commentary 
on  Av.  vii.  76,  and  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
loc.  cit. 

7  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  442 . 
Cf.  Henry ,Le livre vii de I' A tharvaveda,  98. 


Jara,  Mover,'  has  no  sinister  sense  in  the  early  texts1 
generally,  where  the  word  applies  to  any  lover.  But  it  seems 
probable  that  the  Jara  at  the  Purusamedha,  or  human  sacrifice,2 


1  Rv.  i.  66,  8;  117,  18;  134,  3; 
152,  4;  ix.  32,  5,  etc.  The  word  is 
often  used  mythologically,  as,  e.g.,  jara 
usasam,    'lover  of  the  dawns,'   vii.    9, 


1.      Cf.    Zimmer,    Altindisches    Leben, 
308. 

2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  9  ;  Tait- 
tiriya Brahmana,  iii.  4,  4,  1. 


Jahu§a  J  NAMES— NET— HEAD  OF  FAMILY  287 

must  be  regarded  as  an  illegitimate  lover;  this  sense  also 
appears  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,3  and  Indra  is  styled 
the  lover  of  Ahalya,  wife  of  Gautama.4 

3  vi.  4,  n.  4  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  65. 


Jarat-karava  ('  descendant  of  Jaratkaru ')  Artabhag-a  ('  de- 
scendant of  Rtabhaga')  is  the  name  of  a  teacher  mentioned 
in  the  Sankhayana  Aranyaka  (vii.  20)  and  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad  (iii.  2,  1,  in  both  recensions). 

Jaru.     See  Jarayu. 

Jala  occurs  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  the  Sutras2  in  the  sense 
of  '  net.'  Jalaka  is  used  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad3  of  a 
reticulated  membrane  resembling  a  woven  covering. 

1  viii.  8,  5.  8  (as  used  against  foes);  I  2  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  vii.  4,  7, 
x.  1,  30.  I   etc.  3  iv.  2,  3. 

Jalasa.  See  Jalasa,  which  is  read  by  Sayana  in  the  Athar- 
vaveda (vi.  57,  2)  for  Jalasa.1 

1  Cf.  Bloomfield,  American  Journal  0/  Philology,  11,  320. 

Jaskamada  is  the  name  of  an  unknown  animal  in  the  Athar- 
vaveda.1 

1  xi.  g,  9.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  88. 

Jas-pati  occurs  once  in  the  Rigveda1  in  the  sense  of  the 
4  head  of  the  family.'  The  abstract  formed  from  this  word, 
Jas-patya,  apparently  denoting  'lordship  of  children,'  is  also 
found  there.2 

1  i.  185,  8.  a  Rv.  v.  28,  3  ;  x.  85,  23. 

Jahusa  is  the  name  in  the  Rigveda1  of  a  protege  of  the 
Asvins. 

1  i.  n6,  X°  ;  vii-  71,  5-     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  159. 


288 


NAMES— PLANT— OFFICIAL 


[  Jahnava 


Jahnava,  '  descendant  of  Jahnu,'  is  the  patronymic  of  ViSva- 
mitpa  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.1  This  fact  is  of  some 
importance  as  disproving  Aufrecht's  theory2  that  the  Jahnus 
were  the  clan  of  Ajigarta,  the  father  of  Sunah§epa. 

1  xxi.  12.  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  I  necticut  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15, 
1,  32  ;  Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the  Con-  |   54. 

2  Aitareya  Brahmana,  424. 


Jitvan  Sailini  is  the  name  of  a  teacher  in  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad,1  a  contemporary  of  Janaka  and  Yajnavalkya.  He 
held  that  speech  (vac)  was  Brahman. 

1  iv.  1,  2  (Kanva  =  iv.  1,  5  Madhyamdina,  which  has  Sailina  as  the  patronymic). 


Jihvavant  Badhyogfa  is  the  name,  in  the  last  Vamsa  (list  of 
teachers)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,1  of  a  teacher,  pupil 
of  Asita  Varsag-ana. 

1  vi.  5,  3  (Kanva  =  vi.  4,  33  Madhyamdina). 


Jiva-grbh,  '  seizing  alive,'  is,  according  to  Roth,1  the  term, 
for  a  police  official  in  the  Rigveda.2  But  although  this  sense 
is  rendered  possible  by  the  mention  of  MadhyamaSI,  perhaps 
'  arbitrator,'  in  the  same  passage,3  it  is  neither  necessary  nor 
probable.4 


1  St     Petersburg    Dictionary,    s.v. 
Siebenzig  Lieder,  174. 

2  x.  97,  11. 


3  Rv.  x.  97,  12. 

4  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  180. 


Jiva-ja.     See  Jarayu. 


Jivant  appears  to  denote  a  certain  plant  in  one  passage  of 
the  Atharvaveda,1  where  the  edition  of  Roth  and  Whitney  has 
the  unjustified  emendation  Jivala.2 


1  xix.  39,  3.     Cf.  Whitney,  Transla- 
tion of  the  Atharvaveda,  960. 

2  "With    this    conjectural    form,    cf. 


Jivala,   an  epithet  of  a  plant  in  Av. 
vi-  59.  3;  viii.  2,  6;  7,  6 ;  xix.  39,  3. 


Jaitrayana  Sahojit  ]    NAMES— LADLE— FIREBRAND  289 

^  Jivala  Cailaki,  '  descendant  of  Celaka,'  is  mentioned  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana1  as  reproving  Taksan. 

1  ii-  3.  ii  3!-35-     Cf.  Levi,  La  Doctrine  die  Sacrifice,  140. 


Juhu  is  the  regular  name  in  the  Rigveda  and  later  for  the 
tongue-shaped  ladle  in  which  butter  was  offered  to  the  gods. 

1  Rv.  viii.  44,  5;  x.  21,  3  ;  Av.  xviii.  4,  5.  6,  etc. 


Jurni,  '  firebrand,'  is  regarded  by  Zimmer1  as  one  of  the 
weapons  of  the  Vedic  Indians.  But  since  it  is  only  mentioned 
in  the  Rigveda2  as  a  weapon  used  by  demons,  its  employment 
in  normal  war  cannot  be  safely  assumed. 

1  Altindisches  Leben,  301.  2  i.  129,  8.     Cf.  Nirukta,  vi.  4. 

Jurni  is  one  of  the  names  given  to  serpents  in  a  hymn  of  the 
Atharvaveda  (ii.  24,  5),  perhaps  from  their  habit  of  casting 
their  slough.     See  Ahi. 

Jetr.     See  Srni. 


Jaitrayana  Saho-jit  is  apparently  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita1 
the  name  of  a  prince  who  celebrated  the  Rajasuya,  or  '  royal 
consecration.'  Von  Schroeder2  quotes  in  support  of  Jaitra- 
yana as  a  proper  name  the  derivative  Jaitrayani,  '  descendant 
of  Jaitra,'  formed  according  to  the  Gana  karnadi,  which  is 
referred  to  by  Panini  ;3  but  it  should  be  noted  that  in  the 
parallel  passage  of  the  Kapisthala  Samhita4  the  reading  is 
different,  and  no  proper  personal  name  appears,  the  subject 
being  Indra,  the  god.  This  reading  seems  much  more  probable, 
for  the  verse  should  be  general,  and  suit  every  king  performing 
the  rite. 


xviii.  5. 


2  Zeitschrift    der    Deutschen    Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  49,  168. 


3  iv.  2,  80. 

4  xxviii.  5,  cited  by  von  Schroeder 
Kathaka,  i,  p.  269. 


VOL.  I.  19 


290 


NAMES— WITNESS 


[  Jaimini 


Jaimini  does  not  appear  till  the  Sutra  period.1  But  a 
Jaiminiya  Samhita  of  the  Samaveda  is  extant,  and  has  been 
edited  and  discussed  by  Caland  ;2  and  a  Jaiminiya  Brahmana, 
of  which  a  special  section  is  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brah- 
mana,3 is  known  and  has  formed  the  subject  of  several  articles 
by  Oertel.4 


1  AsValayana  Grhya  Sutra,  iii.  4 ; 
Sankhayana  Grhya  Sutra,  iv.  10  ;  vi.  6, 
etc.  He  appears  also  as  a  pupil  of 
Vyasa,  Samavidhana  Brahmana,  ad  fin.; 
Weber,  Indische  Studien,  4,  377.  Cf.  his 
Indian  Literature,  56. 

2  As  part  ii.  of  Hillebrandt's  Indische 
Forschungen,  Breslau,  1907.  See  Olden- 
berg,  Gottingische  Gelehrte  Anzeigen.  1908, 
712  et  seq. 


I  3  Edited  by  Oertel,  Journal  of  the 
I  American  Oriental  Society,  16,  79-260. 
4  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  18,  15  et  seq.  ;  19,  97;  23,  325  ; 
26,  176,  306;  28,  81  ;  Actes  du  onzieme 
Congres  International  des  Orientalistes, 
1 ,  225 ;  Transactions  of  the  Connecticut 
Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15,  155 
et  seq. 


Jaivantayana,  '  descendant  of  Jivanta,'  is  mentioned  in  the 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad1  as  a  teacher,  with  Saunaka  and 
Raibhya,  of  Rauhinayana. 

1  iv.  5,  26  (Madhyamdina).     The  name  is  recognised  by  Panini,  iv.  1,  103. 


Jaivala  or  Jaivali,  '  descendant  of  Jlvala,'  is  the  patronymic 
of  Pravahana  in  the  Brhadaranyaka1  and  Chandogya  Upani- 
sads.2  Jaivali,  the  king,  in  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana3 
is  the  same  person. 


1  vi.  2,  1  (Kanva  =  vi.  1,  1  Madhyam- 
dina), where  the  form  is  Jaivala. 


1.  2.  8 ;  v.  3,  1. 


i.  38,  4- 


Jfiatr  occurs  in  two  passages  of  the  Atharvaveda1  and  one 
of  the  Sankhayana  Aranyaka2  with  a  somewhat  obscure  sense. 
Zimmer3  conjectures  not  unnaturally  that  the  word  is  a 
technical  term  taken  from  law,  meaning  'witness.'  The 
reference  is,  perhaps,  to  a  custom  of  carrying  on  transactions 
of  business  before  witnesses  as  practised  in  other  primitive 
societies.4     Roth5  suggests  that   the  word   has   the   sense  of 


1  vi.  32,  3  ;  viii.  8,  21. 

2  xii.    14.      Cf.    Keith,    Sankhayana 
Aranyaka,  66,  n.  4. 

3  Altindisches  Leben,  181. 


4  In  Manu,  viii.  57,  the  word  is  a 
various  reading  for  sahsin,  'witness.' 
Cf.  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  140. 

5  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Jya  ]  RELATION-BOWSTRING  291 

'surety.'     But  Bloomfield6  and  Whitney7  ignore  these  inter- 
pretations. 

6  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  475.  7  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  306. 


Jfiati  (masc),  a  word  which  originally  seems  to  have  meant 
1  acquaintance,'1  denotes  in  the  Rigveda2  and  later3  a  '  relation,' 
apparently  one  who  was  connected  by  blood  on  the  father's 
side,  though  the  passages  do  not  necessarily  require  the 
limitation.  But  this  sense  follows  naturally  enough  from  the 
patriarchal  basis  of  Vedic  society.4 


1  Being  in  all  probability  derived 
iromjna,  '  know,'  not  iromjan,  '  beget,' 
as  would  at  first  sight  seem  more  likely 
on  account  of  the  sense.  Cf.  the 
St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

2  vii.  55,  5,  seems  to  refer  to  the 
members  of  the  joint  family  sleeping 
in  the  paternal  house;  x.  66,  14;  85, 
28  (the  kinsmen  of  the  bride  are 
meant);  117,  9  (perhaps  'brother  and 
sister '  are  meant  by  jnafi  here,  but 
*  kinsfolk '  will  do ;  cf.  Muir,  Sanskrit 
Texts,  5,  432). 

3  Av.  xii.  5,  44  (where  Whitney  in 


his  Translation  renders  the  word  by 
'  acquaintances, '  which  seems  too  vague 
and  feeble) ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  6, 
5,  2 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  6,  4,  3 
(j'natibhyam,  va  sakhibhyam  va,  [where 
'  relations '  are  contrasted  with  '  friends ' 
or  'companions');  ii.  2,  2,  20;  5,  2, 
20;  xi.  3,  3,  7,  etc. 

4  For  the  transition  from  the  etymo- 
logical meaning,  cf.  yvurds,  yvurrj, 
which  in  Homer  designate  '  brother ' 
and  '  sister  ' ;  St.  Petersburg  Dic- 
tionary, s.v. 


Jya  is  the  regular  word  for  'bowstring'  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  later.2  The  making  of  bowstrings  was  a  special  craft,  as 
is  shown  by  the  occurrence  of  the  Jya-kara,  or  '  maker  of  bow- 
strings,' among  the  victims  at  the  Purusamedha,  or  human 
sacrifice,  in  the  Yajurveda.3  The  bowstring  consisted  of  a 
thong  of  ox-hide.4  It  was  not  usually  kept  taut,5  but  was 
specially  tightened  when  the  bow  was  to  be  used.6  The  sound 
of  the  bowstring  (jyd-ghosa)  is  referred  to  in  the  Atharvaveda.7 
Cf.  Artnl. 


1  iv.  27,  3  ;  vi.  75,  3 ;  x.  51,  6,  etc. 

2  Av.  i.  1,  3;  v.  13,  6;  vi.  42,  1; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  9;  xxix.  51, 
etc. 

3  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  7 ;  Tait- 
tiriya Brahmana,  iii.  4,  3,  1. 

4  Rv.  vi.  75,  3;  Av.  i.  r,  3.  In  the 
Epic  the  bowstring  is  made  of  hemp 


(maurvi)  ;      Hopkins,    Journal    of    the 
American  Oriental  Society,  13,  271. 
6  Av.  vi.  42,  1. 

6  Rv.  x.  166,  3. 

7  v.  21,  9. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  298 
299. 

19 — 2 


292 


BOWSTRING— BOW— CONSTELLATION  [  Jyaka 


Jyaka  means  '  bowstring,'  with  a  contemptuous  sense,  in  the 
Rigveda,1  and  in  the  simple  sense  in  the  Atharvaveda.2 


1  x.  133,    1,   where  anyakesam  j'yakah  is    unmistakably    contemptuous. 
Macdonell,  Vedic  Grammar,  p.  137. 

2  i.  2,  2. 


Cf. 


Jya-paSa  means  '  bowstring '  in  the  Atharvaveda  (xi.  10,  22), 


Jya-hroda  occurs  in  the  description  of  the  arms  of  the 
Vratya  in  the  Paficavim6a  Brahmana,1  and  is  also  mentioned 
in  the  Sutras.2  The  sense  is  somewhat  obscure,  for  one  Sutra 
describes  it  as  a  'bow  not  meant  for  use'  (ayogyam  dhanus),3 
while  the  other  speaks  of  it  as  a  'bow  without  an  arrow' 
(dhanuska  anisu).*  Some  sort  of  a  bow,  therefore,  seems  to  be 
meant. 


1  xvii.  1,  14  (spelt  -hnoda  in  text, 
-hnoda  in  comm.). 

■  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xxii.  4, 
11  (spelt  -hroda) ;  Latyayana  Srauta 
Siitra,  viii.  6,  8  (spelt  -hnoda :  the  editor 
notes  that  the  Drahyayana  Sutra  has 
the  same  reading). 


3  Katyayana,  loc.  cit. 

4  Latyayana,  loc.  cit. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  38; 
Honkins,  Transactions  of  the  Connecticut 
Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15,  32  ; 
Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  33,  52. 


Jyestha,    ordinarily    meaning    '  greatest,'    has    further    the 

specific  sense  of  '  eldest ' x  brother  in  the  Rigveda.2     It  also 

means  the  eldest  among  sons,  which  is  another  side  of  the 
3 


same  sense. 

1  With  changed  accent,  jyestha.     Cf. 
Macdonell,  Vedic  Grammar,  p.  83,  14. 

2  iv-  33»  5  i  x-  IX»  2- 


3  Av.  xii.  2,  35  ;  Aitareya  Brahmana, 
vii.  17 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  5, 
3,  8,  and  cf.  Jyaisthineya. 


Jyestha-g-hni,  *  slaying  the  eldest,'  is  the  name  of  a  Naksatra, 
or  lunar  mansion,  usually  called  Jyestha,  in  the  Atharvaveda1 
and  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana.2     It  is  Antares  or  Cor  Scipionis. 

1  vi.  no,  2.     Cf.  vi.  ii2,  I. 

2  i.  5,  2,  8.     Cf.  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  361. 


Jyestha.     See  Naksatra. 


Jha?a  ]  ASTRONOMY— LARGE  FISH  293 

Jyaisthineya  denotes,  in   combination  with  Jyestha,     the 
eldest,'  a  *  son  of  the  father's  first  wife  '  (jyestha),  in  the  Brah- 


1  Taittiriya  Brahmana,   ii.    1,   8,   1  (opposed   to   kanistha  and  kanisthineya) ; 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  ii.  1,  2;  xx.  5,  2. 


Jyotisa,  *  astronomy.'  It  is  important  to  note  that  no  refer- 
ence to  any  work  on  astronomy  occurs  in  the  Samhitas  or 
Brahmanas.  The  text  which  claims  to  represent  the  astro- 
nomical science  of  the  Veda  has  been  edited  by  Weber,1  and 
has  frequently  been  discussed  since.2  Its  date  is  unknown,  but 
is  undoubtedly  late,  as  is  shown  alike  by  the  contents  and  form 
of  the  work. 

1  Ueber  den  Vedakahnder  namens  I  2  See  references  in  Thibaut,  Astron- 
Jyotisam  (1862).  I   omie,  Astrologie  und  Mathematik,  20,  29. 

Jvalayana,  '  descendant  of  Jvala,'  is  the  name  of  a  man,  a 
pupil  of  Gausukti,  mentioned  in  the  Jaimimya  Upanisad 
Brahmana  (iv.  16,  1),  in  a  list  of  teachers. 


JH. 

Jhasa  is  mentioned  in  the  story  of  Manu  told  in  the  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,1  where  it  means  a  '  great  fish  '  (mahd-matsya) 
according  to  the  commentator.  Eggeling2  suggests  that  a 
horned  fish  is  meant,  because  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita3  the 
Ida,  or  personified  libation,  is  represented  as  a  cow,  and  this 
may  have  brought  in  the  idea  of  a  horned  fish  in  the  later  form 
of  an  old  legend.     But  cf.  Jasa. 

1  i.  8,  1,  4.  2  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  12,  217,  n.  3  ;  26,  xxxi. 

3  i.  7,  1 ;  ii.  6,  7. 


294 


PA  TRONYMIC—FE  VER 


[  Takavana 


T. 

Takavana  appears  to  be  a  patronymic  from  Taku,1  and  to  be 
the  name  of  a  seer  in  the  Rigveda,2  presumably  a  descendant  of 
Taku  Kaksivant,  for  his  name  occurs  in  a  group  of  hymns 
composed  by  the  Kaksivatas.3 


1  Cf.  Bhrgavana,  from  Bhrgu  ;  Roth, 
St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  Taku, 
as  an  adjective  (?),  occurs  in  Rigveda, 
ix.  97,  52. 

2  i.  120,  6. 


3  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  42,  221. 

Cf.  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  2,  92 ; 
Ludwig,  fiber  Methode  bei  Interpretation 
des  Rgveda,  47. 


Takman  is  a  disease  repeatedly  mentioned  in  the  Athar- 
vaveda,  but  later  not  known  under  this  name.  It  is  the  subject 
of  five  hymns1  of  the  Atharvaveda,  and  is  often  mentioned  else- 
where.2 Weber3  first  identified  it  with  '  fever,'  and  Grohmann4 
showed  that  all  the  symptoms  pointed  to  that  ailment 5  Refer- 
ence is  made  to  the  alternate  hot  and  shivering  fits  of  the 
patient,6  to  the  yellow  colour  of  the  jaundice  which  accompanies 
the  fever,7  and  to  its  peculiar  periodicity.  The  words  used  to 
describe  its  varieties  are  anye-dyuh,8  ubhaya-dyuh,9  trtlyaka,10 
vi-trtiya,11  and  sadam-di,12  the  exact  sense  of  most  of  which 
terms  is  somewhat  uncertain.  It  is  agreed13  that  the  first 
epithet  designates  the  fever  known  as  quotidianus,  which  recurs 
each  day  at  the  same  hour,  though  the  word  is  curious  (lit. 


1  i.  25 ;  v.  22 ;  vi.  20 ;  vii.  116 ; 
xix.  39  {cf.  v.  4). 

2  Av.  iv.  9,  8  ;  v.  4,  1.  9  ;  30,  16  ; 
ix.  8,  6 ;  xi.  2,  22.  26,  etc. 

3  Indische  Studien,  4,  119 ;  Roth,  Zur 
Litter atur  und  Geschichte  des  Weda,  39, 
had,  from  the  use  of  Kustha  as  a 
remedy,  regarded  it  as  denoting 
'leprosy,'  and  was  followed  by  Pictet, 
Kuhn's  Zeitschrift,  5,  337.  Muir,  Sanskrit 
Texts,  4,  280,  thought  '  consumption ' 
was  meant. 

4  Indische  Studien,  9,  381  et  seq. 

5  See  also  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  451  et  seq. ;  Zimmer,  Altin- 
disches  Leben,  379-385,  and  compare  the 
para  (a  non-Vedic  word)  of  the  classical 


medicine,  Wise,  Hindu  System  of 
Medicine,  219  et  seq.  ;  Jolly,  Medicin, 
70-72.  Darila  and  Kesava,  the  com- 
mentators on  the  Kaugika  Sutra,  every- 
where equate  takman  and  jvara. 

6  Av.   i.   25,    2-4;   v.   22,   2.   7.   10; 
vi.  20,  3  ;  vii.  116,  1. 

7  Av.  i.  25,  2 ;  v.  22,  2  ;  vi.  20,  3. 

8  Av.  i.  25,  4;  vii.  116,  2. 

9  Ibid. 
v.    22,   13  ;  xix.  39, 


25,   4 


10  Av.   i 
10. 

11  Av.  v.  22,  13. 

12  Av.  v.  22,  13 ;  xix.  39,  10. 

13  Grohmann,  op.  cit.,  387;  Zimmer, 
op.  cit.,  382  ;  Bloomfield,  op.  cit., 
274. 


Takman  ] 


VARIETIES  OF  FEVER 


295 


'on  the  other—  i.e.,  next,  day').  The  ubhaya-dyuh  ('on  both 
days ')  variety  appears  to  mean  a  disease  recurring  for  two  suc- 
cessive days,  the  third  being  free ;  this  corresponds  to  the  rhythmus 
quartamis  complicatus.14  But  Sayana  considers  that  it  means  a 
fever  recurring  on  the  third  day,  the  '  tertian.'  The  trtiyaka, 
however, must  be  the  'tertian'  fever,15  though  Zimmer16  suggests 
that  it  may  mean  a  fever  which  is  fatal  at  the  third  paroxysm. 
Grohmann17  regards  the  vi-trtiyaka  as  equivalent  to  the  tertiana 
duplicata,  a  common  form  in  southern  countries,  in  which  the 
fever  occurs  daily,  but  with  a  correspondence  in  point  of  time 
or  severity  of  attack  on  alternate  days.  Bloomfield18  suggests 
that  it  is  identical  with  the  ubhaya-dyuh  variety.  The  sadam-di19 
type  appears  to  be  the  kind  later  known  as  samtata-jvara 
('  continuous  fever  '),  in  which  there  are  attacks  of  several  days' 
duration,  with  an  interval  followed  by  a  fresh  period  of  attack. 
Fever  occurred  at  different  seasons,  in  the  autumn  (sdrada),  in 
the  hot  weather  (graisma),  in  the  rains  (vdrsika),20  but  was 
especially  prevalent  in  the  first,  as  is  indicated  by  the  epithet 
visva-sdrada,  *  occurring  every  autumn.'21 

The  disease  is  said  to  arise  when  Agni  enters  the  waters.22 
From  this  Weber23  deduced  that  it  was  considered  to  be  the 
result  of  a  chill  supervening  on  heat,  or  the  influence  of  heat  on 
marshy  land.  Grohmann24  preferred  to  see  in  this  connexion 
of  the  origin  of  the  disease  with  Agni's  entering  the  waters  ** 
an  allusion  to  the  fact  that  fever  arises  in  the  rainy  season,  the 
time  when  Agni,  as  lightning,  descends  to  earth  with  the  rain. 
Zimmer,26  who  accepts  this  view,  further  refers  to  the  prevalence 

'  always  cutting '  (cf.  Sayana  on  Av. 
xix.  39, 10),  or  '  always  fastening  upon  ' 
(Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.), 
or  '  belonging  to  every  day  '  =  sadam- 
dina  (Zimmer,  383,  n. ;  Bloomfield, 
452)- 

20  Av.  V.   22,    13. 

21  Av.  ix.  8,  6 ;  xix.  34,  10. 

22  Av.  1.  25,  1. 

23  Indische  Studien,  4,  119. 

24  Ibid.,  9,  493. 

25  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  92. 
2G  Of*  cit.,  384. 


14  Grohmann,  388  ;  Zimmer,  382  ; 
Bloomfield,  274.  It  may  conceivably 
be  the  form  styled  Caturthaka  Vipar- 
yaya  (Wise,  op.  cit.,  232),  in  which  the 
paroxysm  occurs  every  fourth  day, 
and  lasts  for  two  days. 

15  Sayana  on  Av.  i.  25,  4  ;  Bloom- 
field, 451.  It  is  the  jvara  trtiyaka  of 
Susruta  (2,  404,  7). 

16  Op.  cit.,  383,  quoting  Hiigel,  Kash- 
mir, 1,  133. 

17  Op.  cit.,  388. 

18  Op.  cit.,  451. 

19  Of    doubtful    derivation :     either 


296  SOURCES  AND  SYMPTOMS  OF  FEVER        [  Takvan 

of  fever  in  the  Terai,  and  interprets  vanya,  an  epithet  of  fever 
found  in  the  Atharvaveda,27  as  meaning  '  sprung  from  the 
forest,'  pointing  out  that  fever  is  mentioned  as  prevalent  among 
the  Mujavants  and  Mahavrsas,  two  mountain  tribes  of  the 
western  Himalaya.28  There  is  no  trace  of  fever  having  been 
observed  to  be  caused  by  the  bite  of  the  anopheles  mosquito, 
which  breeds  in  stagnant  water  :  this  theory  has  without  reason 
been  held  to  be  known  to  classical  Indian  medicine.29 

Among  the  symptoms  of  Takman,  or  among  complications 
accompanying  it,  are  mentioned  'itch'  (Paman),  'headache' 
(sirsa-soka),so  'cough'  (Kasika),  and  'consumption,'  or  perhaps 
some  form  of  itch  (Balasa). 

It  is  perhaps  significant  that  the  Takman  does  not  appear 
until  the  Atharvaveda.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  Vedic 
Aryans,  when  first  settled  in  India,  did  not  know  the  disease, 
which  would  take  some  generations  to  become  endemic  and 
recognized  as  dangerous.  What  remedies  they  used  against  it 
is  quite  uncertain,  for  the  Atharvaveda  mentions  only  spells 
and  the  Kustha,  which  can  hardly  have  been  an  effective 
remedy,  though  still  used  in  later  times.  Fever  must,  even  in 
the  Atharvan  period,  have  claimed  many  victims,  or  it  would 
not  be  mentioned  so  prominently. 

30  Av.  xix.  39,  io. 

For  the  present  position  of  the  disease 
in  India,  cf.  the  Report  of  the  Simla 
Conference  of  1909. 


27  Av.  vi.  20,  4. 

28  Av.  v.  22,  5. 

29  Jolly,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society,  1906,  222. 


Takvan,1  Takvarl,2  seem  in  the  Rigveda  to  denote  a  '  swift- 
flying  bird.'     Sayana3  explains  Takvan  as  a  swift  steed. 

1  Rv.  i.  66,  2.     Cf.  i.  134,  5,  and  Tsarin. 

2  Ibid.,  i.  151,  5;  x.  91,  2.     But  in  both  places  the  word  may  be  adjectival. 

3  On  Rv.  i.  66,  2. 

Taksaka  VaiSaleya  ('descendant  of  Visala')  is  a  mythical 
figure,  mentioned  as  the  son  of  Viraj  in  the  Atharvaveda,1 
and  as  Brahmanacchamsin  priest  at  the  snake  sacrifice  in  the 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana.2 

•  ^J-  vii.  10,  29. 

2  xxv.  15,  3.    Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  35. 


Tandula  ] 


CA  RPENTER-  GRA  IN 


297 


1.  Taksan,  'carpenter,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1  and 
often  later.2  He  was  employed  to  do  all  sorts  of  work  in 
wood,  such  as  the  making  of  chariots  (Ratha)  and  wagons 
(Anas).  Carved  work  of  a  finer  type  seems  also  to  have  fallen 
to  his  lot.3  The  axe  (kulisa,4  parasu6)  is  mentioned  as  one  of 
his  tools,  and  perhaps  the  Bhurij,  a  word  which  is,  however, 
uncertain  in  sense.  In  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda6  reference 
seems  to  be  made  to  the  pains  of  the  carpenter  in  bending 
over  his  work.  That  the  carpenters  were  a  low  caste,  or 
formed  a  separate  class  of  the  people,  is  certainly  not  true  of 
Vedic  times.7 


1  ix.  112,  1. 

2  Av.  x.  6,  3 ;  Kathaka  Samhita, 
xii.  10  ;  xviii.  13  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita, 
"•  9.  5  I  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  27 ; 
xxx.  6;  Taittirlya  Brahmana,  iii.  4, 
2,  1  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  1,  3,  12  ; 
iii.  6,  4,  4,  etc. 

3  Rv.  x.  86,  5;  Av.  xix.  49,  8.  Cf. 
Rv.  i.  161,  9 ;  iii.  60,  2. 


4  Rv.  iii.  2,  1. 

5  Kathaka  Samhita,  xii.  10. 

6  Rv.  i.  105,  18.  Cf.  Roth,  Nirukta, 
Erlauterungen,  67;  Oldenberg,  Rgveda- 
Noten,  1,  100. 

7  Fick,  Die  sociale  Gliederung,  210, 
n.  1. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  245, 
253. 


2.  Taksan  is  mentioned  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  as  a 
teacher  whose  view  of  a  certain  formula  was  not  accepted  by 
JIvala  Cailaki. 

1  "•  3»  !>  3I_35«     Cf.  Levi,  La  Doctrine  du  Sacrifice,  140. 

3.  Taksan.    See  Brbu. 


Tandula,  '  grain,'  especially  '  rice  grain,'  is  mentioned  very 
often  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  later,2  but  not  in  the  Rigveda. 
This  accords  with  the  fact  that  rice  cultivation  seems  hardly 
known  in  the  Rigveda.3  Husked  (karna)  and  unhusked  (akarna) 
rice  is  referred  to  in  the  Taittirlya  Samhita.4 

26;    xi.    1,    18;    xii.    3,    18. 


A  x.   9,    20 ;    xi.    1,    18 ;    xii.    3, 
29.  30. 

2  Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  6,  6; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  x.  1,  etc.  ;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  i.  1 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
i.  1,  4.  3;  ii.  5.  3.  4  5  v.  2,  3,  2;  vi.  6, 
1,  8,  etc.;  syamaka- tandula,  'millet 
grain,'  ibid.,  x.   6,   3,   2 ;    Chandogya 


Upanisad,  iii.  14,  3  ;  apamarga-tandula, 
'  grain  of  the  Achyranthes  aspera,'  v.  2, 
4,  15,  etc. 

3  Zimmer,    Altindisches    Leben,    239. 
See  Vrihi. 

4  i.  8,   9,  3.     See  Pischel,    Vedische 
Studien,  1,  190. 


298 


FA  THER— DESCEND  A  NTS— CORD—  WA  RP 


[  Tata 


Tata,  'dada,'  is  the  pet  name  for  'father'  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  later.2    Cf.  Tata  and  Pitr. 


1  viii.  91,  6;  ix.  112,  3. 

2  Av.  v.  24,  16  ;  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
iii.  2,  5,  5;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  6, 
9,  7 ;  in  the  vocative  as  a  form  of 
address,  Av.  viii.  4,  77  ;  Aitareya  Brah- 


mana, v.  14 ;  vii.  15 ;  Aitareya  Aran- 
yaka,  i.  3,  3. 

Cf.   Delbruck,    Die    indogermanischen 
Verwandtschaftsnamen,  449. 


Tatamaha,  '  grandfather,'  is  found  in  the  Atharvaveda.1 

1  v.  24,  17 ;    viii.   4,    76.     It  seems  I  be  an  analogical  formation  following 
to  mean  literally  'great  father,'  and  to  |  pitamaha;  Delbruck,  op.  cit.,  473,  474. 


Tanaya,  n.,  denotes  '  offspring,'  'descendants'  in  the  Rigveda,1 
where  also  it  is  often  used  adjectivally  with  Toka.2  There  seems 
no  ground  for  the  view3  that  toka  means  'sons,'  'children,' 
and  tanaya  '  grandchildren.' 


1  i.  96,  4;  183,  3;  184,  5;  ii.  23,  19; 
vii.  1,  21,  etc.;  tokam  ca  tanayam  ca, 
i.  92,  13;  ix.  74,  5.  Cf.  vi.  25,  4; 
31,  1 ;  66,  8  ;  and  i.  31,  12,  as  explained 
by  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  3,  193. 

2  Rv.  i.  64,  14;  114,  6;  147,  1; 
189,  2 ;  ii.  30,  5,  etc.  ;  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana, ii.  7. 


8  Nirukta,  x.  7 ;  xii.  6. 

Cf.  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 
Tan,  tana,  and  tanas,  have  the  same 
sense  as  Tanaya.  See  Rv.  vi.  46,  12 ; 
49.  13 ;  vii.  104,  10 ;  viii.  68,  12,  etc. 
(tan) ;  viii.  25,  2  (tana)  ;  v.  70,  4 
(tanas). 


Tanti  occurs  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda,1  where  Roth 2 
renders  the  plural  of  the  word  by  'files'  of  calves.  But  it 
seems  rather  to  have  the  sense  which  it  has  in  the  later 
literature,  of '  cords,'  here  used  to  fasten  the  calves. 

1  vi.  24,  4.  2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Tantu  appears  properly  to  mean  '  thread,'  and  in  particular 
the  '  warp '  of  a  piece  of  weaving,  as  opposed  to  Otu,  the  •  woof.' 
Both  senses  are  found  in  the  Atharvaveda.1  In  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana2  the  'warp'  is  called  anuchdda,  the  'woof  parydsa, 
the  tantavah  being  the  'threads.'     In  the  Taittiriya  Samhita,3 

1  xiv.  2,  51  (opposed  to  otu) ;  xv.  3,  6  2  iii.  1,  2,  18  ;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books 

(the  prahcah  and  tiryancah  threads  or  of  the  East,  26,  8,  9. 

cords  of    the    throne   of   the  Vratya  3  vi.  1,  1,4. 
[Asandi]). 


Tarak§u  ] 


WEB- A  TEACHER— HYMN  A 


299 


on  the  other  hand,  the  'warp'  is  pracina-tana,  the  'woof  otu. 
The  threads  or  cords  of  the  throne  (Paryanka)  are  referred  to 
in  the  Kausitaki  Upanisad.4 

In  the  Rigveda  the  word  is  used  only  metaphorically,  and 
this  is  its  most  frequent  use  even  in  the  Brahmanas.5  See 
also  Vana. 


4  i.  5;  Keith,  Sahkhayana  Avanyaka, 
20,  n.  2. 

5  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.     It 


is  applied  to  the  filaments  of  plants  in 
Rv.  x.  134,  5 ;  to  the  spider's  web  in 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  1,  23. 


Tantra  means,  like  Tantu,  the  '  warp '  of  a  piece  of  weaving, 
or  more  generally  the  '  web '  itself.  It  is  found  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  later.2 


1  x.  71,  9. 

2  Av.  x.  7,  42  ;  Taittirlya  Brahmana, 
"•   5»   5»  3 ;    Pancavimsa    Brahmana, 


x.  5 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiv.  2,  2, 
22. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  254. 


Tapas,  Tapasya.     See  Masa. 


Tapo-nitya  ('constant  in  penance')  Pauru-sisti  ('descendant 
of  Purusista')  is  the  name  of  a  teacher  in  the  Taittirlya  Upanisad 
(i.  g,  1)  who  believed  in  the  value  of  penance  (tapas). 


Tayadara  is  the  name  of  an  animal  only  mentioned  in  the 
adjectival  form  tayadara  along  with  Parasvant,  '  wild  ass '  (?) 
in  the  Atharvaveda.1 

1  vi.  72,  2.     Cf.  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  335. 


Taraksu,  the  '  hyaena,'  is  mentioned  in  the  list  of  victims  at 
the  Asvamedha,  or  horse  sacrifice,  in  the  Yajurveda.1 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  19,  I, 
where  Sayana  explains  the  animal  to 
be  '  a  kind  of  tiger  with  an  ass's 
appearance '    (vydghra-viseso    gardabha- 


karah) ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  21 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  40. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  81. 


3oo 


ANCIENT  PATRONS— TREE— SPINDLE        [  Taranta 


Taranta  appears,  along  with  Purumidha,  as  a  patron  of 
SyavaSva  in  the  Rigveda.1  In  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana2 
and  other  Brahmanas3  he,  together  with  Purumidha,  is  de- 
scribed as  receiving  gifts  from  Dhvasra4  and  Purusanti;  but 
since  the  receipt  of  gifts  was  forbidden  to  Ksatriyas,  they  for 
the  nonce  became  Rsis,  and  composed  a  passage  in  honour 
of  the  donors.4  He,  like  Purumidha,  was  a  Vaidadasvi,  or 
son  of  Vidadasva.5 


1  v.  61,  10. 

2  xiii.  7,  12. 

3  J aiminly a  Brahmana,  iii.  139;  Saty- 
ayanaka  apud  Sayana  on  Rv.  ix.  58,  3 
=  Samaveda,  ii.  410. 

— i  Rv.  ix.  58,  3. 

5  Cf.  Rv.  v.  61 ,  10;  notes  2  and  3. 
This  is  merely  a  misunderstanding  of 
the  Rv.  Cf.  Oertel,  Journal  of  the 
American  Oriental  Society,  18,  39;  Sieg, 


Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  50  et  seq. ; 
62,  63  ;  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der 
Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft, 
42,  232,  n.  1 ;  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  353, 
354,  where  he  points  out  that  the 
Brahmana  tradition,  and  that  of  the 
Brhaddevata  (v.  50-81,  with  Macdonell's 
notes),  are  not  to  be  accepted  as  real 
explanations  of  the  Rigveda. 


Taru,  the  usual  term  for  '  tree  '  in  classical  Sanskrit,  never 
occurs  in  Vedic  literature,  except  perhaps  in  one  passage  of 
the  Rigveda,1  where  Sayana  finds  it,  and  where  it  can  be  so 
translated.  But  the  form  (tarubhih)  is  probably  to  be  inter- 
preted otherwise.2 


1  v.  44,  5. 

2  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v.,  cites  tarobhih  in  Rv.  ii.  39,  3,  as 


a  parallel,  and  so  Oldenberg,  Rgveda- 
Noten,  i,  341. 


Taruksa  is  the  name  of  a  man  in  the  Rigveda1  who  is 
mentioned  along  with  Balbutha,  the  Dasa,  in  a  Dana-stuti,  or 
*  Praise  of  Gifts.' 

1  viii.  46,  32.  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  391 ;  Zimmer,  Altindisches 
Leben,  117. 


Tarku,  'spindle,'  is  known  only  in  Vedic  literature  from  the 
mention  of  it  in  Yaska's  Nirukta  (ii.  1)  as  an  example  of  the 
transposition  of  letters,  the  word  being  derived,  according  to 
him,  from  the  root  kart,  '  to  spin.' 


Talpa  ] 


A  TREE— BED 


301 


Tarda, '  borer,'  occurs  in  a  hymn  of  the  Atharvaveda1  enumerat- 
ing insects  that  injure  grain.  Whitney2  suggests  that  a  kind  of 
mouse  or  rat  may  be  meant.    Roth3  thought  a  bird  was  denoted. 


1  vi.  50,  1.  2. 

2  Translation   of    the   Atharvaveda, 
318. 


3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 
Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, 485. 


Tardman  in  the  Atharvaveda1  applies  to  the  hole  in  the  yoke 
(Yug*a).     In  the  Satapatha  Brahmana2  it  designates  a  hole  in  a 


skin. 


1  xiv.  1,  40. 

2  iii.  2,  1,  2  ;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  26,  26,  n.  1. 


Tarya  is,  according  to  Sayana,  the  name  of  a  man  in  one 
passage  of  the  Rigveda.1     But  the  verse  is  hopelessly  obscure.2 

1  v,  44,  12.    Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  158,  159. 

2  Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  342. 


Talasa  is  the  name  of  a  tree  in  the  Atharvaveda.1  Whitney2 
suggests  that  it  may  be  the  same  as  talisa  (Flacourtia  cata- 
phractd). 

1  vi.  15,  3.  2  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  291. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  62. 


Talpa  is  the  regular  term  for  '  bed '  or  '  couch  '  from  the 
Rigveda  and  the  Atharvaveda1  onwards.2  One  made  of  Udum- 
bara  wood  is  mentioned  in  the  Taittirlya  Brahmana.3  The 
violation  of  the  bed  of  a  Guru,  or  teacher,  is  already  mentioned 
in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad,4  while  the  adjective  talpya,  '  born 
in  the  nuptial  couch,'  denotes  'legitimate'  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana.5 


1  Rv.    vii. 
xiv.  2,  31.  41. 


55,   8;    Av.   v.    17,    12 


2  Taittirlya  Samhita,  vi.  2,  6,  4 ; 
Taittirlya  Brahmana,  ii.  2,5,3;  Panca- 
vimsa  Brahmana,  xxiii.  4,  2  ;  xxv.  1,  10. 


3  i.  2,  6,  5. 

4  v.  10,  9. 

5  xiii.   1,   6,  2.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altin- 
disches Leben,  154. 


302      MUSICIAN— CARPENTER— SHUTTLE— ROBBER     [  Talava 

Talava  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the  Purusamedha,  or  human 
sacrifice,  in  the  Yajurveda,1  denotes  a  '  musician '  of  some  kind. 

1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,    xxx.    20;   Taittiriya  Brahmana,   iii.   4,    15,    1.     Cf. 
Weber,  Indische  Streifen,  1,  83,  n.  15. 


Ta§tP  is  found  in  the  Rigveda1  in  the  sense  of  'carpenter,' 
like  Taksan,  which  is  from  the  same  root  taks,  '  to  fashion.' 

1  i.  61,  4;  105,  18;  130,  4;  iii.  38,  1;   vii.  32,  20;   x.  93,   12;   119,  5.     Cf. 
Nirukta,  v.  21. 


Tasara  denotes  the  weaver's  'shuttle'  in  the  Rigveda1  and 
the  Yajurveda  Samhitas.2 

1  x.  130,  2.  Samhita,  xxxviii.  3  ;   Taittiriya  Brah- 

2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xix.  83  ;  Mai-      mana,  ii.  6,  4,  2. 

trayani   Samhita,  iii.  II,   9;   Kathaka  Cf.  Zimmer,  A Uindisches  Leben,  254. 


Taskara  occurs  in  the  Rigveda  *  and  frequently  later,2  denoting 
'thief  or  'robber.'  It  appears  to  be  practically  synonymous 
with  Stena,  in  connexion  with  which  it  is  often  mentioned.3 
The  Stena  and  the  Taskara  are  contrasted  in  the  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita4  with  the  Malimlu,  who  is  a  burglar  or  house-breaker, 
while  they  are  highwaymen,  or,  as  the  Rigveda5  puts  it,  '  men 
who  haunt  the  woods  and  risk  their  lives  '  (tanu-tyajd  vanar-gu). 
In  another  passage  of  the  Rigveda,6  however,  the  dog  is  told  to 
bark  at  the  Taskara  or  the  Stena,  which  clearly  points  to  an 
attempt  at  house-breaking.  The  thief  goes  about  at  night,7  and 
knows  the  paths8  on  which  he  attacks  his  victim.  In  one 
passage  of  the  Rigveda9  the  use  of  cords  is  mentioned,  but 
whether  to  bind  the  thieves  when  captured,  or   to  bind   the 


1  1.  191,  5 ;  vi.  27,  3 ;  vii.  55,  3 ; 
viii.  29,  6. 

2  Av.  iv.  3,  2;  xix.  47,  7;  50,  5; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xi.  77.  78  ;  xii.  62  ; 
xvi.  21,  etc ;  Nirukta,  iii.  14. 

3  Rv.  vii.  55,  3 ;  Av.  xix.  47,  7 ; 
50,  5  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xi.  79 ; 
xvi.  21,  etc. 

4  xi.  79  (the  Malimlu  is  janesu, '  among 


men ';  the  others  vane,  *  in  the  forest '). 
Cf.  for  the  Malimlu,  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
vi.  3,  2,  6;  Atharvaveda,  xix.  49,  10. 

5  x.  4,  6. 

6  vii.  55,  3. 

7  Rv.  i.  191,  5. 

8  Rv.  viii.  29,  6. 

9  x.  4)  6. 


Tayu  ] 


THIEVES  AND  ROBBERS 


303 


victim,  is  not  clear.10     The  Atharvaveda u  refers  to  the  Stena 
and  the  Taskara  as  cattle  and  horse  thieves.12 

Tayu  was  another  name  for  thief,  perhaps  of  a  less 
distinguished  and  more  domestic  character  than  the  highway- 
man, for  though  he  is  referred  to  as  a  cattle-thief,13  he  is  also 
alluded  to  as  a  stealer  of  clothes  (yastra-mathi)u  and  as  a 
debtor.15  In  one  passage  the  Tayus  are  said  to  disappear  at 
the  coming  of  dawn  (which  is  elsewhere  called  ydvayad-dvesas, 
1  driving  away  hostile  beings,'  and  rta-pa,  '  guardian  of  order  '), 
like  the  stars  of  heaven  (naksatra).16 

In  the  Satarudriya  litany  of  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita17  Rudra 
is  called  lord  of  assailers  (a-vyddhin),  thieves  (stena),  robbers 
(taskara),  pickpockets  (stdyu),  stealers  (musnant),  and  cutters 
(vi-krnta)  ;  and  designations  of  sharpers  (grtsa)  and  bands 
(gana,  vrdta),  apparently  of  robbers,  are  mentioned.18  It  is 
therefore  not  surprising  that  the  Rigveda19  should  contain 
many  prayers  for  safety  at  home  or  on  the  way,  or  that 
the  Atharvaveda  should  devote  several  hymns  to  night20 
chiefly  for  protection  against  the  evil  doings  of  thieves  and 
robbers. 

Pischel21  suggests  that  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda22 
Vasistha  is  represented  as  a  burglar,  but  he  admits  that,  since 
Vasistha  was  attacking  the  house  of  his  father  Varuna,  he  was 
only  seeking  to  obtain  what  he  may  have  regarded  as  his  own. 
But  the  interpretation  of  the  hymn  is  not  certain.23 

Sayana's   explanation   of  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda,24  as 


10  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  178,  n. 

11  xix.  50,  5.     Cf.  Rv.  x.  97,  10  (stena). 

12  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 984. 

13  Rv.  i.  65,  1 ;  vii.  86,  5. 

14  Rv.  iv.  38,  5. 

15  Rv.  vi.  12,  5.  No  doubt  this  theft 
is  the  result  of  despair  at  being  in  debt, 
which  might  lead  to  loss  of  liberty  (Rna). 

16  Rv.  i.  50,  2.  Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic 
Mythology,  p.  47. 

17  xvi.20.  21.  C/.  Taittiriy a  Samhita, 
iv.  5,  4,  1  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xvii.  13  ; 
Maitrayan!  Samhita,  ii.  9,  4. 


18  xvi.  25. 

19  i.  129,  9;  ii.  23,  16;  vi.  24,  10; 
41.5;  5i.  15;  x.  63,  16. 

20  Av.  xix.  47-50. 

21  Vedische  Studien,  2,  55,  56.  Con- 
trast 1,  106. 

22  Rv.  vii.  55. 

23  Cf.  Aufrecht,  Indische  Studien,  4, 
337  et  seq.  ;  Lanman,  Sanskrit  Reader, 
370;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  308; 
Brhaddevata,  vii.  11  et  seq.,  with  Mac- 
donell's  notes. 

24  vi.  54,  1. 


3<H 


PUNISHMENT  OF  THIEVES— ANTIDOTE    [  Tastuva 


referring  to  professional  cattle-trackers,  like  the  Khojis  of  the 
Panjab,  seems  quite  probable.25 

The  punishment  of  thieves  appears  primarily  to  have  been 
left  to  the  action  of  the  robbed.  The  practice  of  binding  them 
in  stocks26  seems  clearly  referred  to.  But  later,  at  any  rate — 
and  in  all  probability  earlier  also,  as  in  other  countries — a  more 
severe  penalty  could  be  exacted,  and  death  inflicted  by  the 
king.27  There  is  no  hint  in  Vedic  literature  of  the  mode  of 
conviction ;  a  fire  ordeal  is  not  known  to  the  Atharvaveda,28 
and  the  ordeal  known  to  the  Chandogya  Upanisad29  is  not  said 
to  be  used  in  the  case  of  theft.  No  doubt  the  stolen  property 
was  recovered  by  the  person  robbed  if  he  could  obtain  it. 
Nothing  is  known  as  to  what  happened  if  the  property  had 
passed  from  the  actual  thief  into  the  possession  of  another 
person. 


25  Zimmer,  op.  cit.,  182,  183,  citing 
Elliot,  Memoirs,  1,  276;  Jolly,  Recht 
und  Sitte,  123. 

26  Cf.  Rv.  i.  24,  13.  15;  vii.  86,  5; 
Av.  vi.  63,  3  =  84,  4;  115,  2.  3;  121; 
xix.  47,  9  ;  50,  1,  all  of  which  passages 
are  cited  by  Zimmer,  181,  182,  to  prove 
this  practice.  But  it  must  be  noted  that 
Rv.  vii.  86,  5,  alone  is  not  at  all  con- 
clusive evidence,  though  Av.  xix.  47,  9 ; 
50,  1  (drupade  ahan),  probably  mean  the 
same  thing.  Whitney,  Translation  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  976,  983,  renders  the 
passages  as  referring  to  casting  a  thief 
into  a  snare,  and  Pischel,  Vedische 
btudien,  1,  106,  makes  Rv.  vii.  86,  5, 
refer  to  the  cattle-thief  {pasu-trp)  taking 
away  the  rope  from  the  calf  he  means 
to  steal.     For  Rv.  x.  4,  6,  see  above, 


n.  10.  The  German  and  Slavonic 
parallels  cited  by  Zimmer,  182,  n.} 
support  his  view.  See  also  for  a  similar 
punishment  in  case  of  debt,  Rna. 

27  Gautama  Dharma  Sutra,  xii.  43- 
45 ;   Apastamba  Dharma   Sutra,  i.  9, 

25»  4-  5;  J°My»  °P>  °it"  I24« 

28  Av.  ii.  12  was  so  interpreted  by 
Schlagintweit,  Die  Gottesurtheile  der 
Inder,  9  et  seq.  (1866) ;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  13,  164  et  seq.  ;  Ludwig,  Trans- 
lation of  the  Rigveda,  3,  445  ;  Zimmer, 
183  et  seq. ;  but  see  Bloomfield,  American 
Journal  of  Philology,  11,  330  et  seq.  ; 
Hymns  of  the  A  tharvaveda,  294  -  296  ; 
Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, 54  ;  Grill,  Hundert  Lieder,2  47,  85  ; 
Jolly,  op.  cit.,  146. 

29  vi.  16 ;  Jolly,  loc.  cit. 


Tastuva,  or  Tasruva,  as  the  Paippalada  recension  has  it,  is 
the  name  of  a  remedy  against  snake  poison,  and  is  mentioned 
along  with  Tabuva  in  the  Atharvaveda.1 


1  v.    13,    10.    11.     Cf.    Bloomfield, 
Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  428;  Whit- 


ney, Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
244. 


Tandya  ]  PLANT— NAMES  OF  TEACHERS  305 

Tajad-bhang'a  ('  easily  broken ')  is  apparently  the  name  of 
a  tree  or  plant  in  the  Atharvaveda.1  The  Kausika  Sutra2 
treats  it  as  a  compound  word,  and  its  commentator  makes  it 
out  to  be  the  castor-oil  plant  (eranda).  Whitney,3  however, 
treats  the  expression  as  two  separate  words,  and  thinks  that 
the  passage  means  'may  they  be  broken  suddenly  (tdjat)  like 
hemp  (bhafiga): 

1  viii.  8,  3  (a  battle  hymn).  J  35  ;  Lanman  in  Whitney,  Translation 

2  xvi    14.     Cf.  Bloomfield's  edition,       of    the    Atharvaveda,    502 ;    Zimmer, 
xliv  ;   Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,   583,       Altindisches  Leben,  72. 

584;   Caland,  Altindisches  Zauberritual,    I       3  Op.  cit.,  504. 


Tanda  seems  to  be  the  name  of  a  sage  to  whose  school 
belonged  the  Tanda  Brahmana  mentioned  in  the  Latyayana 
Srauta  Sutra.1 

1  vii.  10,  17.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  49. 


Tanda-vinda,  or  Tanda-vindava,  is  the  name  of  a  teacher 
mentioned  in  the  Sankhayana  Aranyaka.1 

1  viii.  10.    The  manuscripts  differ  as  to  the  form  of  the  name. 


Tandi  occurs  as  the  name  of  a  pupil  of  Badarayana  in  the 

Vamsa    (list   of    teachers)    at   the   end    of    the   Samavidhana 

Brahmana.1 

1  See  Konow's  Translation,  80,  n.  2. 

Tandya  is  the  name  of  a  teacher  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,1 
quoted  on  a  point  bearing  on  the  Agniciti,  or  piling  of 
the  sacred  fire.  He  is  also  mentioned  in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana.2 
The  Tandya  Mahabrahmana  or  Pancavimsa  Brahmana3  of  the 
Samaveda  represents  the  school  of  the  Tandins. 


Series,  1869-74.  See  Weber,  Indian 
Literature,  66  etseq.,  74,  133  ;  Macdonell, 
Sanskrit  Literature,  203,  210 ;  Hopkins, 
Transactions  of  the  Connecticut  Academy 
of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15,  23  et  seq. 
VOL.  I.  20 


1  vi.  1,  2,  25.     Cf.  Levi,  La  Doctrine 
du  Sacrifice,  140. 

2  Weber,    Indische    Studien,    4,    373, 

384. 

3  Edited    in    the    Bibliotheca    Indica 


306 


SON— FROG— HEIR— NA  ME 


[  Tata 


Tata,  apparently  '  dada's  boy,'  an  affectionate  term  of  address 
by  a  father  (cf.  Tata)  to  a  son,  is  found  in  the  Brahmanas,1 
occurring  in  the  vocative  only.  But  in  the  sense  of  '  father,' 
through  confusion  with  Tata,  it  occurs  also  as  early  as  the 
Aitareya  Aranyaka.2 


1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  14,  4 ; 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  1,  6 ; 
Chandogya  Upanisad,  iv.  4,  2. 

2  i.  3.  3,  where  Tata  and  Tata  are 
given  as  variant  forms  of  the  address 
of   the    child   to   the    father.     Little, 


Grammatical  Index,  75,  takes  Tata  to 
mean  *  father  '  primarily,  but  this  seems 
unlikely. 

Cf.    DelbrUck,    Die    indogermanischcn 
Verwandtschaftsnamen,  449,  454. 


Taduri  is  mentioned  in  a  verse  of  the  Atharvaveda1  together 
with  the  female  frog  (Manduki).  Some  similar  animal  must 
be  meant,2  but  Roth,3  with  the  commentator  Durga  on  the 
Nirukta,4  regards  the  word  as  an  adjective  describing  the  frog. 


1  iv.  15,  14. 

2  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 175. 

3  St.    Petersburg    Dictionary,    s.v., 


where    he    suggests   taduri,  from  the 
root    tad,    'beat,'   with   the    sense   of 
'splashing.' 
4  ix.  7. 


i.  Tanva  in  an  obscure  passage  of  the  Rigveda1  seems  to 
mean  a  '  legitimate  son,'  who  is  said  not  to  leave  the  heritage 
(riktha)  of  his  father  to  his  sister  (jdmi).  The  exact  meaning 
is  probably  unascertainable,2  but  the  passage  may  convey  a 
statement  of  what  was  no  doubt  the  fact,  that  the  daughter 
had  no  share  in  the  paternal  inheritance;  her  brother  had  to 
provide  for  her  during  her  life  if  she  remained  unmarried,  but 
she  had  no  independent  portion.3     (See  Daya.) 


1  hi.  31,  2. 

2  Cf.  Griffith,  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  1, 
348 ;  Oldenberg,  Rgveda  Noten,  1,  240 ; 
Geldner,  Vedische  Studien,  3,  34. 


3  Cf.  Jolly,   Recht  und  Sitte,  87,   for 
the  modern  law  of  the  Panjab. 


2.  Tanva  appears  to  be  a  patronymic,  *  descendant  of  Tanva,' 
in  a  verse  of  the  Rigveda.1  Ludwig2  thinks  that  it  is  the 
patronymic  of  Du^ima,  who  is  mentioned  in  the  preceding 
verse,  but  this  is  uncertain. 


1  x.  93, 15. 


2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  166. 


Tarak§ya  ]    ASCETIC— ANTIDOTE— THIEF— STAR— NAME      307 

1.  Tapasa,  '  ascetic,'  is  not  found  in  Vedic  literature  till  the 
Upanisads.1 

1  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  iv.  3,  22.     Cf.  Fick,  Die  sociale  Gliederung,  40. 

2.  Tapasa  is  a  name  of  Datta  who  was  Hotr  priest  at  the 
snake  festival  described  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana  (xxv.  15). 

Tabuva  is  the  name  in  the  Atharvaveda1  of  a  remedy  against 
snake  poison.  The  Paippalada  recension  has  Tavuca  instead. 
Weber2  thinks  that  the  original  form  was  Tathuva,  from  the 
root  sthd,  'stand,'  and  that  it  meant  'stopping';  but  this  is 
hardly  probable.3 


2  Proceedings  of  the  Berlin  Academy, 
1896,  681. 

3  Barth,  Revue  de  I'Histoire des  Religions , 


39,  26.  Cf.  Whitney,  Translation  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  244 ;  Bloomfield, 
Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  428. 


Tayadara,  'belonging  to  the  Tayadara'  (Av.  vi.  72,  2). 

Tayu,  '  thief,'  is  mentioned  several  times  in  the  Rigveda.1 
See  Taskara. 

1  i.  50,  2  ;  65,  1 ;  iv.  38,  5  ;  v.  15,  5  ;  I  'cattle  -  thief,'  see  Pischel,  Vedische 
52,  12;  vi.   12,  5;   vii.  86,  5  (pasu-trp,    |  Studien,  1,  106). 

Taraka  is  found  several  times  in  the  Atharvaveda1  denoting 
a  star.  The  masculine  form  Taraka  occurs  in  the  Taittirlya 
Brahmana.2 

1  ii.  8,  1  ;  iii.  7,  4  ;  vi.  121,  3  ;  xix.  49,  8.  2  i.  5,  2,  5. 

Taruksya  is  the  name  of  a  teacher  in  the  Aitareya1  and 
Sankhayana  Aranyakas.2  In  the  former  passage  Tarksya  is 
a  variant  reading,  and  in  the  latter  Tarksya  is  read,  but  this 
is  probably  only  due  to  confusion  with  Tarksya,  the  reputed 
author  of  a  Rigvedic  hymn.3 


1  iii.  1,  6. 

2  vii.  19. 

3  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  i.   5,  2,   with 


Keith's  note ;  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra 
xi.  14,  28;  xii.  11,  12;  Asvalayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  ix.  1. 

20 — 2 


3o8 


STEED— G  A  RMENT—TREE 


[  Tark§ya 


Tarksya  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1  as  a  divine  steed, 
apparently  the  sun  conceived  as  a  horse.2  But  Foy,3  judging 
by  the  name,  apparently  a  patronymic  of  Trksi,  who  is  known 
from  the  Rigveda4  onwards  as  a  descendant  of  Trasadasyu, 
thinks  that  a  real  steed,  the  property  of  Trksi,  is  meant ;  but 
this  is  not  very  probable.5     See  also  Taruksya. 


i  i.  89,  6;  x.  178. 

2  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  149. 

3  Kuhn's  Zeitschrift,  ix,  366,  367. 

4  viii.  22,  7. 

5  In  Khila,  ii.  4,  1,  Tarksya  is  repre- 
sented as  a  bird  (vayasa),  also  a  symbol 
of  the  sun.  In  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xv.  18,  he  is  mentioned  with  Aristanemi, 


originally  an  epithet  of  his  (Rv.  i.  89, 6  ; 
x.  178,  1),  as  a  person,  and  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  4,  3,  13,  he 
appears  as  Vaipasyata  (Vaipascita  in 
Asvalayana  Srauta  Sutra,  x.  7),  king 
of  the  birds  (cf.  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books 
of  the  East,  44,  369). 


Tarpya  denotes,  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  later,2  a  garment 
made  of  some  material,  the  nature  of  which  is  uncertain.  The 
commentators  on  the  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra  and  the  Sata- 
patha Brahmana3  suggest  that  a  linen  garment,  or  one  thrice 
soaked  in  ghee,  or  one  made  of  the  trpa  or  of  the  triparna  plant, 
is  meant :  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  sense  was  known  even  to 
the  author  of  the  Brahmana  himself.  Goldstiicker's4  rendering 
of  the  word  is  '  silken  garment,'  which  Eggeling5  is  inclined 
to  accept.6 


1  xviii.  4,  31. 

2  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  4,  XI,  6; 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  3,  7,  1  ;  7,  6,  4  ; 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xxi.  1 ;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  v.  3, 5, 20 ;  Katyayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  5,  7  et  seq. ;  Sahkb- 
ayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  12,  19. 


3  v.  3,  5,  20.  Cf.  Katyayana,  loc.  cit.  ; 
Sayana  on  Av.,  loc.  cit.  ;  Whitney, 
Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  879. 

4  Dictionary,  s.v.  abhisecaniya. 

5  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  41,  85, 
n.  1. 


Tapstagha,  a  species  of  tree,  is  mentioned  in  the  Kausika 
Sutra,1  while  the  adjective  formed  from  it,  tdrstaght,  '  derived 
from  the  Tarstagha  tree,'  is  found  in  the  Atharvaveda.2 
Weber3  thinks  that  the  sarsafta,  or  mustard  plant,  is  meant. 


1  xxv.  23. 

2  v.  29,  15.     Cf.  Whitney's  note  in 
his  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda. 


3  Indische  Studien,  18,  280. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  62. 


Tirasca  ]       SIEVE— PARTRIDGE— LUNAR  DAY— PRIEST         309 


Titau1  is  found  once  in  the  Rigveda2  denoting  a  '  sieve,'  or 
perhaps  *  winnowing  fan,'  which  was  used  for  purifying  corn 

(saktu) . 


1  On  the  peculiar  form  of  this  word, 
cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic  Grammar,  20,  3. 


*  x.  71,  2. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  238. 


Tittira,  Tittiri,  is  the  name  of  the  partridge  in  the  later 
Samhitas1and  the  Brahmanas,2  being  presumably  an  onomato- 
poetic  formation.  The  bird  is  described  as  having  variegated 
plumage  (bahu-rupa).  It  is  usually  associated  with  the  Kapin- 
jala  and  Kalavinka. 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  1,  2  ; 
v.  5, 16,  1  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  4,  1  ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xii.  10 ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxiv.  30.  36.  The  form  Tittira 
occurs  in  the  Maitrayani  Samhita, 
iii.  14,  1. 

a  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  6,   3,   5  ; 


v.  5,  4,  6 ;  Jaiminiya  Brahmana, 
ii.  154,  6  (Oertel,  Transactions  of  the 
Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences, 
15.  181). 

Cf.   Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  91  ; 
Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  251. 


Tithi,  as  the  name  of  a  lunar  day,  the  thirtieth  part  of  a  lunar 
month  of  rather  over  twenty-seven  days,  is  only  found  in  the 
later  Sutras,1  being  completely  unknown  to  the  Brahmanas,  in 
which  the  only  day  is  the  natural  one.2     See  Masa. 


1  Gobhila  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  1,  13  ;  ii.  8, 
12.  20  ;  Sankhayana  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  25  ; 
v.  2,  etc. 


2  Thibaut,  Astronomie,  Astrologie  und 
Mathematik,  7,  8. 


Timirgha  Daupe-gruta  ('  descendant  of  Duresruta ')  is  men- 
tioned as  Agnldh  ('  fire-kindling ')  priest  at  the  snake  sacrifice 
described  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.1 

1  xxv.  15.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  35. 


Tirasca  is  read  in  some  manuscripts  of  the  Atharvaveda1  in 
the  description  of  the  Vratya's  throne  (Asandi),  meaning  *  the 
cross-pieces.'  But  the  reading  should  be  tirascye,  which  is 
adjectival,  and  is  used  in  the  same  sense. 

1  xv.  3,  5.     Cf.  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  776;  Keith,  Sankh- 
ayana Aranyaka,  19,  n.  3, 


3io     SNAKE— A  SEER— CROSS-BEAM— A  PATRON    [  TiraScaraji 


Tipa^ca-raji,1  Tira^ci-raji,2  Tirascma-raji,3  are  variant  forms 
of  a  name  for  '  snake  '  (lit.,  '  striped  across  '),  found  in  the  later 
Samhitas. 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  10,  2; 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  94,  95, 
reports  this  form  from  the  Av.,  but 
the  text  and  Roth  (St.  Petersburg  Dic- 
tionary, s.v.)  read  tirasci-raji  there. 

2  Av.  iii.  27,  2  ;  vi.  56,  2 ;  vii.  56,  1  ; 
x.  4,  13;  xii.  3,  56. 


3  Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  13,  21  ; 
Sankhayana  Aranyaka,  xii.  27. 

Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda,  488,  553 ;  Keith,  Sankhayana 
Aranyaka,  68,  n.  2 ;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  17,  295-297. 


Tira^Ci  is,  according  to  the  Anukramani,  the  author  of  a 
Rigvedic  hymn1  in  which  he  appeals  to  Indra  to  hear  his  call. 
The  Paficavimsa  Brahmana2  adopts  this  view  of  the  name, 
and  mentions  a  TirascI  Ahgirasa.  But  Roth3  thinks  that  the 
word  is  not  a  proper  name  at  all. 


1  vm.  95,  4. 

2  xii.  6,  12. 

3  Zeitschrift    der    Deutschen    Morgen- 
landischen    Gesellschaft,    48,    115.      Cf. 


Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda, 
5,  187  ;  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  17,  90 ;  Macdonell, 
Vedic  Grammar,  p.  273. 


Tira£cina-vam£a,  'cross-beam,'  is  used  to  denote  a 
hive '  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad.1     See  also  Vamsa. 

1  iii.  1,  1.     Cf.  Little,  Grammatical  Index,  75. 


bee- 


Tirindira  is  mentioned  in  a  Danastuti,  or  '  Praise  of  Gifts,' 
in  the  Rigveda1  as  having,  along  with  Par£u,  bestowed  gifts 
on  the  singer.  In  the  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra2  this  state- 
ment is  represented  by  a  tale  that  the  Kanva  Vatsa  obtained 
a  gift  from  Tirindira  Parasavya,  Tirindira  and  Parsu  being 
in  this  version  thus  treated  as  one  and  the  same  man. 
Ludwig3  sees  in  the  Rigvedic  passage  a  proof  that  the  Yadus 
had  gained  a  victory  over  Tirindira,  and  gave  a  part  of  the 
booty  to  the  singers;  but  there  is  no  proof  whatever  of  the 
correctness  of  this  interpretation,  which  Zimmer4  shows  to  be 
most  unlikely.     Yadu  princes  must  be  meant  by  Tirindira  and 


1  viii.  6,  46-48. 

2  xvi.  11.  20. 


3  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  160, 
161 ;  5,  142. 


4  Altindisches  Leben,  136,  137. 


Tiryanc  Arigirasa  ]    DIADEM— SESAMUM— A  SEER 


3ii 


Parsu,  though  Weber6  thinks  that  the  singers  were  Yadus,  not 
the  princes.  The  latter  he  holds  to  have  been  Iranian  (cf. 
Tcpi/3a^o<;,  and  see  Parsu),  and  he  thinks  that  in  this  there  is 
evidence  of  continual  close  relations  between  India  and  Iran. 
This  is  perfectly  possible,  but  the  evidence  for  it  is  rather 
slight. 


5  Indische  Studien,  4,  356,  n. ;  Indian 
Literature,  3,  4 ;  Episches  im  vedischen 
Ritual,  37,  38. 

6  For  the  recent  controversy  as  to 
Iranian  names  found  at  Boghaz-kioi, 
cf.  Jacobi,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society,  1909,  721  et  seq.  ;  Oldenberg, 
ibid.,  1095-1100;  Keith,  ibid.,  1100-1106; 
Sayce,  ibid.,  1106,  1107;  Kennedy, 
ibid.,  1107-1119.    Hillebrandt,  Vedische 


Mythologie,  1,  94  et  seq.,  argues  in  favour 
of  an  early  connexion  of  Iranians  and 
Indians  in  Arachosia,  where  he  places 
part  of  the  action  of  the  Rigveda. 
Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  17,  16,  277,  holds  that  traces  of 
Iranian  connexion  are  signs  of  late 
date;  Arnold,  ibid.,  18,  205  et  seq.t 
opposes  this  view. 


TiFita1  is  found  in  the  Atharvaveda2  in  the  adjectival 
derivative  tiritin  used  of  a  demon,  and  presumably  meaning 
'  adorned  with  a  tiara.' 


1  Meaning,  according  to  later  native 
lexicographers,  '  head-dress  '  or  '  dia- 
dem.' 


2  viii.  6,  7.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches 
Leben,  265 ;   Whitney,   Translation   of 
495- 


the  Atharvaveda, 


Tirya  occurs  in  the  Atharvaveda1  as  an  epithet  of  Karambha, 
1  gruel.'  It  is  probably  equivalent  to  tilya,  '  made  of  sesamum,' 
as  rendered  by  Roth2  and  Whitney,3  but  tiriya  is  read  by 
Roth4  in  the  Raja-nighantu  as  a  kind  of  rice. 

'  the  poison  which  comes  in  a  horizontal 
direction'  {cf.  tiryanc).  Grill,  Hundert 
Lieder,2  121,  amends  to  atiriya,  'over- 
flowing.' 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  270; 
Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda, 
3,  201. 


1  iv.  7,  3- 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Translation    of    the   Atharvaveda, 

155- 

4  See  Whitney,  loc.  cit.,  with  Lan- 
man's  additional  note.  Bloomfield, 
Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  377,  construes 
the  adjective  with  visum,  and  renders 


Tiryaiic  Angirasa  is  mentioned  as  a  seer  of  Samans,  01 
Chants,  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.1  The  name  is  doubtless 
feigned. 

1  xii.  6,  12.     Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  2,  160. 


312 


SESAMUM— A  TREE— A  STAR— A  BOW 


[  Tila 


Tila  denotes  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  later2  the  sesamum 
plant,  and  particularly  its  grains,  from  which  a  rich  oil  (Taila) 
was  extracted.  It  is  often3  mentioned  in  connexion  with  Masa, 
'kidney  bean.'  The  Taittirlya  Samhita4  attributes  the  bean 
and  the  sesamum  to  the  winter  Qiemanta)  and  the  cool  (sisira) 
seasons.  The  stalk  of  the  sesamum  plant  (tila-pinji,5  til-pinja6) 
was  used  for  fuel,  and  the  seed  was  boiled  in  the  form  of 
porridge  (tilaudana7)  for  food. 


1  ii.  8,  3  ;  vi.  140,  2 ;  xviii.  3,  69  ; 
4.32. 

2  Taittirlya  Samhita,  vii.  2,  10,  2 ; 
Maitrayanl  Samhita,  iv.  3,  2 ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xviii.  12 ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  ix.  1,  1,  3,  etc. 

3  Av.  vi.  140,  2  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
loc.  cit.\  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  3, 


22;    Chandogya  Upanisad,   v.    10,   6 
etc. 

4  Loc.  cit. 

5  Av.  ii.  8,  3. 

6  Av.  xii.  2,  54. 

7  Brhadaranyaka    Upanisad,    vi.    4 
16  ;  Sahkhayana  Aranyaka,  xii.  8. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  240. 


Tilvaka  is  mentioned  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  as  a  tree 
(Symplocos  racemosa),  near  which  it  is  inauspicious  to  construct 
a  grave.  The  adjectival  derivative  tailvaka,  *  made  of  the  wood 
of  the  Tilvaka,'  is  found  in  the  Maitrayanl  Samhita,2  and  is 
employed  to  describe  the  yupa,  or  sacrificial  post,  in  the 
Sadvimsa  Brahmana.3 


1  xiii.  8,  1,  16. 


111.  1,  9. 


3  iii.  8. 


Tisya  occurs  twice  in  the  Rigveda,1  apparently  as  the  name 
of  a  star,2  though  Sayana  takes  it  to  mean  the  sun.  It  is 
doubtless  identical  with  the  Avestan  Tistrya.  Later  it  is  the 
name  of  a  lunar  mansion  :  see  Naksatra. 


1  v.  54,  13 ;  x.  64,  8  (with  Krsanu  as 
an  archer). 

2  Weber,  Naxatra,  2,  290 ;  Zimmer, 


Altindisches  Leben,  355;  Max  Miiller, 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32,  331 ;  Keith, 
Sankhayana  A  raiiyaka,  77,  n.  1 . 


Tisr-dhanva,  ■  a  bow  with  three  (arrows),'  is  mentioned  as 
a  gift  to  the  priest  at  the  sacrifice  in  the  Taittirlya  Samhita1 
and  in  the  Brahmanas.2 


1  i.  8,  19,  1. 

2  Taittirlya  Brahmana, 


3.   4 


ii.  7,  9,  2 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  1, 
5,  10 ;  xiv.  1,  1,  7. 


Tuminja  Aupoditi  ] 


NA  MES— CHILDREN 


313 


Tugra  appears  in  the  Rigveda1  as  the  name  of  the  father  of 
Bhujyu,  a  protege  of  the  Asvins,  who  is  accordingly  called 
Tugrya2  or  Taugrya.3  A  different  Tugra  seems  to  be  referred 
to  in  other  passages  of  the  Rigveda4  as  an  enemy  of  Indra. 


1  i.  116,  3  ;   117,  14  ;  vi.  62,  6. 

2  Rv.  viii.  3,  23  ;  74,  14. 

3  Rv.  i.  117,  15;  118,  6;  182,  5.  6; 
viii.  5,  22 ;  x.  39,  4. 

4  vi.    20,    8 ;    26,    4 ;    x.    49,    4.     Cf. 


Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutscheu 
Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  55,  328, 
329 ;  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  157. 


Tugrya  occurs  in  the  Rigveda  as  a  patronymic  of  Bhujyu,1 
but  also  in  a  passage2  in  which  no  reference  to  Bhujyu  appears 
to  be  meant,  and  in  which  it  may  mean  '  a  man  of  the  house 
of  Tugra.'  A  similar  sense  seems  to  occur  in  the  locative 
plural  feminine  in  the  Rigveda,3  where  (supplying  viksu)  the 
meaning  must  be  '  among  the  Tugrians.'  This  explanation 
may  also  apply  to  the  epithet  of  Indra4  or  Soma,5  tugryd-vrdh, 
'  rejoicing  among  the  Tugrians.' 


1  Who  is  also  called  Tugrasya  sunu, 
Rv.  vi.  62,  6.  Cf  the  use  of  Pajriya 
and  perhaps  Krsniya  in  the  patronymic 
sense  without  Vrddhi. 

2  viii.  32,  20. 

3  i-  33>  x5-  Cf.  Griffith,  Hymns  of 
the  Rigveda,  1,  47. 


4  viii.  45,  29 ;  99,  7. 

5  viii.  1,  15,  where,  however,  Roth, 
St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.,  sug- 
gests an  alteration  to  make  it  refer  to 
Indra. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  128. 


Tuc  in  the  Rigveda1  occasionally  occurs  denoting  'children.' 
Tuj  occurs  rather  more  often  in  the  same  sense.2  Cf.  Tanaya 
and  Toka. 


viii.  18,  18  ;  27,  14  ;  vi.  48,  9. 

iii.  45,  4  ;  iv.  1,  3  ;  v.  41,  9  ;  viii.  4,  15. 


Tuji  is  the  name  in  the  Rigveda1  of  a  protege  of  Indra,  who 
in  another  hymn2  appears  to  be  called  Tutuji. 

1  vi.  26,  4  ;  x.  49,  4.  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen 

2  vi.  20,  8.    Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation      Gesellschaft,  55,  328. 
of  the   Rigveda,    3,    156  ;    Oldenberg, 


Tuminja  Aupoditi  is  mentioned  in  the  Taittirlya  Samhita 
(i.  7,  2,  1)  as  a  Hotr  priest  at  a  Sattra,  or  *  sacrificial  session,' 
and  as  having  been  engaged  in  a  discussion  with  S^Tsravas. 


Si 


314 


NAMES— FOUR-YEAR-OLD  OX        [  Tura  Kava§eya 


Tura  Kavaseya  is  mentioned  in  the  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers) 
at  the  end  of  the  tenth  book  of  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  as 
the  source  of  the  doctrine  set  forth  in  that  book,  and  as 
separated,  in  the  succession  of  teachers,  from  Sandilya  by 
Yajiiavacas  and  Kugri.  In  the  same  Brahmana2  he  is  quoted 
by  Sandilya  as  having  erected  a  fire-altar  on  the  Karoti.  In 
the  Aitareya  Brahmana8  he  appears  as  a  Purohita,  or  '  domestic 
priest,'  of  Janamejaya  Pariksita,  whom  he  consecrated  king. 
In  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad4  and  a  Khila5  he  appears  as 
an  ancient  sage.  Oldenberg,6  no  doubt  rightly,  assigns  him 
to  the  end  of  the  Vedic  period.  He  is  probably7  identical  with 
Tura,  the  deva-muni,  'saint  of  the  gods,'  who  is  mentioned  in 
the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.8 


1  x.  6,  5,  9. 

2  ix.  5,  2,  15. 

3  iv.  27  ;  vii.  34  ;  viii.  21. 

4  vi.  5,  4  (Kanva,  not  in  Madhyam- 
dina). 

5  i.  9, 6 ;  Scheftelowitz,  Die  Apokryphen 
des  Rgveda,  65,  190. 

6  Zeitschrift    der    Dentschen    Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  42,  239. 


7  So  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v. 

8  xxv.  14,  5.  See  Hopkins,  Transac- 
tions of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts 
and  Sciences,  15,  68. 

Cf.  Weber,  IndischeStudien,  1,  203,  n. ; 
Indian  Literature,  120,  131 ;  Eggeling, 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  43,  xviii. 


Tura-gravas  is  the  name  of  a  seer  mentioned  in  the  Panca- 
vimsa Brahmana1  as  having  pleased  Indra  by  two  Samans 
(Chants)  of  his  composition.  Indra  in  return  appears  to  have 
given  him  the  oblation  of  the  Paravatas  on  the  Yamuna. 

1  ix.  4,  10.  Cf.  Hopkins,  Transactions  I  Sciences,  15,  53 ;  Max  Muller,  Sacred 
of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and  \  Boohs  of  the  East,  32,  316. 


Turya-vah,  masc. ;  Turyauhi,   fern.,  '  a  four-year-old  ox  or 
cow,'  is  mentioned  in  the  later  Samhitas.1 

1  Taittiriya    Samhita,    iv.    3,   3,    2 ;   1   17  ;     Vajasaneyi     Samhita,     xiv.     10  ; 
Maitrayanl   Samhita,   iii.    11,    11;    13,    |  xviii.  26,  etc. 


Turva  occurs  only  once  in  the  Rigveda  (x.  62,  10),  doubtless 
as  a  name  of  the  TurvaSa  people  or  king. 


TurvaSa  ] 


KING  TURVASA 


3i5 


TurvaSa  occurs  frequently  in  the  Rigveda  as  the  name  of 
a  man  or  of  a  people,  usually  in  connexion  with  Yadu.  The 
two  words  usually  occur  in  the  singular  without  any  connecting 
particle,  Turvasa  Yadu  or  Yadu  Turvasa.2  In  a  plural  form 
the  name  Turvasa  occurs  once  with  the  Yadus,3  and  once 
alone4  in  a  hymn  in  which  the  singular  has  already  been  used. 
In  one  passage5  the  dual  Turvasd-Yadu  actually  occurs,  and 
in  another6  Yadus  Turva$  ca,  '  Yadu  and  Turva.'  In  other 
passages7  Turvasa  appears  alone,  while  in  one8  Turvasa  and 
Yadva  occur. 

From  these  facts  Hopkins9  deduces  the  erroneousness  of  the 
ordinary  view,10  according  to  which  Turvasa  is  the  name  of 
a  tribe,  the  singular  denoting  the  king,  and  regards  Turvasa 
as  the  name  of  the  Yadu  king.  But  the  evidence  for  this  is 
not  conclusive.  Without  laying  any  stress  on  the  argument 
based  on  the  theory11  that  the  'five  peoples'  of  the  Rigveda 
are  the  Anus,  Druhyus,  Turvasas,  Yadus,  and  Purus,  it  is 
perfectly  reasonable  to  hold  that  the  Turvasas  and  Yadus  were 
two  distinct  though  closely  allied  tribes.  Such  they  evidently 
were  to  the  seers  of  the  hymns  which  mention  in  the  dual  the 
Turvasd-Yadu  and  speak  of  Yadus  Turvas  ca.  This  explanation 
also  suits  best  the  use  of  the  plural  of  Turvasa  in  two  Rigvedic 
hymns. 

In  the  Rigveda  the  chief  exploit  of  Turvasa  was  his  partici- 
pation in  the  war  against  Sudas,  by  whom  he  was  defeated.12 
Hopkins13  suggests  that  he  may  have  been  named  Turvasa 
because  of  his  fleet  (tura)  escape  from  the  battle.     His  escape 


1  i.  36,  18 ;  54,  6  ;  174,  9  ;  vi.  20, 
12;  45,  1  ;  viii.  4l  7;  7,  18;  9,  14; 
45,  27 ;  x.  49,  8.  In  vii.  18,  6,  Turvasa 
is  joined  with  Yaksu,  apparently  a  con- 
temptuous variant  of  Yadu  (Hopkins, 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
15,  261).     Cf.  Trtsu. 

2  v.  31,  8. 

3  i.  108,  8. 

4  viii.  4,  18  ;  singular  with  Anava  in 
viii.  4,  1. 

5  iv.  30,  17. 

6  x.  62,  10.  Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation 
of  the  Rigveda,   3,    166 ;    Oldenberg, 


Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlandischen 
Gesellschaft,  42,  220,  n.  1. 

7  i.  4,  77  ;  vi.  27,  7.     Cf.  viii.  4,  1. 

8  vii.  19,  8. 

9  Op.  cit.,  258  et  seq. 

10  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  122, 
124 ;  Oldenberg,  Buddha,  404  ;  Ludwig, 
op.  cit.,  153 ;  Macdonell,  Vedic Mythology, 
p.  64;  Sanskrit  Literature,  153  et  seq., 
etc. 

11  Zimmer,    122,    124 ;    Macdonell, 

153.  154- 

12  vii.  18,  6. 

13  Op.  cit.,  264. 


3i6 


THE  TURVA$A  PEOPLE 


[  Turvasa 


may  have  been  assisted  by  Indra,  for  in  some  passages14  Indra's 
aid  to  Turvasa  (and)  Yadu  is  referred  to ;  it  is  also  significant 
that  the  Anu,  and  apparently  the  Druhyu,  kings  are  mentioned 
as  having  been  drowned  in  the  defeat,  but  not  the  Turvasa 
and  Yadu  kings,  and  that  Turvasa  appears  in  the  eighth  book 
of  the  Rigveda  as  a  worshipper  of  Indra  with  the  Anu  prince, 
the  successor,  presumably,  of  the  one  who  was  drowned.15 
Griffith,16  however,  proposes  to  refer  these  passages  to  a  defeat 
by  Turvasa  and  Yadu  of  Arna  and  Citraratha  on  the  Sarayu ; 17 
but  the  evidence  for  this  is  quite  inadequate. 

Two  passages  of  the  Rigveda18  seem  to  refer  to  an  attack  by 
Turvasa  and  Yadu  on  Divodasa,  the  father  of  Sudas.  It  is 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  this  was  an  attack  of  the  two 
peoples  on  Divodasa,  for  there  is  some  improbability  of  the 
references  being  to  the  Turvasa,  who  was  concerned  in  the 
attack  on  Sudas,  the  son. 

Zimmer19  considers  that  the  Turvasas  were  also  called  Vrci- 
vants.  This  view  is  based  on  a  hymn20  in  which  reference 
is  made  to  the  defeat  of  the  Vrclvants  on  the  Yavyavati  and 
Hariyupiya  in  aid  of  Daivarata,  and  of  Turvasa  in  aid  of 
Sriijaya,  the  latter  being  elsewhere21  clearly  the  son  of  Deva- 
rata.  But  as  this  evidence  for  the  identification  of  the  Turvasas 
with  the  Vrclvants  is  not  clear,  it  seems  sufficient22  to  assume 
that  they  were  allies. 

Later,  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,23  the  Turvasas  appear 
as  allies  of  the  Pancalas,  Taurvasa  horses,  thirty-three  in 
number,  and  armed  men,  to  the  number  of  6,000,  being 
mentioned.24     But  otherwise  the  name  disappears :  this  lends 


14  Rv.  i.  174,  9;  iv.  30,  17;  v.  31,  8; 

viii.  4,  7. 

15  Hopkins,  265. 

16  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  1,  433,  n. 

!7  The  hymn  is  a  late  one,  and  the 
connexion  of  verse  18,  where  Arna  and 
Citraratha  are  mentioned,  is  obscure. 
Cf.  Hopkins,  259. 

18  vi.  45,  1 ;  ix.  61,  2  (where  Divo- 
dasa is  mentioned) ;  vii.  19,  8  (where 
he  appears  as  Atithigva). 

19  Op.  cit.,  124. 

20  vi.  27,  5-7. 


21 


iv.  15,  4- 


22  Oldenberg,  Buddha,  404,  n.  Cf. 
Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  105. 

23  xiii.  5,  4,  16. 

24  The  sense  is  obscure.  The  St. 
Petersburg  Dictionary  takes  it  appar- 
ently as  6,033  horses  (of  armed  warriors); 
Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  44, 
400,  prefers  to  understand  it  as  33  horses 
and  6,000  men;  Oldenberg,  loc.  cit., 
takes  it  as  6,033  warriors.  Harisvamin's 
Commentary,  cited  by  Eggeling,  is 
obscure. 


Tula  ] 


KING  TURVITI— SCALES 


3i7 


probability  to  Oldenberg's  conjecture25  that  the  Turvasas 
became  merged  in  the  Paiicala  people.  Hopkins26  considers 
that  in  the  Satapatha  passage  the  horses  were  merely  named 
from  the  family  of  Turvasa ;  but  this  view  is  less  likely,  since 
it  ignores  the  difficulty  involved  in  the  reference  to  the  men. 

It  is  impossible  to  be  certain  regarding  the  home  of  the 
Turvasas  at  the  time  of  their  conflict  with  Sudas.  They 
apparently  crossed  the  Parusni,27  but  from  which  side  is  dis- 
puted. The  view  of  Pischel28  and  Geldner,29  that  they  advanced 
from  the  west  towards  the  east,  where  the  Bharatas  were  (see 
Kufu),  is  the  more  probable. 


25  Buddha,  404. 

26  Op.  cit.,  258,  n.   Cf  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  1,  220. 

27  Rv.  vii.  18. 

28  Vedische  Studien,  2,218.  Cf  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  126. 

29  Vedische    Studien,    3,    152.     If    in 


Rv.  viii.  20,  24,  turvasa  is  read  with 
Ludwig  for  turvatha,  they  are  connected 
with  the  Sindhu. 

Cf.  Oldenberg,  Religion  des  Veda,  167  ; 
Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  5,  286 ;  Bergaigne, 
Religion  Vedique,  2,  354  et  seq. 


Turviti  is  mentioned  several  times  in  the  Rigveda,  both  in 
association  with  Vayya1  and  alone.2  In  three  passages3 
reference  is  made  to  Indra  aiding  him  over  a  flood.  Ludwig4 
has  conjectured  that  he  was  king  of  the  Turvasas  and  Yadus. 
But  there  is  no  sufficient  evidence  for  this  view,  though 
presumably  he  was  of  the  Turvasa  tribe. 


1  i.  54,  6;  ii.  13,  12;  iv.  19,  6, 

2  Rv.  i.  36,  18  ;  61,  11 ;   112,  23. 

3  i.  61,  11  ;  ii.  13,  12  ;  iv.  19,  6. 

4  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  147  ; 


4,  254.  Cf.  Turvasa,  and  Bergaigne, 
Religion  Vedique,  2,  358 ;  Oldenberg, 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  42,  36. 


Tula,  '  scales,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.1 
The  Satapatha  Brahmana2  also  speaks  of  the  balance  in  con- 
nexion with  the  weighing  of  a  man's  good  and  evil  deeds  in 
the  next  and  in  this  world.  This  differs  very  considerably 
from  the  later  balance3  ordeal,  in  which  a  man  was  weighed 
twice,  and  was  pronounced  guilty  or  innocent  according  as,  on 
the  second  occasion,  he  was  more  or  less  heavy  than  on  the 


xxx.  17. 


XL   2,   7,  33. 


3  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  145. 


318   HUSK— FLUTE— NORTH  KU RU K SET R A— TORRENT    [  Tu§a 

first.     It  is  not  possible  to  read  the  later  practice  into  the 
earlier.4 

4  Weber,    Indische    Streifen,    i,    21  ;   I   balance  ordeal.     Cf.  Eggeling,  Sacred 
2.  3°3.  quotes  Schlagintweit  as  giving   I   Books  of  the  East,  44,  45,  n.  4. 
this   passage   as   an    example   of    the  j 

Tusa,  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  later,2  regularly  denotes  the 
'  husk '  of  grain,  often  used  for  a  fire.3 


1  ix.  6,  16  ;  xi.  I,  12.  29  ;  3,  5  ;  xii.  3, 
19. 

2  Taittirlya  Brahmana,    i.   6,   5,   5 ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  7,  9,  etc. 


3  Tusa-pakva,  Taittirlya  Samhita,  v.  2 , 
4,  2 ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  2,  4 ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  vii.  2,  1,  7. 


Tunava  denotes  in  the  later  Samhitas1  and  the  Brahmanas2 
a  musical  instrument  of  wood,  probably  the  'flute.'  A  'flute- 
blower  '  is  enumerated  among  the  victims  of  the  Purusamedha, 
or  'human  sacrifice.'3 


1  Taittirlya  Samhita,  vi.  1,  4,  1  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  6,  8  ;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  xxiii.  4 ;  xxxiv.  5  (Indische 
Studien,  3,  477). 

2  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  vi.  5,  13 ; 


Tutuji.     See  Tuji. 


Taittirlya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  13, 1 ;  15, 1  ; 
Nirukta,  xiii.  9. 

3  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  19.  20 ; 
Taittirlya  Brahmana,  loc.  cit. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  289. 


Tupara,  *  hornless,'  is  a  frequent  description  of  animals 
intended  for  the  sacrifice,  especially  of  the  goat,  in  the 
Atharvaveda  and  later.1 

1  Av.  xi.  9,  22;  Taittirlya  Samhita,    1  xxiv.  1.  15;  xxix.  59,  etc.;  Satapatha 
ii.  1,  1,  4,  etc.  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,    |   Brahmana,  v,  1,  3,  7,  etc. 

Turghna  is  mentioned  in  the  Taittirlya  Aranyaka  (v.  1)  as 
the  northern  part  of  Kuruksetra.1  Its  exact  position,  however, 
cannot  be  ascertained. 

1  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  78. 

TurnaSa,  in  the  Rigvjeda,1  seems  to  denote  a  '  mountain 
torrent.' 

1  viii.  32,  4.     Cf.  Nirukta,  v.  16. 


Trna  ] 


NAMES  OF  PRINCES— TRIMMING— GRASS 


319 


Turvayana  is  the  name  of  a  prince  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda. 
He  appears  by  name  in  two  passages,1  and  is  clearly  alluded 
to  in  a  third,2  as  an  enemy  of  Atithigva,  Ayu,  and  Kutsa. 
With  this  accords  the  fact  that  the  Pakthas  were  opposed  in 
the  battle  of  the  ten  kings  to  the  Trtsus,3  and  that  Turvayana 
is  shown  by  another  passage  of  the  Rigveda4  to  have  been 
a  prince  of  the  Pakthas.  He  is  there  represented  as  having 
been  a  protege  of  Indra,  who  aided  him  against  Cyavana  and 
his  guardians,  the  Maruts.  It  is  not  probable  that  he  is 
identical  with  SuSravas.5 


1  i.  53,  10 ;  vi.  18,  13. 

2  ii.  14,  7  (as  a  comparison  of  the 
two  preceding  passages  shows)  ;  per- 
haps also  viii.  53,  2.  In  i.  174,  3, 
Turvayana  seems  also  to  be  a  proper 
name,  though  Roth,  St.  Petersburg 
Dictionary,  s.v.,  here  regards  the  word 
as  an  adjective. 


3  vii.  18. 

4  x.  61,  1  et  seq.  ;  Pischel,  Vedische 
Studien,  1,  71-77. 

5  Mentioned  in  i.  53,  9.  10.  Cf. 
Griffith,  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  1, 
75.  n. 


Tusa  is  found  in  the  later  Samhitas  and  the  Brahmanas1 
denoting  the  '  fringe '  or  '  trimming '  of  a  garment. 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  i.  8,  1,  1  ;  ii.  4, 
9,  1;  vi.  1,  1,  3;  Kathaka  Samhita, 
xxiii.    1 ;    Taittiriya  Brahmana,   i.   6, 


1,  8  ;  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xvii.  1, 
etc. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  A  Itindisches  Leben,  262. 


Trksi  is,  in  the  Rigveda,1  the  name  of  a  prince  who  was 
a  Trasadasyava, '  descendant  of  Trasadasyu.'  He  also  appears 
with  the  Druhyu  and  the  Puru  peoples  in  another  hymn.2  It 
has  been  conjectured,  but  it  is  not  probable,  that  the  steed 
Tarksya  (as  '  belonging  to  Trksi ')  was  his.3 

1  viii.  22,  7.  I   brandt,     Vedische    Mythologie,    1,     113, 

2  vi.  46,  8.     It  is  not  certain  that  the   j   notes  3,  4),  but  it  is  probable. 


two  persons  are  identical   {cf.    Hille- 


Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  149. 


Trna,  '  grass,'  is  often  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later.2 
It  was  used  as  straw  to  roof  in  a  house  or  hut.3 


1  i.  161,   1 ;    162,  8.  11  ;   x.  102,   10, 
elc. 

»  Av.    ii.    30,    1 ;    vi.    54,    1,    etc.  ; 


Aitareya  Brahmana,   iii.   22  ;   viii.   24, 
etc. 

3  Av.  iii.  12,  5  ;  ix.  3,  4.  7, 


320 


CATERPILLAR— TERTIAN  FEVER        [  Trnajalayuka 


Trna-jalayuka,  'caterpillar,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Brhad- 
aranyaka  Upanisad  (iv.  2,  4). 

Trna-skanda  occurs  once  in  the  Rigveda1  as  the  name  of 
a  prince,  his  subjects  {visah)  being  referred  to.2  The  word 
may  originally  have  meant  '  grasshopper.'3 

1  i-  172.  3. 

2  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  159,  takes  visah  as  'cantons,'  but  see  Vii 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

Trtiyaka,  'the  tertian  (fever),'  is  mentioned  in  the  Athar- 
vaveda  (i.  25,  4;  v.  22,  13;  xix.  39,  10).     See  Takman. 

Trtsu  occurs  in  the  Rigveda,  once  in  the  singular1  and  several 
times  in  the  plural,2  as  a  proper  name.  The  Trtsus  were 
clearly  helpers  of  Sudas  in  the  great  battle  against  the  ten 
kings,  Simyu,  the  TurvaSa,  the  Druhyu,  Kavasa,  the  Puru, 
the  Anu,  Bheda,  Sambara,  the  two  Vaikarnas,  and  perhaps 
the  Yadu,  who  led  with  them  as  allies3  the  Matsyas,  Pakthas, 
Bhalanas,  Alinas,  Visanins,  Sivas,  Ajas,  Sigrus,  and  perhaps 
Yaksus.4     The  defeat  of  the   ten  kings  is  celebrated   in  one 


1  vii.  18,  13. 

2  vii.  18,  7. 15.  19  ;  33, 5.  6 ;  83,  4.  6.  8. 

3  They  were  regarded  as  enemies  of 
the  kings  by  Roth,  Zur  Litter atur  und 
Geschichte  des  Weda,  95,  and  by  Zimmer, 
op.  cit.,  126.  The  latter,  however, 
altered  his  view  (see  pp.  430,  431, 
which  Hopkins,  op.  cit.,  260,  has  over- 
looked), and  there  is  no  doubt  that 
the  later  opinion  is  correct.  Cf.  also 
Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda, 
3,  173;  Hopkins,  260,  261.  Of  these 
tribes  the  Pakthas,  Alinas,  Bhalanas, 
Visanins,  and  Sivas,  were  probably 
settled  in  the  north-west,  to  the  west 
of  the  Indus,  and  around  the  Kabul 
River.  The  Anus,  Purus,  TurvaSas, 
Yadus,  and  Druhyus,  were  probably 
tribes  of  the  Panjab  ;  the  Ajas,  Sigrus, 
and  Yaksus,  tribes  of  the  east,  under 
Bheda ;  Sambara  may  also  have  been 
a  native  of  the  east ;  Simyu  and  Kavasa 
are  doubtful ;  and  the  Vaikarnau  prob- 
ably belonged  to  the  north-west. 


4  This  is  uncertain  ;  the  text  of  the 
Rigveda,  vii.  18,  6,  has  Yaksu,  and 
the  same  word  recurs  in  verse  19.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  word  Yadu  would 
naturally  be  expected  in  verse  6,  as  Tur- 
va£a  is  mentioned.  Zimmer,  A Itindisches 
Leben,  122,  says  that  Yadu  occurs  in 
vii.  18,  but  on  p.  126  he  cites  Yaksu 
in  both  places,  evidently  by  oversight. 
Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  15,  261,  n.,  considers  that  Tur- 
va£a,  the  Yaksu,  is  a  sarcastic  expres- 
sion, instead  of  Turvasa,  the  Yadu, 
making  Turvasa,  whom  he  regards  as 
king  of  the  Yadus,  ridiculous  as  a 
member  of  an  insignificant  people,  and 
alluding  to  him  also  as  a  sacrificial 
victim  (as  it  were,  yastavya,  '  to  be 
offered  ' :  cf.  purodas,  '  cake  of  sacrifice,' 
in  verse  6,  as  a  pun  on purogas,  '  leader'). 
Whether  Yaksu  is  used  contemptuously 
for  Yadu  or  not,  it  seems  hard  not  to 
believe  that  the  Yadus  are  referred 
to. 


Trtsu  ] 


RELATION  OF  TRTSUS  AND  BHARATAS 


321 


hymn  of  the  Rigveda,5  and  is  evidently  alluded  to  in  two 
others.6  The  great  battle  took  place  on  the  Parusni,  but  there 
was  also  a  fight  on  the  Yamuna  with  Bheda,  the  Ajas,  Sigrus, 
and  Yaksus.  As  the  Yamuna  and  the  Parusni  represent 
opposite  ends  of  the  territory  of  the  Trtsus  (for  we  cannot 
with  Hopkins7  safely  identify  the  streams),  it  is  difficult  to  see 
exactly  how  the  ten  kings  could  be  confederated,  but  it  should 
be  noted  that  the  references  to  the  ten  kings  occur  in  the  two 
later  hymns,6  and  not  in  the  hymn5  describing  the  battle  itself; 
besides,  absolute  numerical  accuracy  cannot  be  insisted  upon. 

It  is  difficult  exactly  to  determine  the  character  of  the 
Trtsus,  especially  in  their  relation  to  the  Bharatas,  who  under 
Visvamitra's  guidance  are  represented  as  prospering  and  as 
advancing  to  the  Vipa£  and  Sutudri.8  Roth  ingeniously 
brought  this  into  connexion  with  the  defeat  of  his  enemies 
by  Sudas,  which  is  celebrated  in  the  seventh  book  of  the 
Rigveda — a  book  attributed  to  the  Vasistha  family — and  thought 
that  there  was  a  reference  in  one  verse9  to  the  defeat  of  the 
Bharatas  by  Sudas.  But  it  seems  certain  that  the  verse  is 
mistranslated,  and  that  the  Bharatas  are  really  represented  as 
victors  with  Sudas.10  Ludwig11  accordingly  identifies  the 
Trtsus  and  the  Bharatas.  Oldenberg,12  after  accepting  this 
view  at  first,13  later  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  Trtsus  were 
the  priests  of  the  Bharata  people,  and  therefore  identical  with 
the  Vasisthas.  This  view  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  in  one 
passage14  the  Trtsus  are  clearly  described  as  wearing  their 
hair  in  the  peculiar  manner  affected  by  the  Vasisthas,15  and 
would  in  that  passage  thus  seem  to  represent  the  Vasisthas. 


5  vii.  18. 

6  vii.  33  and  83. 

7  India,  Old  and  New,  52.  No  such 
conjecture  was  made  by  him  in  the 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
15,  259  et  seq. 

8  Rv.  iii.  33  ;  53,  9-12. 

9  vii.  33,  6.  See  Roth,  op.  cit.,  90, 
121  ;  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  i2,  320 ; 
Macdonell,  Sanskrit  Literature,  154,  155; 
von  Schroeder,  Indiens  Literatur  und 
Cultur,  35,  36  ;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische 
Mythologie,    1,    no,    111  ;    Bloomfield, 

VOL.  I. 


Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
16,  41. 

10  Oldenberg,  Buddha,  406 ;  Weber, 
Episches  im  vedischen  Ritual,  34. 

11  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  175. 

12  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
Icindischen  Gesellschaft,  42,  207.  Cf.  Ber- 
gaigne,  Religion  Vddique,  2,  362. 

13  Buddha,  405,  406, 

14  Rv.  vii.  33,  1  {ivityanco  dakshiatas- 
kapardah). 

15  Rv.  vii.  83,  8  (sjityanco  .  .  . 
kapardinah) . 

21 


322 


THE  TRTSUS  ABSORBED  BY  THE  KURUS         [  Trtsu 


But  Geldner18  has  suggested  with  great  probability  that  Trtsu, 
who  is  once  mentioned  in  the  singular,17  means  the  Trtsu 
king — that  is,  Sudas.18  This  explanation  alone  justifies  the 
description19  of  the  Bharatas  as  Trtsunam  visah,20  'subjects  of 
the  Trtsus,'  meaning  the  Trtsu  Gotra  or  family,  for  the  people 
could  not  be  said  to  be  subjects  of  a  body  of  priests.  The 
Vasisthas  might  be  called  Trtsus  because  of  their  close  con- 
nexion with  the  royal  house  of  that  people.  The  reverse 
process  is  also  quite  possible,  but  is  rendered  improbable  by 
the  fact  that  the  Pratrdah  are  referred  to  as  receiving  Vasistha.21 
This  name  of  the  Trtsu  dynasty  is  probably  older  than  its 
connexion  with  Vasistha  in  the  time  of  Sudas,  a  conclusion 
supported  by  the  name  of  Pratardana,  who  is  mentioned  later 
as  a  descendant  of  Divodasa,22  an  ancestor  of  Sudas.  The 
Trtsu  dynasty  could  therefore  hardly  have  been  referred  to  as 
Vasisthas.  For  the  further  history  of  the  dynasty  and  its 
relation  with  Vasistha  and  Visvamitra,  see  Sudas. 

If  the  Trtsus  and  their  subjects,  the  Bharatas,  were  in  the 
Rigvedic  period  at  war  with  the  tribes  on  either  side  of  the 
territory  between  the  Parusni  and  the  Yamuna,  it  is  clear23 
that  later  on  they  coalesced  with  the  Purus  and  probably 
others  of  those  tribes  to  form  the  Kuril  people.  Already  in 
the  Rigveda24  the  Trtsus  are  allied  with  the  Srnjayas,  and  in 
the  Satapatha  Brahmana25  one  Purohita  serves  both  Kurus 
and  Srnjayas. 


16  Vedische  Studien,  2,  136;  Rgveda- 
Glossar,  74. 

17  Rv.  vii.  18,  13. 

18  Cf.  Rv.  vii.  18, 24.  The  parallelism 
of  verses  13  and  24  is  quite  beyond 
question.  Moreover,  the  praise  of 
Sudas  and  of  the  Bharatas  is  found 
coupled  in  Rv.  iii.  53,  9.  12.  24,  and  in 
Rv.  vi.  16,  4.  5,  Divodasa  is  coupled 
with  the  Bharatas  in  such  a  way  as  to 
suggest  irresistibly  that  Divodasa  was 
a  Bharata. 

19  Rv.  vii.  33,  6. 

20  That  this  is  the  sense  of  viiah  is 
almost  certain.  See  Geldner,  Vedische 
Studien,  loc.  tit.  Zimmer,  Altindisches 
Leben,   159,  and   Hillebrandt,    Vedische 


Mythologie,  1,  111,  render  it  'cantons,' 
but  see  Vii. 

21  Rv.  vii.  ^t  T4-  Geldner  (op.  cit., 
J38,  139)  ingeniously  suggests  that 
Vasistha,  being  miraculously  born, 
needed  a  Gotra,  and  so  became  a  Trtsu. 

22  Pratardana  is  mentioned  in  the 
Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xxvi.  5,  as  Daivo- 
dasi,  '  descendant  of  Divodasa.' 

23  Cf.  Oldenberg,  Buddha,  406  et  seq., 
and  see  Kuru. 

24  See  Rv.  vi.  47,  where  Divodasa 
and  Sarnjaya  are  both  praised.  In 
vi.  27,  5,  the  TurvaSas  are  opposed  to 
the  Srnjayas,  and  in  vii.  18,  6;  19,  8, 
the  Trtsus  are  opposed  to  the  TurvaSas. 

25  ii.  4.  4.  5- 


Tejana]        TRTSUS— A  PRIEST— A  RIVER— BAMBOO  323 

Hillebrandt26  considers  that  the  Trtsus  cannot  be  identified 
with  the  Bharatas,  but  that  Sudas  and  the  Bharatas  represent 
an  invading  body,  which,  however,  became  allied  with  the 
Trtsus  and  the  Vasistha  priests.  He  also  thinks  that  the 
Rigveda  reveals  a  time  when  Divodasa,  the  grandfather  or 
ancestor  of  Sudas,  was  living  in  Arachosia,  on  the  Sarasvati, 
and  warring  against  the  Panis,  whom  he  identifies  with  the 
Parnians.  But  this  conjecture27  cannot  be  regarded  as 
probable.  In  the  Sarasvati28  it  is  not  necessary  to  see  any 
other  river  than  the  later  Sarasvati,  in  the  middle  country, 
which  flowed  within  the  boundaries  of  the  Trtsus :  it  is  also 
significant  that  there  are  references29  to  contests  between 
Turva^a  Yadu  and  Atithigva  or  Divodasa.  Thus  there  is  no 
reason  to  doubt  that  Divodasa  and  the  Bharatas  were  in  the 
middle  country,  and  not  in  Iran. 


26  Vediscke  Mythologie,  1,  98  et  seq. 

27  Cf.  also  Grierson,  Journal  of  the 
Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1908,  837  et 
seq. 

28  Rv.  vi.  61,  3.  Brunnhofer,  Iran 
und  Turan,  127,  identifies  this  river  with 


the  Oxus,  but  Hillebrandt  identifies  it 
with  the  Haraqaiti. 

29  Rv.  ix.  61,  2.  Cf.  vi.  45,  1  ; 
Zimmer,  op.  cit.,  124. 

Cf.  Max  Miiller,  Sacred  Books  of  the 
East,  32,  424. 


Trsta  is  mentioned  in  the  Maitrayani1  and  Kathaka  Samhitas2 
as  being  along  with  Varutri  the  priest  of  the  Asuras. 


1  iv.  8,  1.  The  reading  is  uncer- 
tain ;  it  may  be  Trstha-varutri.  See 
von  Schroeder's  edition,  p.  106,  n. 

2  xxx.  1,  where  again  the  reading  is 
uncertain.     The  Kapisthala  Samhita, 


xlvi.  4,  has  Tvasta  -  varutri  (von 
Schroeder's  edition  of  the  Kathaka,  2, 
181,  n). 

Cf.  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  i2,  190,  191  ; 
Levi,  La  Doctrine  du  Sacrifice,  119. 


Trstama  is  mentioned  as  a  stream  in  the  Nadi-stuti,  or 
'praise  of  rivers,'  in  the  Rigveda.1  There  seems  to  be  no 
means  of  identifying  it. 

1  x.  75,  6.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  14. 

Tejana  denotes  in  the  Rigveda1  a  rod  or  staff  of  reed  used 
for  measuring  a  field.  In  the  Atharvaveda  the  sense  of 
'  bamboo '  is  found  twice,2  the  bamboo  being  specified  in  the 

1  i.  no,  5,  I   Cf.  taijana  as  an  adjective  in  Kathaka 

2  i.  2,  4;  xx.  136,  3(  =  Khila,  v.  22,  3).    |   Samhita,  xxi.  10. 

21 — 2 


324        REEDS— BOLT— TAITTIRIYA  SCHOOL— SNAKE     [  Tejani 


second  passage  as  '■  of  the  spring '  (vdsantika) ;  more  particularly 
it  denotes  the  shaft  of  an  arrow,3  a  sense  often  found  in  later 
Vedic  texts.4 


3  Av.  vi.  49,  i  (Whitney,  Translation 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  317) ;  isu  eka-tejand, 
'  an  arrow  with  one  shaft,'  vi.  57,  1. 

4  Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  25;  hi.  26; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxv.  1  (with  sriiga 
and    salya   as  the  three    parts  of    an 


arrow ;  in  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  8,  1, 
kulmala  takes  the  place  of  tejana ;  cf. 
ibid.,  2).  The  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  3, 
3,  1,  has  anika,  salya,  and  tejana. 
Cf.  Isu. 


Tejani  denotes  in  the  later  Samhitas  and  Brahmanas  a  bundle 
of  reeds,1  and  in  some  cases  such  a  bundle  twisted  into  a  rope,2 
for  the  two  ends  of  the  Tejani  are  mentioned. 


1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  8,  3,  12  ; 
perhaps  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxiii.  9. 


2  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxii.  13 ;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  i.  11,  as  rendered  by  Sayana. 


Tejas  is  regarded  by  Schrader1  as  having  in  the  Rigveda2 
the  specific  sense  of  '  axe.'  But  in  all  the  passages  the  sense 
of  the  '  bolt '  of  the  god  is  adequate. 


1  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  221. 


2  Cf.  vi.  3,  5 ;  8,  5 ;   15,  19. 


Taittiriya  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  divisions  of  the  Black 
Yajurveda,  which  is,  however,  not  found  thus  described  until 
the  Sutra  period.1  The  school  is  represented  by  a  Samhita,2 
a  Brahmana,3  and  an  Aranyaka,4  besides  an  Upanisad,6  which 
forms  a  part  of  the  Aranyaka. 


1  Anupada  Sutra,  ii.  6;  vii.  7.  10, 
etc.  See  Weber  Indian  Literature,  87 
et  seq.  ;  Macdonell,  Sanskrit  Literature, 
175  et  seq.  ;  von  Schroeder,  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  1,  x  et  seq. 

2  Edited  by  Weber,  Indische  Studien, 
xi,  xii,  and  in  the  Bibliotheca  Indica, 
1854-1899. 


3  Edited  in  the  Bibliotheca  Indica, 
1855  - 1870,  and  in  the  Anandasrama 
Series,  1898. 

4  Edited  in  the  Bibliotheca  Indica,  1864- 
1872,  and  in  the  Anandasrama  Series, 
1898. 

5  Edited  by  Roer,  1850,  and  in  the 
Anandasrama  Series,  1889. 


Taimata  is  twice  mentioned  as  a  species  of  snake  in  the 
Atharvaveda.1 


1  v.    13,   6 ;    18,   4.     Cf.   Whitney, 
Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  243 ; 


Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
425;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  95. 


Toda  ]        SESAMUM  OIL— CHILDREN— SHOOTS— GOAD 


325 


Taila,  '  sesamum  oil,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda,1 
where2  reference  is  made  to  keeping  such  oil  in  jars.  In  the 
Sankhayana  Aranyaka,3  reference  is  made  to  anointing  with 
sesamum  oil. 


1  i.  7,  2  (all  the  manuscripts  have 
taula,  which  must  be  wrong ;  the  Paip- 
palada  MS.  has  tula :  see  Whitney, 
Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  7). 


2  xx.  136,  16. 

3  xi.  4. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  240, 
241. 


Toka  denotes  '  children '  or  '  descendants '  generally  in  the 
Rigveda1  and  later.2    The  word  is  often  joined  with  Tanaya.3 


1  i.  43,  2 ;  ii.  2,  n  ;  9,  2  ;  vii.  62,  6 ; 
viii.  5,  20  ;  67,  11,  etc. 

2  Av.  i.  13,  2  ;  28,  3  ;  v.  19,  2 ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxxvi.  7  (Indische 
Studien,  3,  466) ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
vii.  5,  2,  39,  etc. 


3  Rv.  i.  31,  12  ;  64,  14 ;  114, 
147,  1;  ii.  33,  14;  v.  53,  13;  vi.  1, 
etc. ;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  7. 


6; 
12, 


Tokman,  neut.,  denotes  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  the  green 
shoots  of  any  kind  of  grain.  In  the  Aitareya  Brahmana3 
reference  is  made  to  the  shoots  of  rice  (vrihi),  large  rice  (maha- 
vrihi),  panic  seed  (priyangu),  and  barley  (yava). 


1  x.  62,  8. 

2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xix.  13.  81  ; 
xxi.  30.  42  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xii.  11 ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  hi.  11,  9;  Tait- 
tiriya  Brahmana,  ii.  6,  4 ;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  viii.  5,  etc. 


3  viii.  16.  Cf.  for  its  use  at  the 
SautramanI,  Hillebrandt,  Rituallitte- 
ratur,  160. 


Tottra,   a  'goad'  for  driving   cattle,  is   mentioned   in   the 
Satapatha  Brahmana  (xii.  4,  1,  10). 


Toda  appears  once  to  denote  a  '  goad '  in  the  Rigveda,1  but 
more  often2  it  is  an  agent  noun  meaning  'impeller.'  Geldner3 
considers  that  in  one  passage4  the  sense  is  'wielder  of  the  rod 
of  punishment '  (later  danda-dhara) — that  is,  '  prince.' 


1  iv.    16,    11  ;    Mantra    in    Kausika 
Sutra,  107. 

2  Rv.  vi.  6,  6;  12,  1.  3,  are  probably 
so  to  be  understood. 


3  Vedische  Studien,  3, 

4  Rv.  i.  150,  1. 


74- 


326  PATRONYMICS— PLANT— TIN  [  Taugrya 

Taugrya,    'descendant    of   Tugra,'   is    the    patronymic   of 
Bhujyu  in  the  Rigveda.1     u^X-y 

1  i.  117,  \f\  118,  6;  182,  5.  6;  viii.  5,  22;  x.  39,  4. 


Taudi  in  one  passage  of  the  Atharvaveda1  appears  to  denote 
a  plant. 


1  x.  4,  24.  Cf.  St.  Petersburg  Dic- 
tionary, s.v.  Whitney,  Translation  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  578,  leaves  the  word 
untranslated.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  608,  suggests  that  it  is 


a  fanciful  name,  '  the  piercer,'  since  it 
is  associated  with  ghrtaci,  '  dripping 
with  ghee,'  which  is  clearly  such  a 
word. 


TaurvaSa.     See  TurvaSa. 

Taula,  the  reading  of  the  text  of  the  Atharvaveda  (i.  7,  2), 
and  a  form  which  is  otherwise  unknown  and  cannot  be  satis- 
factorily explained,  must  doubtless  be  meant  for  Taila. 

Tauvilika,  occurring  once  in  a  hymn  of  the  Atharvaveda,1 
is  a  word  of  quite  uncertain  sense.  Roth2  thinks  it  means 
some  kind  of  beast;  Zimmer3  and  Whitney4  regard  it  as  a 
sort  of  plant ;  Sayana  explains  it  as  a  disease-causing  demon, 
while  Bloomfield5  leaves  the  sense  doubtful. 


1  vi.  16,  3. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Altindisches  Leben,  72. 


4  Translation    of   the   Atharvaveda, 
292. 

5  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  30,  466. 


Trapu  denotes  'tin'  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  later.2  Its 
quality  of  being  easily  smelted,  which  Roth3  thinks  is  indicated 
by  the  name  (as  derived  from  the  root  trap,  'be  ashamed'),  is 
clearly  alluded  to  in  the  Atharvaveda  passage. 


1  xi.  3,  8. 

2  Kathaka  Samhita,  xviii.  10  ;  Maitra- 
yani  Samhita,  ii.  XX,  5 ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xviii.  13  (all  in  enumerations 
of  metals) ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  12, 
6,  5 ;  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana, 


iii.  17,  3  ;  Chandogya  Upanisad, 
iv.  17,  7.  In  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv. 
7,  5,  1,  the  form  is  trapus. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  53. 


Trasadasyu  ]        TRASADASYU,  KING  OF  THE  PORUS  327 

Trasa-dasyu,  son  of  Purukutsa,1  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda 
as  king  of  the  Purus.2  He  was  born  to  Purukutsa  by  his  wife, 
Pupukutsani,  at  a  time  of  great  distress  ;3  this,  according  to 
Sayana,  refers  to  Purukutsa's  captivity :  possibly  his  death  is 
really  meant.  Trasadasyu  was  also  a  descendant  of  Giriksit,4 
and  Purukutsa  was  a  descendant  of  Durgaha.  The  genealogy, 
therefore,  appears  to  be :  Durgaha,  Giriksit,  Purukutsa,  Trasa- 
dasyu. Trasadasyu  was  the  ancestor  of  Tpksi,5  and,  according 
to  Ludwig,6  had  a  son  Hiranin.  Trasadasyu's  chronological 
position  is  determined  by  the  fact  that  his  father,  Purukutsa, 
was  a  contemporary  of  Sudas,  either  as  an  opponent7  or  as 
a  friend.8  That  Purukutsa  was  an  enemy  of  Sudas  is  more 
probable,  because  the  latter's  predecessor,  Divodasa,  was 
apparently9  at  enmity  with  the  Purus,  and  in  the  battle  of  the 
ten  kings  Purus  were  ranged  against  Sudas  and  the  Trtsus. 
Trasadasyu  himself  seems  to  have  been  an  energetic  king. 
His  people,  the  Purus,  were  settled  on  the  Sarasvati,10  which 
was,  no  doubt,  the  stream  in  the  middle  country,  that  locality 
according  well  with  the  later  union  of  the  Purus  with  the 
Kuru  people,  who  inhabited  that  country.  This  union  is 
exemplified  in  the  person  of  Kuruspavana,  who  is  called 
Trasadasyava,  '  descendant  of  Trasadasyu,'  in  the  Rigveda,11 
whose  father  was  Mitratithi,  and  whose  son  was  Upamasravas. 
The  relation  of  Mitratithi  to  Trksi  does  not  appear. 

Another  descendant  of  Trasadasyu  was  Tryaruna  Traivrsna, 
who  is  simply  called  Trasadasyu  in  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda.12 

1  Rv.  v.  33,  8;  vii.  19,  3;  viii.  19,  |  G/sellschaft,  42,  204,  205,  219;  Rgveda- 
36;  iv.  42,  8  et  seq.  Noten,  1,  63  ;  Geldner,  Vedische  Studien, 

2  Rv.  iv.  38,  1  et  seq.;  vii.  19,  3.  /i,  153 ;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische Mythologie, 
He  is  merely  alluded  to  in  i.  63,  7;/  1,  112,  n.  1.  Foy,  Kuhn's  Zeitschrift, 
112,  4  ;  viii.  8,  21  ;  36,  7  ;  37,  7  ;  49,  10.       34,  242,  denies  that  the  word  in  this 

3  Rv.  iv.  42,  8  et  seq.  passage  is  a  proper  name  at  all. 
*  Rv.  v.  33,  8.  8  Qf.  Hillebrandt,  loc.  tit. 

5  Rv.  viii.  22,  7.  He  was  a  Piiru  I  9  Rv.  i.  130,  7;  Ludwig,  3,  114;  but 
king.     See  vi.  46,  8.  |  see  Hillebrandt,  1,  113,  114. 

6  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  155,  I  10  Rv.  vii.  95,  96;  Ludwig,  3,  175; 
with  reference  to  Rv.  v.  33,  7  et  seq.  i  Hillebrandt,  1,  115. 

7  So    Ludwig,    3,    174,    who    alters  !  u  x.    ^,    4.     Cf.    Lanman,   Sanskrit 


Sudasam  to  Sudase,  in  support  of  this 
view,  in  Rv.  i.  63,  7.  Cf.  Oldenberg, 
Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morqenldndischen 


Reader,  386  et   seq.  ;    Geldner,    Vedische 
Studien,  2,  150,  184. 


Vi 


v.  27, 


328 


NAMES— A  PLANT 


[  Trata  Ai§umata 


He  was  not  only  a  '  descendant  of  Trivrsan,'  but,  according 
to  the  Paficavimsa  Brahmana,13  he  was  also  Traidhatva, 
'  descendant  of  Tridhatu.'  The  order  of  these  two  predecessors 
of  Tryaruna  cannot  be  determined  in  any  way  from  Vedic 
literature.  According  to  the  later  tradition,14  a  prince  named 
Tridhanvan  preceded  Tryaruna  in  the  succession.  Vedic  tradi- 
tion further  fails  to  show  in  what  precise  relation  Trasadasyu 
stood  to  Trivrsan  or  Tryaruna. 

Trasdasyu  Paurukutsa  appears  in  several  Brahmanas15  as  a 
famous  sacrificer  of  ancient  times,  together  with  Para  Atnara, 
Vitahavya  Srayasa,  and  Kakslvant  Auslja,  who  in  the 
Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana16  are  called  'ancient  great 
kings'  (purve  maharajdh). 


13  xiii.  3,  12.  The  Tandaka,  cited 
by  Sayana  (Sieg,  Die  Sagenstoffe  dcs 
Rgveda,  67).  has  Trasadasyu,  like  the  Rv. 

14  HarivamSa,  714  et  seq.,  where  the 
name  (716)  is  also  misread  as  Tridhar- 
raan.  Traidhatva  cannot  reasonably 
be  taken  as  representing  a  patronymic 
from  Tridhanvan,  as  Sieg,  op.  cit.,  74- 
76,  seems  to  do.  Trivrsan  has  entirely 
disappeared  from  the  Epic  tradition  ; 
there  is  thus  no  way  of  assigning  a 
relative  priority  to  either  Trivrsan  or 
Tridhanvan. 


15  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xxv.  16 ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxii.  3  (Indische 
Studien,  3,  473) ;  Taittinya  Samhita, 
v.  6,  5,  3. 

16  ii.  6,  11. 

Cf.  Oldenberg,  Zcitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenlandischen  Gesellschap,  42,  217 
et  seq. ;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie, 
1,  IIX-IX6;  2, 165,  n.  4  ;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  10,  25  ;  Lanman,  Sanskrit  Reader, 
386. 


Trata  Aisumata  ('  descendant  of  Isumant ')  is  mentioned  in 
the  Vamsa  Brahmana1  as  a  pupil  of  Nig-ada  Parnavalki. 

1  i.  3.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  4,  372. 

Trayamana  denotes  in  the  Atharvaveda1  a  plant  of  an 
unknown  species.  The  word  is  possibly  only  an  epithet, 
retaining  its  participial  sense  of  '  preserving,'  though  this 
interpretation  is  not  favoured  by  the  accent.2 

1  viii.  2,  6. 

2  Trdyamand.     Cf.  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  477. 

Trasadasyava,  'descendant  of  Trasadasyu,'  is  the  patro- 
nymic in  the  Rigveda  of  Trksi1  and  of  KuruSravana.2    The 


via.  22,  7. 


x.  33,  4' 


Tripura  ]    A  MOUNTAIN— SOMA   VESSELS— STRONGHOLD    329 

word  is  also  applied  to  Agni  as  '  protector  of,  or  worshipped  by, 
Trasadasyu  '  and  his  line.3 

3  viii.  19,  32  ;  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  96. 


Tri-kakud1  or  Tri-kakubh,2  '  having  three  peaks,'  occurs  in 
the  Atharvaveda  and  later  as  the  name  of  a  mountain  in  the 
Himalaya,  the  modern  Trikota.  From  it  came  the  salve 
(Aiijana),3  which  tradition  made  out  to  be  derived  from 
Vrtra's  eye.4 


1  Av.  iv.  9,  8  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
iii.  1,  3,  12. 

2  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  6,  3 ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxiii.  1  ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xv.  4 ;  Pancavimsa  Brahmana, 
xxii.  14. 

3  Hence  called  Traikakuda,  Av.  iv.  9, 
9.  10  ;  xix.  44,  6,  etc. 


4  Satapatha  Brahmana,  loc.  cit.  ; 
Maitrayani  and  Kathaka  Samhitas, 
loc.  cit. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda,  3, 198  ;  Zimmer,  Altindisches Leben, 
5,  29,  30  ;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Myth- 
ologie,  3,  239,  n.  4 ;  Bloomfield,  Hymns 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  381. 


Tri-kadruka,  a  term  used  in  the  plural  only,  appears  to 
denote  three  vessels  of  some  kind  for  holding  Soma. 

1  i.  32,  3  ;  ii.  11,  17 ;   15,  1 ;  22,  1  ;  x.  14,  16. 

Tri-kharva  is  the  name  of  a  school  of  priests  mentioned  in 
the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana  (ii.  8,  3)  as  practising  a  special  rite 
with  success. 


Trita  is  clearly  a  god1  in  Vedic  literature,  but  Yaska  in  one 
passage  of  the  Nirukta2  already  explains  the  name  as  that  of 
a  Rsi  or  seer. 


1  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  pp.  67-69. 


2  iv.  6. 


Tri-pura,  « a  threefold  stronghold,'  is  alluded  to  in  the 
Brahmanas1  as  a  secure  protection.  But  as  the  passages  are 
mythical  no  stress  can  be  laid  on  them  as  evidence  for  the 
existence  of  forts  with  three  concentric  walls. 


1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  vi.  3,  3,  25  ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  11;  Kausltaki 

310. 


Brahmana  in  Indische  Studien, 


See  also  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  2,  3 ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxiv.  10,  etc.,  and 
Levi,  La  Doctrine  du  Sacrifice,  46,  n  1. 


33° 


FIG-TREES— THREE  AGES— CATTLE        [  Triplak§a 


Tri-plaksa,  masc.  plur.,  '  the  three  fig-trees,'  is  the  name  of 
the  place  where  the  Drsadvati  disappeared,  near  the  Yamuna, 
according  to  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.1 

1  xxv.  13,  4.  Cf.  Sankhayana  Srauta  l  Sutra,  x.  19,9;  KatyayanaSrauta  Sutra, 
Sutra,  xiii.  29,  33  ;  Latyayana  Srauta  |   xxiv.  6,  39. 


Triy-avi.     See  Tryavi. 


Tri-yug'a,  neut.,  is  an  expression  occurring  in  the  Rigveda1 
where  it  is  said  that  the  plants  (osadhi)  were  born  *  three  ages ' 
before  the  gods  (devebhyas  triyugam  pur  a).  The  commentator 
on  the  Nirukta2  thinks  that  the  ages  here  meant  are  the  Yugas 
of  the  later  Indian  chronology,  the  sense  of  the  passage  being 
that  the  plants  were  born  in  the  first  Yuga.  The  author  of 
the  Satapatha  Brahmana3  understands  three  seasons — spring, 
the  rains,  and  autumn — to  be  meant  in  the  verse,  taking  the 
two  words  triyugam  pur  a  separately  as  '  formerly,  in  the  three 
seasons.'  The  vague  sense  '  three  ages  '  is  quite  adequate : 
the  use  of  '  three '  in  such  cases  is  a  favourite  feature  in 
folklore.     Cf.  Yuga. 


1  x.  97,   1  =  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv. 
2,  6, 1,  and  Vajasaneyi  Samhita;  xii.  75. 

2  ix.  28. 


3  vii.  2,  4,  26. 

Cf.  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 
41,  34°- 


Tri-vatsa,   *  three  years  old,'1  is  an  expression  applied   to 
cattle  in  the  later  Samhitas  and  the  Brahmanas.2 


1  As  regards  the  form  and  meaning 
of  this  compound,  cf.  Tryavi. 

2  Vajasaneyi     Samhita,      xiv.      10  ; 
xviii.  26 ;  xxviii.  27 ;  Pancavimsa  Brah- 


mana, xvi.  13  ;  xviii.  9 ;  xxi.  14,  etc. 
Cf.  Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  viii.  3, 
9  et  seq.,  where  one  explanation  of  the 
word  is  tri-varsa. 


Tri-vrt,  '  threefold,'  is  the  designation  of  an  amulet  in  the 
Atharvaveda  (v.  28,  2.  4). 


Tri-veda  Krsna-rata  Lauhitya  ('  descendant  of  Lohita ')  is 
the  name  of  a  teacher,  a  pupil  of  Syamajayanta  Lauhitya, 
according  to  a  VamsSa  (list  of  teachers)  in  the  Jaiminiya 
Upanisad  Brahmana  (iii.  42,  1). 


Traipada]        A  SAGE— A  SEER— A  DASA— DISTANCE 


33* 


Tri-gariku  is  in  Vedic  literature  the  name  of  a  sage  men- 
tioned as  a  teacher  in  the  Taittiriya  Upanisad.1  There  is  no 
trace  of  the  later  legend  by  which  he  becomes  the  victim  of 
Vasistha's  curse  and  the  object  of  Visvamitra's  solicitude, 
being  eventually  fixed  in  the  sky  as  a  constellation.2  The 
confusion  of  the  chronology  in  the  tales  of  Trisanku  is  a  good 
example  of  the  worthlessness  of  the  supposed  epic  tradition. 


1  i.  10,  1. 


See  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  i2,  362,  375  et  seq. 


Tri-goka  is  the  name  of  an  ancient  mythical  seer  who  is 
mentioned  both  in  the  Rigveda1  and  the  Atharvaveda.2  A 
Saman,  or  chant,  named  after  him  is  referred  to  in  the 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana.3 


IX. 

1  i.  112,  1/;  viii.  45,  30.  In  x.  29,  2, 
the  word  seems  merely  to  be  an  adjec- 
tive, meaning  '  with  triple  splendour. ' 


2  iv.  29,  6. 


Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  107,  162  ;  Hopkins,  Transac- 
tions of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts 
and  Sciences,  15,  33. 


Trai-kakuda.     See  Trikakud. 


Traitana  appears  in  the  Rigveda1  as  a  Dasa,  an  enemy  of 
Dirg*hatamas,  who  seems  to  have  engaged  him  in  single 
combat  and  defeated  him.  The  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary 
suggests  that  he  is  rather  a  supernatural  being  allied  to  Trita 
{cf.  the  Avestan  Thrita  and  Thraetaona).2 


1  i-  158,  5. 

2  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  68. 
Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 


veda, 3,   151 ;  Oldenberg,  Religion  des 
Veda,  144. 


Trai-dhatva  ('  descendant  of  Tridhatu,')  is  the  patronymic 
of  Tryaruna  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana  (xiii.  3,  12). 

Trai-pada,  neut.,  occurs  as  a  measure  of  distance,  '  three- 
quarters '  of  a  Yojana,  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  where 
half  a  Yojana  is  termed  Gavyuti  and  a  quarter  Kro^a.1 


1  xvi.  13.     Cf.  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xiv.  41,  12. 


332 


PATRONYMICS— KING  TRY  A  RUN  A 


[  Traivani 


Traivani  is  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Aupacandhani  or  Aupa- 
jandhani  in  the  first  two  Vamsas  (lists  of  teachers)  in  the 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.1  In  the  Madhyamdina  recension2 
his  name  occurs  twice  in  the  second  Vamsa,  in  both  cases  as 
a  pupil  of  Aupajandhani. 


iv.  5.  27. 


1  ii.  6,  3  (Kanva=ii.  5,  21  Madhyam- 
dina) ;  iv.  6,  3  (  =  iv.  5,  27). 

Trai-vrsna,   '  descendant  of  Trivrsan,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
Trayaruna  in  the  Rigveda  (v.  27,  1). 

Try-aruna  Tpai-vrsna  Trasadasyu  is  the  name  of  a  prince 
whose  generosity  to  a  singer  is  celebrated  in  a  hymn  of  the 
Rigveda.1  In  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana2  he  appears  as 
Tryaruna  Traidhatva  Aiksvaka,  and  is  the  hero  of  the 
following  story.  He  was  out  in  his  chariot  with  his  Purohita, 
or  domestic  priest,  Vp£a  Jana,  and  by  excessive  speed  in  driving 
killed  a  Brahmin  boy.  This  sin  was  atoned  for  by  the  Puro- 
hita's  using  his  Varsa  Saman  (chant).  The  Satyayana  Brah- 
mana, cited  by  Sayana,3  elaborates  the  tale.  As  Vrsa  had 
held  the  reins,  king  and  priest  accused  each  other  of  the  murder. 
The  Iksvakus  being  consulted  threw  the  responsibility  for  the 
crime  on  Vrsa,  who  thereupon  revived  the  boy  by  the  Varsa 
Saman.  In  consequence  of  this  unfairness  of  theirs — being 
Ksatriyas  they  were  partial  to  a  Ksatriya — Agni's  glow  ceased 
to  burn  in  their  houses.  In  response  to  their  appeal  to  restore 
it,  Vrsa  came  to  them,  saw  the  Pisaci  (demoness),  who,  in  the 
form  of  Trasadasyu's  wife,  had  stolen  the  glow,  and  succeeded 
in  restoring  it  to  Agni.  This  version  with  some  variations 
occurs  also  in  the  Brhaddevata,4  which  connects  the  story  with 
a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda.5  Sieg's  attempt6  to  show  that  the 
hymn  really  refers  to  this  tale  is  not  at  all  successful.7 

4  v.  14  et  seq.,  with  Macdonell's  notes. 

5  v.  2. 

6  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  64-76. 
Cf.  Geldner,  Festgruss  an  Roth,  192. 

7  See  Oldenberg,  Sacred  Books  of  the 
East,  46,  366  et  seq. ;  Rgveda-Noten,  1, 
312  ;  Hillebrandt,  Gottingische  Gelehrtc 
Anzeigen,  1903,  240^5^. 


1  v.  27,  1-3. 

2  xiii.  3,  12.  Cf.  the  Tandaka  recen- 
sion, cited  in  Sayana,  on  Rv.  v.  2, 
where  Trasadasyu  is  given  as  the  king's 
name. 

3  On  Rv.,  loc.  cit.  See  also  the 
Jaiminlya  Brahmana  version  in  Oertel, 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 

18,  20. 


Tvac  ] 


CALF— SOMA  ADMIXTURE— HIDE 


333 


It  is  clear  that  Trasadasyu  must  here  mean  *  descendant  of 
Trasadasyu,'  and  not  King  Trasadasyu  himself.  The  difference 
of  the  patronymics,  Traivrsna  and  Traidhatva,  by  which  he  is 
referred  to  can  best  be  explained  by  assuming  that  there  were 
two  kings,  Trivrsan  and  Tridhatu  (or  possibly  Tridhanvan), 
from  whom  Tryaruna  was  descended.8  The  connexion  with  the 
Iksvakus  is  important  (see  Iksvaku). 

8  See  Sieg,  op.  cit.,  74-76,  and  Trasadasyu. 


Try-avi   designates   a   calf    eighteen    months    old1   in    the 
Rigveda2  and  later  Samhitas.3 


1  The  etymological  meaning  is  ap- 
parently '  having  three  sheep  (periods) ' 
— that  is,  '  having  periods  of  thrice  six 
months,'  just  as  the  adjective  pancavi 
means  '  having  five  periods  of  six 
months,'  or  '  thirty  months  old.' 


2  iii.  55>  14- 

3  Kathaka  Samhita,  xvii.  2 ;  xviii.  12, 
etc.  (in  the  form  triyavi)  ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xiv.  10 ;  xviii.  26,  etc. 


Try-aiir,  *  with  three  admixtures,'  is  an  epithet  of  Soma  in 
the  Rigveda.1  According  to  Sayana  this  means  mixed  with, 
curds  (Dadhi),  meal  (Saktu),  and  milk  (Payas).  More  accurately 
it  would  seem2  to  denote  the  milk  (gavasir),  the  barley  (yavdsir), 
and  the  curds  (dadhyasir),  which  were  used  to  mix  with  the 
Soma. 


1  v.  27,  5.  Cf.  perhaps  viii.  2,  7 
(traya  Indrasya  somdh  sutdsah,  *  three 
kinds  of  Soma  pressed  for  Indra '). 


2  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  1, 
209 ;  Oldenberg,  Sacred  Books  of  the 
East,  46,  422. 


Tvac,  'skin,'  'hide,'  {a)  denotes  specially  in  the  Rigveda1 
the  hide  used  in  the  process  of  extracting  the  Soma  juice  from 
the  plant.  The  Soma  was  pounded  with  stones  (adri)  upon  the 
skin  laid  on  the  pressing  boards  (adhisavane  phalake),2  which, 
however,  are  not  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda.  Or  if  a  pestle  and 
mortar  were  used,  the  skin  was  still  placed  underneath  them 
to  catch  the  drops  of  juice,  not  above,  as  Pischel3  thought. 

1  *•    79.   3;   iii-    21,    5;   ix.   65,    25 ;    I       '2  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  1, 
66,  29;  70,  7;  79,  4;  101,  11,  16,  etc.      I   181-183,  and  Adhisavana. 
3  Vedische  Studien,  1,  no. 


334 


BLA  CKSKINS—CA  RPENTER—HA  NDLE 


[  Tvasfc 
Soma   plant   that 


(b)  Tvac   also   denotes   the   rind   of  the 
remains  after  the  juice  has  been  extracted.4 

(c)  Metaphorically  the  term  krpia  tvac,  *  the  black  skins,'  is 
applied  to  the  aboriginal  enemies  of  the  invading  Aryans.6 


*  Rv.  ix.  86,  44;  Taittiriya  Brah- 
mana,.  iii.  7,  13,  1 ;  Hillebrandt,  op.  cit., 
52. 


5  Rv.  i.  130,  8,  and  probably  ix.  41,  1, 
for  which,  however,  cf.  Hillebrandt, 
op.  cit.,  51,  n.  2,  and  see  Dasa. 


TvastP  is  employed  once  in  the  Atharvaveda1  to  denote  a 
'  carpenter,'  with  a  deliberate  play  on  the  name  of  the  god 
Tvastr.  He  is  there  mentioned  as  using  an  axe  (svadhiti)  to 
fashion  (from  wood)  '  a  well-made  form  '  (rupam  sukrtam).  See 
Tastr. 

1  xii.  3,  33.  Cf.  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  688 ;  Bloomfield, 
Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  651. 

Tvastra,  '  descendant  of  Tvastr,'  is  the  patronymic,  in  the 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,1  of  the  mythical  teacher  Abhuti. 

1  ii.  6,  3  (Kanva  =  ii.  5,  22  Madhyamdina) ;  iv.  6,  3  (=  iv.  5,  28). 


TsaPU. — (a)  This  word  seems  to  denote  some  sort  of  crawling 
animal  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda.1 

1  vii.  50,  1.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  99. 

(6)  In  the  later  literature  the  word  means  a  *  handle,'  as  of 
a  beaker  (Camasa).1  In  this  sense  also  it  seems  to  occur  in  the 
description  of  the  plough  (Lahgala)  in  the  Atharvaveda2  and 
the  later  Samhitas.3 


1  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xxv.  4. 
Cf.  Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  x.  12,  12, 
etc. 

2  iii.  17,  3,  where  the  ordinary  text 
has  soma-satsaru  (so  the  Pada  text),  and 
the  Paippalada  recension  has  soma- 
pitsalam. 

'•''  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  2,  5,  6,  has 
sumati-tsaru ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  7, 
12 ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xvi.  12 ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xii.  71  ;  Vasistha 
Dharma  Sutra,  ii.  34,  have  somapitsaru, 


which  Vasistha  renders  as  '  provided 
with  a  handle  for  the  drinker  of  Soma ' 
(i.e.,  somapi - tsaru) .  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  17,  255,  suggests  soma-sa-tsaru, 
*  with  (sa-)  strap  (uman,  a  conjectural 
word)  and  handle'  (tsaru).  Whitney, 
Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  116, 
prefers  to  read  throughout  sumati-tsaru, 
1  with  well-smoothed  handle,'  from  the 
root  seen  in  matl-kr,  etc.  Cf.  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  236;  Biihler,  Sacred 
Books  of  the  East,  14,  13. 


Daksinataskaparda  ]    HUNTER— GADFLY— TUSK— NAMES      335 

Tsarin  denotes,  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda,1  a  '  hunter ' 
engaged  in  the  chase  of  the  takva  (an  unknown  beast),  according 
to  Ludwig  and  Max  Miiller.2  But  this  explanation  is  quite 
conjectural. 


1  i-  134,  5- 


2  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32,  448. 


D. 

DamSa  (lit., '  biter '),  '  gad-fly,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Chandogya 
Upanisad  (vi.  9,  3;  10,  2). 

Damstra,  denoting  a  prominent  tooth,  'tusk,'  or  'fang'  of 
an  animal,  occurs  often  from  the  Rigveda  onwards.1 

1  Rv.  ii.  13,  4 ;  x.  87,  3  ;  Av.  iv.  36,  2  ;  x.  5,  43  ;  xvi.  7,  3,  etc. 

Daksa  Katyayani  Atreya  ('  descendant  of  Atri ')  is  mentioned 
in  the  Vamsas  (lists  of  teachers)  of  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad 
Brahmana  (iii.  41, 1 ;  iv.  17, 1)  as  a  pupil  of  Sahkha  Babhravya. 


Daksa  Jayanta  Lauhitya  ('  descendant  of  Lohita ')  is  men- 
tioned in  a  Vamsa  (list  of  teachers)  of  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad 
Brahmana  (iii.  42,  1)  as  a  pupil  of  Krsnarata  Lauhitya. 


Daksa  Parvati  ('descendant  of  Parvata')  is  mentioned  in 
the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  as  having  performed  a  certain  rite 
which  his  descendants,  the  Daksayanas,  still  maintained,  thus 
enjoying  royal  dignity  down  to  the  time  of  the  Brahmana  itself. 
He  appears  in  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana2  also. 


1  ii.  4,  4,  6. 

2  iv.  4. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Sttidien,  1,  223  ; 


4,  358 ;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the 
East,  12,  374^  sea. ;  Levi,  La  Doctrine 
du  Sacrifice,  138. 


Daksinatas-kaparda  is  an  epithet  of  the  Vasisthas  in  the 
Rigveda  (vii.  33, 1)  referring  to  their  mode  of  '  wearing  the  hair 
in  a  braid  on  the  right  side.'     See  Kaparda. 


336 


SACRIFICIAL  FEE— SOUTH  COUNTRY        [  Dak?ina 


Daksina  appears  repeatedly  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  as  the 
designation  of  the  gift  presented  to  priests  at  the  sacrifice, 
apparently  because  a  cow — a  prolific  (daksina)  one — was  the 
usual  'fee'3  on  such  an  occasion.4  The  later  Dana-stutis,  or 
1  Praises  of  Gifts,'  in  the  Rigveda  immensely  exaggerate  these 
donations,  and  the  exaggeration  grows  in  the  Brahmanas.  It 
is  important  to  notice  that  these  enumerations  of  gifts  in  the 
main  include  nothing  but  articles  of  personal  property,  such  as 
kine,  horses,  buffaloes,  or  camels  (ustra),  ornaments,  and  so 
forth,  but  not  land.5  Reference  is,  however,  made  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana6  to  land  as  a  Daksina,  but  with  dis- 
approval, probably  because  the  land  came  to  be  regarded  as 
inalienable  without  the  consent  of  the  clansmen.7 


i  A  whole  hymn,  Rv.  x.  107,  is 
devoted  to  its  praise.  Cf.  i.  168,  7  ;  vi. 
27,  8;  viii.  24,  29;  39,  5;  x.  62,  1,  etc. 

2  Av.  iv.  11,  4;  v.  7,  11;  xi.  7,  9; 
8,  22;  xiii.  1,  52;  xviii.  4,  8,  etc.; 
Taittirlya  Samhita,  i.  7,  3,  1  ;  8,  1,1; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  iv.  19.  23 ;  xix.  30  ; 
Taittirlya  Brahmana,  i.  7,  3,  3  et  seq.  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  9,  3,  1  et  stq. 
The  verses  (gatha  naraiamsi,  either  as 
a  single  expression  or  as  two  separate 
terms)  used  to  win  these  Daksinas  were 
notoriously  false.  See  Kathaka  Sam- 
hita, xiv.  5  ;  Taittirlya  Brahmana,  i.  3, 
2,  6.  7 ;  Nirukta,  i.  7 ;  xi.  2. 

3  The  transition  of  meaning  is  similar 
in  the  use  of  the  English  word  '  fee ' : 
'  cattle, '  '  money,'  '  payment  for  service ' 
(see  Murray's  English  Dictionary, 
s.v.  '  fee  ').     Cf.  also  Go-dana,  n.  4. 

4  Cf.  the  rule  that  when  nothing  is 
specified  a  cow  is  the  Daksina,  Katy- 
ayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  2,  13  ;  Laty- 
ayana  Srauta  Sutra,  viii.  1,  2. 

5  So,  e.g.,   Rv.  i.  126,    1-4;    v.   30, 


12-15;  viii.  1,  32.  33;  3,  21  et  seq.; 
4,  19-21  ;  5,  37-39 ;  6,  46-48  ;  55  ;  56  ; 
vii.  18,  21-24,  and  the  full  list  in 
Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda, 
3,  273-277.  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien, 
10,  49  et  seq.  Clothes  (vasas)  and  gold 
are  mentioned  as  a  Daksina  in  Av.  ix.  5, 
14.  The  four  Daksinas,  according  to 
the  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iv.  3,  4,  7, 
are  gold,  a  cow,  clothes,  and  a  horse. 
This  is  practically  exhaustive  if  the 
trappings  of  the  horse  and  ornaments 
are  included. 

6  xiii.  7,  1,  13,  with  which  compare 
xiii.  6,  2,  18,  where  the  Brahmin's  land 
is  excluded  ;  and  see  xiii.  7,  1,  15,  where 
the  gift  of  land  is  disapproved. 

7  Satapatha  Brahmana,  vii.  1,  1,  4. 
Cf.  above,  pp.  100,  n.  19,  246 ;  below, 

PP.  35i,  352. 

Cf.   Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  169- 
171  ;  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  104,  105 
Weber,    Indische    Streifen,    1,    96-98 
Bloomfield,  Religion  of  the  Veda,  69-74 
Atharvaveda,  76  et  seq.,  100,  121. 


Daksina-patha  (lit.,  'the  road  to  the  south'),  'the  south 
country,'  is  found,  probably  as  a  designation  of  the  Deccan, 
as  early  as   the   Baudhayana   Dharma   Sutra,1  coupled  with 

1  i.  1,  2,  13.     Cf.  Oldenberg,  Buddha,  394,  n.,  and  Baudhayana  Grhya  Sutra, 
v.  13. 


Danda  ]  SIDE  HORSE— YOKE  HORSE— STAFF  337 

Surastra.  A  similar  expression  is  daksind  pada,  '  with  south- 
ward foot,'  in  the  Rigveda,2  referring  to  the  place  where  the  exile 
(pard-vrj)  goes  on  being  expelled.  This  no  doubt  simply  means 
1  the  south '  beyond  the  limits  of  the  recognized  Aryan  world, 
which  even  as  late  as  the  Kausltaki  Upanisad3  appears  as 
bounded  by  the  Vindhyas  on  the  south. 


2  x.  61,  8.  3  ii.  13. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  185; 
Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  408 ;  Rhys 


Davids,  Buddhist  India,  30  ;  Keith, 
Sankhayana  Araiiyaka,  28,  n.  1 ;  Aitareya 
Aranyaka,  200. 


Daksina-prasti  denotes  'the  side  horse  on  the  right.'  It 
appears  from  two  passages  of  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  that 
there  were  at  times  four  horses  yoked  to  the  chariot,  the  right 
and  the  left  yoke  horse  (daksina-yugya,savyd-yugya)  in  the  middle, 
flanked  by  one  on  each  side,  the  two  latter  of  course  not  being 
fastened  to  the  yoke  at  all,  but  presumably  by  traces  alongside 
of  the  yoke  horses.     See  Ratha. 

1  v.  1,  4,  9;  ix.  4,  2,  11  (this  passage  appears  to  speak  of  three  horses  only, 
but  cf.  v.  4,  3,  17).     Cf.  also  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xvi.  13,  12. 

Daksinayana.     See  Surya. 

Daksina-yugya,  '  the  yoke  horse  on  the  right,'  is  mentioned 
in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (v.  1,  4,  6;  4,  3,  8;  ix.  4,  2,  n). 
See  Ratha. 

Danda,  'staff.'  (a)  This  word  is  often  mentioned  in  the 
ordinary  sense ;  for  example,  when  used  for  driving  cattle1 
(go-ajanasah),  or  as  a  weapon.2  A  staff  was  given  to  a  man 
on  consecration  for  driving  away  demons,  according  to  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana.3  The  staff  also  played  a  part  in  the 
initiation  (upanayana)  of  a  youth  on  attaining  manhood.4  In 
a  modified  sense  the  word  is  used  to  denote  the  handle  of  a 
ladle  or  similar  implement.5 

1  Rv.  vii.  33,  6.  5  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  5  ;   Sata- 

2  Av.  v.  5,4.  Cf.  Aitareya  Brahmana,  j  patha  Brahmana,  vii.  4,  1,  36.  Of  a 
ii.  35 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  5,4,  6,  etc.  i  musical  instrument,  Sankhayana  Aran- 

3  iii.  2,  1,  32.  .  yaka,  viii.  9  ;  Srauta  Sutra,  xvii.  3,  1  et 

4  Asvalayana  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  19  ;  22  ;  '  seq. 
Sankhayana  Grhya  Sutra,  ii.  1 . 6. 1 1 ,  etc.  i 

VOL.  I.  *     22 


338 


NAMES— REED— SOUR  MILK  [  Danda  Aupara 


(b)  The  'staff'  as  the  symbol  of  temporal  power,  implying 
punishment,  is  applied  by  the  king  (rdja-presito  dandah).1  The 
king,  in  modern  phraseology,  was  the  source  of  criminal  law ; 
and  he  clearly  retained  this  branch  of  law  in  his  own  hands 
even  in  later  times.2  The  punishment  of  the  non-guilty 
(a-dandya)  is  given  as  one  of  the  characteristics  of  the  non- 
Brahminical  Vratyas  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.3  See 
also  Dharma. 


1  Paraskara  Grliya  Sutra,  iii.  15. 
Cf.  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  4,  4,  7, 
where  the  king,  being  himself  '  exempt 
from  punishment '  (a-dandya),  inflicts 
judicial  punishment  (danda-vadha). 


Foy,   Die   konigliche  Gewalt,   21   et 


seq. 


3  xvii.  1,9;  Weber,  Indische  Studien, 
1.  33- 


Danda  Aupara  ('  descendant  of  Upara ')  is  mentioned  in  the 
Taittiriya  Samhita  (vi.  2,  9,  4)  and  the  Maitrayani  Samhita 
(iii.  8,  7)  as  having  performed  a  certain  rite. 

Dandana  occurs  in  the  Atharvaveda1  among  other  names  of 
'  reed  '  or  '  cane.' 

1  xii.  2,  54.     Cf.  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  682. 

Datta  Tapasa  was  Hotr  priest  at  the  snake  festival  described 
in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.1 

1  xxv.  15,  3.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  35. 

Dadhi,  'sour  milk,'  is  repeatedly  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  later.2  The  Satapatha  Brahmana3  mentions  in  order 
Ghrta  ('clarified  butter'),  Dadhi,  Mastu,  which  Eggeling4 
renders  '  whey,'  and  Amiksa,  '  curds.'  Dadhi  often  has  the 
meaning  of  '  curds  '  also.     It  was  used  for  mixing  with  Soma.5 

1  viii.  2,  9  ;  ix.  87,  1,  etc. 

2  Av.  iii.  12,  7  ;  iv.  34,  6  ;  Taittiriya 
Samhita,  ii.  5,  3,  4,  etc.  ;  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana,  xviii.  5,  12,  etc. 

3  i.  8,  1,  7.  Cf.  Jaiminiya  Brahmana, 
ii.  348. 


4  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  12,  218. 

5  Dadhyaiir,  'mixed  with  sour  milk,' 
is  an  epithet  of  Soma  in  Rv.  i.  5,  5  ; 
I37i  2  ;  v.  51,  7  ;  vii.  32,  4.  Cf.  Hille- 
brandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  219  et  seq. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  227. 


Dadhyaiic  Atharvana   is  a  purely  mythical   sage.     In  the 
Rigveda1  he  is  clearly  a  divinity  of  some  kind,  but  in  the  later 

1  i.    80,    16;    84,    13.    14;    116,    12;    I    Vedic  Mythology,  pp.    141,   142;   Hille- 
117,  22  ;  119,  9,  etc.     See  Macdonell,    |  brandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  176. 


Dabhiti  ]        A  MYTHICAL  TEACHER— TOOTH— A  SAGE 


339 


Samhitas2  and  the  Brahmanas3  he  is  metamorphosed  into  a 
teacher.  In  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana4  he  is  by  oversight 
called  an  Angirasa. 


2  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  ir  4,  4  ;  6, 
6,  3  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xix.  4. 

3  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iv.  1,  5,  18  ; 
vi.  4,  2,  3  ;  xiv.  1,  1,  18.  20.  25  ;  4,  13  ; 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  5,  22  ; 
iv.  5,  28,  etc. 


*  xii.  8,  6.  So  also  Gopatha  Brah- 
mana, i.  5,  ax. 

Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda,  xxxv ;  Atharvaveda,  23,  116,  118  , 
St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Dadhy-agir.     See  Dadhi  and  Soma. 


Dant,  Danta,  'tooth,'  is  frequently  mentioned  from  the 
Rigveda  onwards.1  Cleansing  (dhclv)  the  teeth  was  an  ordinary 
act,  especially  in  preparation  for  a  sacrifice,  and  accompanied 
bathing,  shaving  of  the  hair  and  beard  (kesa-smasru) ,  and  the 
cutting  of  the  nails.2  A  hymn  of  the  Atharvaveda3  celebrates 
the  appearance  of  the  first  two  teeth  of  a  child,  though  its 
exact  interpretation  is  doubtful.4  In  the  Aitareya  Brahmana5 
there  is  a  reference  to  a  child's  first  teeth  falling  out.  The 
word  seems  in  the  Rigveda6  once  to  denote  an  elephant's  tusk. 
Whether  dentistry  was  practised  is  doubtful.  The  occurrence 
in  the  Aitareya  Aranyaka7  of  Hiranya-dant,  'gold-toothed,'  as 
the  name  of  a  man,  is  perhaps  significant,  especially  as  it  is 
certain  that  the  stopping  of  teeth  with  gold  was  known  at 
Rome  as  early  as  the  legislation  of  the  Twelve  Tables.8 


1  Rv.  vii.  55,  2 ;  x.  68,  6 ;  Av.  v.  23, 
3 ;  29,  4 ;  vi.  56,  3,  etc.  The  more 
usual  form  is  Danta,  Rv.  iv.  6,  8 ; 
vi.  75,  11 ;  Av.  iv.  3,  6,  etc. 

2  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  6,  2  (not 
exactly  paralleled  in  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
vi.  1,  1,  2  et  seq.). 

3  vi.  140. 

4  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  321  ; 
Weber,  Indische  Studien,  5,  224  ;  Grill, 
Hundert  Lieder,2  176 ;  Bloomfield,  Hymns 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  540,  541  ;  Atharva- 


veda, 71 ;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  386. 

5  vii.  14  ;  Sahkhayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
xv.  18. 

6  iv.  6,  8 ;  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien, 
i,  99  ;  Oldenberg,  Sacred  Boohs  of  the 
East,  46,  341,  342. 

7  ii-  I,  5- 

8  Keith,  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  206.  See 
Wordsworth,  Fragments  and  Specimens 
of  Early  Latin,  537. 


Dabhiti  appears  several  times  in  the  Rigveda  as  a  hero  or 
sage.     Indra  overcomes  on  his  behalf  Cumuri  and  Dhuni  ;l 

1  x.  113,  9;  ii.  15,  9;  vii.  19,  4. 

22 — 2 


34Q        HOUSE— MASTER  OF  THE  HOUSE— A  GRASS       [  Dama 


he  pressed  Soma  for  Indra,2  who  rewarded  him.3  For  him 
30,000  Dasas  were  sent  to  sleep,4  and  for  him  the  Dasyus  were 
bound  without  cords.5  Dabhiti  also  appears,  with  Turviti,  as 
a  protege  of  the  Asvins.6  There  seems  no  reason  to  deny  that 
he  was  a  real  person.7 


*  vi.  20,  13. 

3  vi.  26,  6. 

4  iv.  30,  21. 
5 


11.  13.  9- 


1.  112,  23. 


7  Oldenberg,  Religion  des  Veda,  155, 

157,  158. 

Cf.     Macdonell,      Vedic     Mythology, 
p.  162. 


Dama,  *  house,'  is  a  word  that  occurs  several  times  in  the 
Rigveda.1  It  denotes,  according  to  Roth,2  the  place  in  which 
a  man  wields  uncontrolled  power  (from  the  root  dam,  '  control '). 

1  i.  1,  8  ;  61,  9 ;  75,  5  ;  143,  4  ;  ii.  I,  2,       this  seems  very  doubtful  in  view  of  the 
etc.  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  viii.  24.  apparent  connexion  of  56/mos  and  Sfyiw, 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.    But       '  build,'  in  Greek. 


Dam-pati  denotes  '  the  master  of  the  house  '*  in  the  Rigveda,2 
but  is  more  often  used  in  the  dual  to  designate  '  the  master 
and  the  mistress,'3  an  expression  that  may  legitimately  be 
deemed  to  show  the  high  status  of  women  at  the  time  of  the 
Rigveda.     See  Stri. 


1  For  the  form,  cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic 
Grammar,  p.  37,  n.  9.  Pischel,  Vedische 
Studien,  2,  307  et  seq.,  argues  in  favour 
of  the  spelling  dampati  (adopted  by 
Geldner  in  his  Rgveda,  Glossar).  Cf. 
patir  dan,  Rv.  i.  149,  2 ;  Oldenberg, 
Sacred  Boohs  of  the  East,  46,  176,  177. 


2  i.  127,  8;  ii.  39,  2;  v.  22,  4;  viii.  69, 
16;  84,  7. 

3  Rv.  v.  3,  2;  viii.  31,  5  ;  x.  10,  5  ; 
68,  2  ;  85,  32  ;  95,  12,  etc.  ;  Av.  vi.  123, 
3  ;  xii.  3,  14 ;  xiv.  2,  9,  etc. 

Cf.  Delbriick,  Die  indogermanischen 
Verwandtschaftsnamen,  418,  420. 


Darbha  is  the  name  of  a  grass  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later.2 
In  the  Atharvaveda  it  is  used  for  the  calming  of  anger  (manyu- 
samana),3  and  as  an  amulet  for  protection  against  the  scattering 
of  one's  hair  or  the  striking  of  one's  breast.4  It  is  also  said  to 
be  '  rich  in  roots '  {bhuri-rnula),5  to  possess  a  thousand  leaves 
(sahasra-parna)  and  a  hundred  stalks  (sata-kanda).e 

1  i.   191,  3  (with  Sara  and  Kusara,  3  Av.  vi.  43. 

varieties  of  grass).  *  xix.  32,  2.     Cf.  xix.  30. 

2  Av.  vi.  43,  2 ;  viii.  7,  20  ;  x.  4,  13  ;  5  Av.  vi.  43,  2. 
xi.  6,  15;   xix.   28,   1,  etc.  ;  Taittiriya  6  Av.  xix.  32,  1. 

Samhita,  i.  5,  1,  4,  etc.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  70. 


DaSagva  ]        LADLE— WOODPECKER— NEW  MOON  DAY         341 


Darvi,  or  Darvi,  properly  denotes  a  '  ladle,'  in  which  sense  it 
is  found  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later.2  But  the  word  also  means 
a  serpent's  '  hood'  in  the  Atharvaveda,3  though  Zimmer  regards 
it  as  the  name  of  a  serpent. 


1  v.  6,  9  ;  x.  105,  10. 

2  Av.  iii.  10, 7  ;  iv.  14, 7 ;  ix.  6, 17,  etc. 

3  x.  1,  13.  See  Whitney,  Translation 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  577;  Bloomfield, 
Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  153. 


4  Altindisches  Leben,  95,  where  he 
takes  Karikrata  also  as  the  name  of  a 
snake. 


Darvida,  the  '  woodpecker,'  is  mentioned  as  a  victim  at  the 
Asvamedha,  or  horse  sacrifice,  in  the  Yajurveda.1  Cf.  Darva- 
gfhata. 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  13,  1  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  15;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  3.  Cf.  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  93.  The  St.  Peters- 
burg Dictionary,  s.v.,  suggests  '  wood- 


piercer  '  (ddru-vidha)  as  the  literal  sense. 
On  the  etymology,  cf.  F.  W.  Thomas's 
article,    'The    D-Suffix,'    p.     121,    in 

Transactions  of  the  Cambridge  Philological 
Society,  5,  part  ii. 


Darsa  ('  appearance ')  denotes  the  new  moon  day,1  usually  in 
opposition  to  the  day  of  full  moon  (purna-masa).2  Most 
frequently  the  word  occurs  in  the  compound3  darsa-purna- 
masau,  *  new  and  full  moon,'  the  days  of  special  ritual  impor- 
tance.4 The  order  of  the  first  two  words  here  is  worthy  of 
note,  for  it  distinctly  suggests,  though  it  does  not  conclusively 
prove,  that  the  month  was  reckoned  from  new  moon  to  new 
moon,  not  from  full  moon  to  full  moon.     See  Masa. 


1  Av.  vii.  81,  3.  4;  Taittiriya  Brah- 
mana, i.  2,  1,  14;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
xi.  2,  2,  1. 

2  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  4,  4,  1,  etc. 

3  Ibid.,  i.  6,  7,  1  ;  9,  3 ;  ii.  5,  6,  1; 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  ii.  2, 2, 1 ;  Aitareya 


Brahmana,  i.  1  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
i.  3,  5,  11,  etc. 

4  Hillebrandt,  Das  altindische  Neu- 
und  Vollmondsopfer,  Jena,  1880 ;  Ritual- 
litteratur,  111-114  ;  Oldenberg,  Religion 
des  Veda,  439. 


DaSa-gva  appears  in  one  hymn  of  the  Rigveda1  as  the  name 
of  a  person  who  was  assisted  by  Indra.  The  other  references 
in  that  work,2  however,  clearly  show  the  mythical  character 
of  the  Dasagvas,  and  of  any  individual  among  them. 


1  viii.  12,  2. 

2  They    are    mentioned    with     the 
Navagvas  in  i.  62,  4 ;  iii.  39,  5 ;  iv.  51,  4 ; 


v.  29,  12 ;  x.  62,  6,  and  alone  in  ii.  34 
12.  See  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology, 
p.  144  (C). 


342    THE  RIGVEDA—A  HERO— THE  NUMBER  TEN    [  Dasatayi 

Dasatayi  in  the  Nirukta1  frequently  denotes  the  text  of  the 
Rigveda  as  divided  into  ten  Mandalas. 

1  vii.  8.  20 ;  xi.  16;  xii.  40. 


Da6a-dyu  appears  twice  in  the  Rigveda1  as  the  name  of  a 
hero,  but  nothing  can  be  made  out  regarding  him  or  his 
relation  to  Vetasu,  who  is  mentioned  in  one  passage  along 
with  him. 

1  i.  33,  14;  vi.  26,  4.  Cf.  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlandischen 
Gesellschaft,  55,  328. 

Dasan,  '  ten,'  forms  the  basis  of  the  numerical  system  of  the 
Vedic  Indians,  as  it  does  of  the  Aryan  people  generally.  But 
it  is  characteristic  of  India1  that  there  should  be  found  at  a 
very  early  period  long  series  of  names  for  very  high  numerals, 
whereas  the  Aryan  knowledge  did  not  go  beyond  1,000.  In 
the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita2  the  list  is  1  ;  10;  100;  1,000;  10,000 
(ayuta);  100,000  (niyu ta) ;  1,000,000  (prayuta);  10,000,000  (arbuda); 
100,000,000  (nyarbuda) ;  1,000,000,000  (samudra);  10,000,000,000 
(madhya);  100,000,000,000  (anta) ;  1,000,000,000,000  (pardrdha). 
In  the  Kathaka  Samhita3  the  list  is  the  same,  but  niyuta  and 
prayuta  exchange  places,  and  after  nyarbuda  a  new  figure 
(badva)  intervenes,  thus  increasing  samudra  to  10,000,000,000, 
and  so  on.  The  Taittiriya  Samhita  has  in  two  places4  exactly 
the  same  list  as  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.  The  Maitrayani 
Samhita6  has  the  list  ayuta,  prayuta,  then  ayuta  again,  arbuda, 
nyarbuda,  samudra,  madhya,  anta,  pardrdha.  The  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana6  has  the  Vajasaneyi  list  up  to  nyarbuda  inclusive, 
then  follow  nikharvaka,  badva,  aksita,  and  apparently  go  = 
1,000,000,000,000.      The  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana7  list 


1  Thibaut,  Astronomie,  Astrologie  und 
Mathematik,  70. 

2  xvii.  2  et  seq.  Cf.  xxii.  34  ;  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,  ix.  i,  2,  16. 

3  xxxix.  6.  In  xvii.  10  the  number 
badva  disappears,  and  the  list  corre- 
sponds with  that  of  the  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  except  for  the  fact  that  niyuta 
and  prayuta  change  places. 


5  ii.  8,  14. 

6  xvii.  14,  2. 

7  i.  10, 28.  29.  Cf.  Aitareya  Aranyaka, 
v.  3,  2 ;  Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the 
Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences, 
15.  30,  n.  2  ;  Keith,  Aitareya  Aranyaka, 
293.  294- 


Da&m  ]        ARITHMETICAL  PROGRESSION— FRACTIONS        343 

replaces  nikharvaka  by  nikharva,  badva  by  padma,  and  ends 
with  aksitir  vyomantah.  The  Sarikhayana  Srauta  Sutra8  con- 
tinues the  series  after  nyarbuda  with  nikharvada,  satnudra, 
salila,  antya,  ananta  ( =  10  billions). 

But  beyond  ayuta9  none  of  these  numbers  has  any  vitality. 
Badva,  indeed,  occurs  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana,10  but  it 
cannot  there  have  any  precise  numerical  sense  j11  and  later  oh 
the  names  of  these  high  numerals  are  very  much  confused. 

An  arithmetical  progression  of  some  interest  is  found  in  the 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana,12  where  occurs  a  list  of  sacrificial  gifts 
in  which  each  successive  figure  doubles  the  amount  of  the 
preceding  one.  It  begins  with  dvadasa-manam  hiranyam,  '  gold 
to  the  value  of  12  '  (the  unit  being  uncertain,  but  probably  the 
Krsnala18),  followed  by  'to  the  value  of  24,  48,  96,  192,  384, 
768,  1,536,  3072,'  then  dve  astdvimsati-sata-mdne,  which  must 
mean  2  x  128  x  24  (the  last  unit  being  not  a  single  mdna,  but 
a  number  of  24  mdnas)  =  6,144,  then  12,288,  24,576,  49,152, 
98,304,  196,608,  393,216.  With  these  large  numbers  may  be 
compared  the  minute  theoretical  subdivision  of  time  found 
in  the  ^atapatha  Brahmana,14  where  a  day  is  divided  into 
15  muhurtas — 1  muhurta  =15  ksipras,  1  ksipra  =15  etarhis, 
I  etarhi=i5  iddnis,  1  iddni  =  15  prdnas.  The  Sahkhayana  Srauta 
Sutra15  has  a  decimal  division  of  the  day  into  15  muhurtas — • 
1  muhurta  =10  nimesas,  1  nimesa  =  10  dhvamsis. 

Few  fractions  are  mentioned  in  Vedic  literature.  Ardha, 
pdda,  sapha,  and  hold  denote  J,  J,  J,  TTg  respectively,  but  only 

12  xviii.  3,  Cf.  Latyayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  viii.  10,  1  et  seq.  ;  Katyayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  xxii.  9,  1-6. 

u  Cf.  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xxii.  9, 
1  ;  Weber,  op.  cit..  102,  103. 


0  xv.  ii,  7. 

9  Cf.  Rv.  iii.  6,  15  ;  viii.  1,  5 ;  2,  41 ; 
21,  18  ;  34,  15  ;  46,  22  ;  Av.  viii.  2,  21  ; 
8,7;  x.  8,  24  ;  Pancavimsa  Brahmana, 
xix.  13,  6 ;  xxi.  18,  3,  etc.  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  348,  considers  that 
it  has  not  any  definite  sense  in  the 
Rigveda  ;  this  cannot  be  either  proved 
or  disproved.  The  Rv.  has  the  phrase 
sata  sahasrani  several  times  (iv.  32, 
18 ;  viii.  32,  18,  etc.)  =  100,000 ;  and 
ayuta  may  easily  have  been  already 
specialized,  though  it  may  also  have 
retained  a  vague  sense. 

10  vii.  21.  23. 

11  Weber,  Indische  Streifen,  1,  96. 


14  xii.  3,  2,  1  etseq.  Cf.  also  Taittiriya 
Brahmana,  iii.  10,  1,  1,  where  a  series 
of  names  of  the  divisions  of  the  muhurta 
is  given,  apparently  as  alternatives,  not 
as  successive  stages  (idanim,  tadanlm, 
etarhi,  ksipram,  ajiram,  aiuh  (?  asu),  nime- 
sah,  phanah,  dravan,  atidravan,  tvaran, 
tvaramcmah,  aiuh,  asiyan,  javah).  See 
Weber,  op.  cit.,  92-94. 

15  xiv.  75  et  seq.  Cf.  Sankhayana 
Aranyaka,  vii.  20. 


344  HEREDITARY  RULE— TENTH  DECADE    [  DaSapurusamrajya 

the  first  two  are  common.  Trtiya  denotes  the  third  part.16 
In  the  Rigveda17  Indra  and  Visnu  are  said  to  have  divided 
1,000  by  3,  though  how  they  did  so  is  uncertain.  Tri-pad 
denotes  *  three-fourths.'18 

There  is  no  clear  evidence  that  the  Indians  of  the  Vedic 
period  had  any  knowledge  of  numerical  figures,  though  it  is 
perfectly  possible.19 

16  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  1,  4; 
v.  2,  6,  2 ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  1, 
6,  1  ;  7,  1,  2;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
iii.  8,  4,  4,  etc. 

17  vi.  69,  8  =  Av.  vii.  44,  1  =  Tait- 
tiriya Samhita,  iii.  2,  11,  2;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  vi.  15 ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, iii.  3,  1,  13. 

18  Rv.  x.  90,  4. 

19  If  asta-karnl  means  in  Rv.  x.  62,  7, 
'  having  the  figure  8  marked  on  the 


ears  '  of  cattle,  then  the  mention  of 
numerical  signs  would  be  certain.  Cf. 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  234,  235, 
348.  But  this  is  doubtful.  See  Mac- 
donell,  Vedic  Grammar,  p.  309,  n.  10. 

Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic  Grammar,  p.  308  ; 
Weber,  Indische  Streifen,  1,  90-103  ; 
Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  349 ; 
Kaegi,  Rigveda,  n.  65  ;  Hopkins,  Journal 
of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  16,  275 
et  seq. 


Dasa-purusam-rajya,  occurring  in  the  Satapatha  grahmana,1 
doubtless2  means  *  sovereignty  inherited  through  ten  ancestors,' 
a  striking  case  of  hereditary  rule.  Weber3  once  rendered  the 
word  as  the  *  kingdom4  of  Dasapuru,'  comparing  the  Dasapura 
of  Kalidasa's  Meghaduta5  and  the  Dasarna  of  the  '  middle 
country.' 


1  xn.  9,  3,  1.  3. 

2  Cf.  Asvalayana  Srauta  Sutra,  ix.  3  ; 
Sahkhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  14,  18. 
So  tri-purusa,  'three  generations,' 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  7.  The 
St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.,  and 
Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 
44,  269,  have  the  correct  rendering. 


3  Indische  Studien,  1,  209.  But  see  10, 
75,  n.  1. 

4  This  would  be  samrajya,  which  is 
always  spelt  with  m,  not  m;  cf.  Mac- 
donell, Vedic  Grammar,  75,  3. 

5  i.  48. 


Dasa-masya,  '  ten  months  old,'  describes  in  the  Rigveda x 
and  later2  the  embryo  immediately  before  birth.     See  Masa. 


-  v.  78,  7.  8. 

3  Av.  i.  11,  6  ;  iii.  23,  2.     There  are 
several  references  in  Vedic  literature 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  366;  Weber,  Naxatra,  2,  313,  n.  1 


to  birth  in  the  tenth  month,  as  Rv. 
x.  184,  3,  etc. 


Dasami  denotes  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  the  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana2   the   period   of    life   between    90    and    100    years 


in.  4.  7. 


xxu.  14. 


DaSa  ]  LONGEVITY— A  TREE— NAMES— FRINGE 


345 


which  the  Rigveda3  calls  the  dasama  yuga,  '  the  tenth  stage 
of  life.'  Longevity  seems  not  to  have  been  rare  among  the 
Vedic  Indians,  for  the  desire  to  live  a  '  hundred  autumns ' 
(saradah  satam)  is  constantly  expressed.4  Dirghatamas  is  said 
to  have  lived  ioo  years,5  and  Mahidasa  Aitareya  is  credited 
with  n6.6  Onesikritos7  reported  that  they  sometimes  lived 
130  years,  a  statement  with  which  corresponds  the  wish 
expressed  in  the  Jataka8  for  a  life  of  120  years.  Probably  the 
number  was  always  rather  imaginary  than  real,  but  the  com- 
parative brevity  of  modern  life  in  India9  may  be  accounted  for 
by  the  cumulative  effect  of  fever,  which  is  hardly  known  to  the 
Rigveda.     See  Takman. 


3  i.  158,  6. 

4  Rv.  i.  89,  9 ;  x.  18,  10,  and  passim. 
See  Lanman,  Sanskrit  Reader,  384  ; 
Bloomfield,  Atharvaveda,  62,  63. 

5  Sankhayana  Aranyaka,  ii.  17. 

6  Chandogya   Upanisad,  iii.   16,   7 ; 


Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana,  iv. 
11 ;  Keith,  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  17. 

7  In  Strabo,  p.  701. 

8  Ed.  Fausboll,  ii.  16. 

9  Indian  Empire,  1,  513  et  seq. 


Dasa-vrksa  is  the  name  of  a  tree,  according  to  Roth,1  in 
the  Atharvaveda.2  But  Whitney3  treats  the  word  as  a  mere 
adjective  meaning  *  of  ten  trees.' 


1  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

2  ii.  9,  1, 


3  Translation   of    the   Atharvaveda, 


5o. 


DaSa-vraja  is  the  name  of  a  protege  of  the  Asvins  in  the 
Rigveda  (viii.  8,  20;  49,  r;  50,  9). 

DaSa-sipra  is  the   name  of  a  sacrificer   mentioned  in  the 
Rigveda.1 

1  viii.  52,  2.     C/.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  163. 


Dasa  denotes  the  '  fringe  '  or  '  border '  of  a  garment  (vdsah) 
in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.1  The  word  also  occurs  in  the 
compound  dasa-pavitra,2  which  means  '  a  filtering  cloth  with 
a  fringe.' 

1  iii.  3,  2,  9,  and  often  in  the  Sutras.    I  patha  Brahmana,  iv.  2,  2,  11.    Cf.  iv.  1, 

2  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  32;  Sata-   j   1,  28. 


346 


NAMES— SNAKE 


[  Dasoni 


Dasoni  appears  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda1  apparently 
as  a  favourite  of  Indra  and  as  opposed  to  the  Panis,  who  fell 
in  hundreds  for  his  benefit.  The  view  of  Ludwig2  that  he  is 
here  the  priest  of  the  Panis  is  very  improbable.  Elsewhere 
his  name  is  simply  mentioned.3     See  also  DaSonya. 


1  vi.  20,  4.  8. 

2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  156 ; 
5,  107. 

3  x.  96,  12,  where,  however,  the  word 
may  be  merely  an  epithet  of  Soma. 


Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie, 
1,  92,  n.  1 ;  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der 
Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft, 
55,  328. 


DaSonya  is  the  name  of  a  sacrificer  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1 
along  with  Da£asipra  and  others.  Whether  he  is  identical 
with  Dasoni  cannot  be  decided. 

1  viii.  52,  2.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  163. 

Dasonasi  is  the  name  of  a  kind  of  snake  in  the  Atharvaveda.1 
The  reading  of  the  Paippalada  recension  is  Nasonasi. 

1  x.  4,  17.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  95;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  577. 


Dasyave  vrka,  '  wolf  to  the  Dasyu,'  is  the  name  of  a  man 
mentioned  four  times  in  the  Rigveda.1  In  one  hymn2  he  is 
called  a  Rsi,  but  in  two  others3  he  is  clearly  a  prince  victorious 
over  the  Dasyus,  and  a  generous  patron  of  the  singer.  It  is 
hardly  necessary  to  assume  different  persons,4  for  the  term  Rsi 
is  not  altogether  inconsistent  with  royalty.  He  was  son  of 
Putakratu5  and  Putakrata,6  his  wife. 


1  viii.  51,  2;  55,  1  ;  56,  1.  2. 

2  viii.  51. 

3  viii.  55.  56. 

4  Especially  as  the  name  occurs  only 
in  the  small  collection  of  Kanva  hymns 
forming  the  Valakhilya  group  in  the 
eighth  Mandala. 


5  viii.  56,  2,  Pautahrata.     Cf.  viii.  68, 

6  viii.  56,  4. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  139,  164;  5,  552. 


Dasyave  saha  is,  according  to  Roth,1  the  name  of  a  man 
or  a  clan  in  the  Rigveda.2     But  he  admits  that  the  words  may 

1  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  2  i.  36,  18. 


Dasyu  ]  ABORIGINAL  FOES  347 

be  an  epithet  of  Agni.    This  is  the  interpretation  given  to  them 
by  Oldenberg.3 

3  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  46,  33. 

Dasyu,  a  word  of  somewhat  doubtful  origin,  is  in  many 
passages  of  the  Rigveda1  clearly  applied  to  superhuman 
enemies.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  several  passages  in 
which  human  foes,  probably  the  aborigines,  are  thus  designated. 
This  may  be  regarded  as  certain  in  those  passages  where  the 
Dasyu  is  opposed  to  the  Aryan,  who  defeats  him  with  the  aid 
of  the  gods.2  The  great  difference  between  the  Dasyus  and 
the  Aryans  was  their  religion  :  the  former  are  styled  '  not 
sacrificing,'  '  devoid  of  rites,'  '  addicted  to  strange  vows,'  '  god- 
hating,'  and  so  forth.3  As  compared  with  the  Dasa,  they  are 
less  distinctively  a  people :  no  clans  (visah)  of  the  Dasyus  are 
mentioned,  and  while  Indra's  dasyu-hatya,.  '  slaughter  of  the 
Dasyus,'  is  often  spoken  of,  there  is  no  corresponding  use  of 
dclsa-hatya.  That  the  Dasyus  were  real  people  is,  however, 
shown  by  the  epitdet  anas  applied  to  them  in  one  passage  of  the 
Rigveda.5  The  sense  of  this  word  is  not  absolutely  certain  :  the 
Pada  text  and  Sayana  both  take  it  to  mean  '  without  face '  (an-as),6 
but  the  other  rendering,  '  noseless '  (a-nas),  is  quite  possible,7 


1  i.  34,  7;  100,  18;  ii.  13,  9,  etc. 
See  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  pp.  157, 

158. 

2  Rv.  i.  51,  8;  103,  3;  117,  21; 
ii.  11,  18.  19;  iii.  34,  9;  vi.  18,  3; 
vii.  5,  6 ;  x.  49,  3.  Probably  also  in 
v.  70,  3  ;  x.  83,  6,  people  are  meant. 

3  The  Dasyu  is  called  a-karman, '  rite- 
less,'  x.  22,  8;  a-devayu,  'indifferent  to 
the  gods,'  viii.  70,  11  ;  a-brahman, 
'without  devotion,'  iv.  16,  9;  a-yajvan, 
'not  sacrificing,'  viii.  70,  11;  a-yajyu, 
id.,  vii.  6,  3;  a-vrata,  'lawless,'  i.  51, 
8;  175.  3;  vi-  J4»  3;  ix.  41,  2;  anya- 
vrata,  '  following  strange  ordinances, ' 
viii.  70,  11;  deva-piyu,  'reviling  the 
gods,'  Av.  xii.  1,  37.  It  is  impossible 
in  all  cases  to  be  certain  that  people 
are  meant. 

4  Rv.  i.  51,  5.  6;  103,  4;  x.  95,  7; 
99.  7;  io5,  "•  Cf.  dasyM>  tan,  '  Dasyu- 
slaying,'  i.  100,  12  ;  vi.  45,  24;  viii.  76. 


11  ;    77,   3  ;   x.   47,   4   (all   of  Indra)  ; 
vi.  16,  15  ;  viii.  39,  8  (of  Agni),  etc. 

5  Rv.  v.  29,  10. 

6  This  sense  allows  of  two  inter- 
pretations: 'misfeatured,'  which  seems 
that  of  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dic- 
tionary, s.v.,  and  Grassmann,  Worter- 
buch ;  or  '  speechless '  (that  is,  unable 
to  speak  the  language  of  the  Aryans), 
which  is  that  of  Bollensen,  Zeitschrift 
der  Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  Gesell- 
schaft,  41,  496. 

7  This  view  is  supported  by  Mega- 
sthenes'  report  as  to  natives  who  were 
cLo-To/xoi  :  see  Strabo,  p.  711  ;  Pliny, 
Nat.  Hist.,  vii.  2,  18,  cited  by  Zimmer, 
A  Itindisches  Leben,  430.  See  also  Ludwig, 
Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  2,  109 ; 
5,  95  ;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie, 
3,  277  ;  Knauer,  Kuhn's  Zeitschrift,  29, 
52 ;  Wackernagel,  Altindische  Gram- 
matih,  2,  293  (accent). 


34$ 


ORIGINAL  MEANING  OF  DASYU 


[  Das: 


and  would  accord  well  with  the  flat-nosed  aborigines  of  th< 
Dravidian8  type,  whose  language  still  persists  among  the  Brahuis, 
who  are  found  in  the  north-west.  This  interpretation  would 
receive  some  support  from  Vrtra's  being  called  '  broken-nosed  ' 
if  this  were  a  correct  explanation  of  the  obscure  word  rujdnds.9 

The  other  epithet  of  the  Dasyus  is  mrdhra-vac,  which 
occurs  with  anas,10  and  which  has  been  rendered11  'of  stam- 
mering, or  unintelligible  speech.'  This  version  is  by  no 
means  certain,  and  since  the  epithet  is  elsewhere12  applied 
to  Aryans,  its  correct  meaning  is  more  probably  '  of  hostile 
speech.' 

Dasyu  corresponds  with  the  Iranian  danhu,  daqyu,  which 
denotes  a  '  province.'  Zimmer13  thinks  that  the  original 
meaning  was  '  enemy,'  whence  the  Iranians  developed  the 
sense  of  'hostile  country,'  'conquered  country,'  'province,' 
while  the  Indians,  retaining  the  signification  of  '  enemy,'  ex- 
tended it  to  include  demon  foes.  Roth14  considers  that  the 
meaning  of  human  enemy  is  a  transfer  from  the  strife  of  gods 


8  The  suggestion  in  the  Indian  Empire, 
i,  390,  that  the  modern  Brahui  type  is 
the  true  Dravidian,  while  the  modern 
Dravidian  is  the  result  of  fusion  with 
Munda-speaking  tribes,  would  render 
this  theory  improbable.  But  it  seems 
more  probable  that  the  Brahuis  in 
speech  preserve  the  tradition  of  Dra- 
vidian settlements  in  North  India. 

9  See  Bloomfield,  American  fournal  of 
Philology,  17,  415  (who  takes  rujanah  of 
Rv.  i.  32,  8,  as  =  rujana-nah) ;  Olden- 
berg,  Rgveda-  Noten,  1,  31,  32  (who 
suggests  as  possible  the  analysis  of  the 
word  as  ruja-anah).  But  cf.  Lanman, 
Sanskrit  Reader,  361,  who  suggests  the 
emendation  rujanah  as  nominative 
singular     of     the     simple     participle 

'  broken  ' ;  Macdonell,   Vedic  Grammar, 
p.  59,  n.  1. 

10  Rv.  v.  29,  10. 

11  Cf.  Muir,  Sanskrit   Texts,  22,  393 
et  seq. 

12  The    expression    is    used    of    the 
Aryan  Purus  in  vii.  18,  13  ;  of  the  Panis 


in  vii.  6,  3  ;  and  of  hostile  persons  in 
i.  174,  2  ;  v.  32,  8  ;  x.  23.  5.  Roth, 
Erlduterungen  zum  Nirukta,  97,  thinks 
the  sense  is  '  of  insulting  speech,'  and 
Zimmer,  op.  cit.,  114,  115,  strongly 
supports  this  view.  But  Hillebrandt, 
op.  cit.,  1,  89,  90,  114,  prefers  to  see  in 
it  'speaking  an  enemy's  speech,'  and 
thinks  that  the  Purus  were  dialectically 
different  from  the  Bharatas — a  view 
which  can  be  supported  from  the  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,  iii.  2,  I,  23.  24, 
where  the  Asuras  say  he  'lavo  (  =  he  'rayo, 
'  ho,  enemies,'  in  Sanskrit).  See  Muir, 
op.  cit.,  22,  114;  Davidson,  Zeitschrift 
der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesell- 
schaft,  37,  23  (the  Mahabhasya  version) ; 
Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  26, 
31,  n.  3.  The  word  could  thus  apply 
to  the  Dasyus  also,  as  the  strange 
speech  of  the  enemy  could  be  either 
Aryan  or  aboriginal. 

13  Op.  cit.,  no  et  seq.     So  MacdonelJ, 
Vedic  Mythology,  p.  158. 

14  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Datyauha  ]        A  RACE  OF  PRINCES— GALLINULE 


349 


and  demons.  Lassen15  attempted  to  connect  the  contrast 
daqyu :  dasyu  with  that  of  daeva  :  deva,  and  to  see  in  it  a  result 
of  the  religious  differences  which,  according  to  Haug's  theory, 
had  separated  the  Iranians  and  the  Indians.  The  word  may 
have  originally  meant  '  ravaged  land  ' 16  as  a  result  of  invasion  ; 
hence  'enemies'  country,'  then  'hostile  people,'  who  as  human 
foes  were  more  usually  called  by  the  cognate  name  of  Dasa. 

Individual  Dasyus  are  Cumuri,  Sambara,  Susna,  etc. 

In  the  Aitareya  Brahmana17  the  word  has,  as  later,18  the 
sense  of  uncivilized  peoples  generally. 

'  lay  waste '  ;  but,  according  to  Roth, 
'  suffer  want,'  '  waste  away.' 

17  vii.  18,  where  the  descendants  of 
Visvamitra  are  called  dasyunam  bhuy- 
isthah ;  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
xv.  26,  7. 

18  Manu,  v.  131 ;  x.  32.  45  ;  Zimmer, 
op.  cit.,  118. 

Cf.  Hillebrandt,  op.  cit. ,  3,  276  et  seq.  ; 
Zimmer,  op.  cit.,  101  et  seq. 


15  Indische  Alterthumskunde,  i2,  633 
et  seq.  This  theory  is  now  generally  dis- 
credited. Cf.  Justi,  Gottingische  Gelehrte 
Anzeigen,  1866,  1446  et  seq. ;  Geldner, 
Vedische  Studien,  1,  142;  Oldenberg, 
Religion  des  Veda,  162  et  seq.  ;  Macdonell, 
Vedic  Mythology,  p.  156. 

16  Both  this  word  and  Dasa  appear 
to  be  derived  from  the  root  das,  which, 
according   to   Whitney,  Roots,   means 


Daksayana,  '  descendant  of  Daksa.'  The  Daksayanas  are 
mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda  and  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas1 
as  having  given  gold  to  Satanika.  In  the  Satapatha  Brahmana2 
the  word  is  actually  used  to  denote  'gold.'  The  Daksayanas 
appear  there3  as  a  race  of  princes  who,  because  of  performing 
a  certain  rite,  prospered  down  to  the  time  of  the  Brahmana 
itself. 


1  Av.  i.  35,  1.  2;  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 
hita,  xxxiv.  51.  52  ;  Katha,  cited  by 
von  Schroeder,  Tiibinger  Katha-Hand- 
schriften,  36 ;  Khila,  iv.  7,  7.  8. 

2  vi.  7,4,2:  daksayana-hasta,  'golden- 
handed.'  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the 
East,  41,  283,  n.  2,  seems  unnecessarily 
doubtful  as  to  this. 


3  ii.  4,  4,  6.  Cf.  Aitareya  Brahmana, 
iii.  40. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  i,  224  ; 
4,  358 ;  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the 
Rigveda,  3,  195  ;  Whitney,  Translation 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  35 ;  Levi,  La 
Doctrine  dn  Sacrifice,  138. 


Datyauha,  a  '  gallinule,'  is  mentioned  in  the  list  of  victims 
at  the  Asvamedha,  or  horse  sacrifice,  in  the  Yajurveda.1     The 


1  Taittinya  Samhita,  v.  5,  17,  1  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  6 ;  Vaja- 
saneyi Samhita,  xxiv.  25.  39.     Panini, 


vii.  3. 1,  derives  the  word  from  ditya-vah. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  91. 


35° 


SICKLE— PA  TRONYMIC—GIFT 


[  Datra 


word  is  clearly  a  variant  of  datyuha,  which  occurs  in  the  epics 
and  law  books. 

Datra  ('cutter'),  denoting  a  'sickle,'  is  mentioned  in  the 
Rigveda.1  Cows  ■  with  sickle-shaped  marks  on  their  ears ' 
(ddtra-karnyafy)  are  referred  to  in  the  Maitrayani  Samhita.2 
Otherwise  the  expression  is  only  found  later,  occurring  in  the 
Sutra  and  epic  literature.3     See  also  Srni. 

1  viii.  78,  10;  Nirukta,  ii.  1.  3  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 

2  iv.  2,  9.  I  Oriental  Society,  17,  86. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  238. 


Datreya  is  the  patronymic  of  Arada  Saunaka  in  the  Vamsa 
Brahmana.1  Possibly  Darteya,  'descendant  of  Drti,'  should 
be  read,2  but  the  word  may  have  the  same  derivation  as  the 
latter  form  with  metathesis. 


1  Indische  Studien,  4,  373. 


2  Cf.  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Dadhica,   '  descendant  of  Dadhyanc,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
Cyavana  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana  (xiv.  6). 


1.  Dana,  '  giving,'  '  gift,'  is  a  word  of  frequent  occurrence  in 
the  Rigveda,  especially  in  the  Dana-stutis1  ('Praises  of  Gifts') 
of  generous  patrons  (see  Daksina).  One  of  the  characteristics 
of  the  Brahmana  is  his  right  to  receive  gifts,  which  it  is 
obligatory  on  the  other  castes  to  present.2  The  gift  of  a 
daughter  (kanyayd  ddnam)  was  a  form  of  marriage3  (see  Vivaha), 
because  in  it  the  girl  was  '  given '  away  by  her  father  or 
brother. 


1  The  term  seems  first  to  occur  in 
the  Brhaddevata,  vi.  45.  92,  and  in 
similar  works. 


2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  5,  7,  1 
Weber,  Indische  Studien,  10,  47-61. 

3  Nirukta,  iii.  4. 


2.  Dana  ('  distribution  ')l  seems  in  several  passages  of  the 
Rigveda2  to  be  a  designation  of  the  sacrificial  feast  to  which 

1  From  da,  '  divide.'  I   60,  8  ;  99,  4,  etc.   Cf.,  however,  Pischel 

2  i-  55)  71  48.  4 ;  180,  5  ;  viii.  46,  26;    I    Vedische  Studien,  1,  100. 


Daya  ]        SACRIFICIAL  FEAST— ROPE— INHERITANCE  351 


the  god  is  invited  (cf.  Sak,  Sclltt)).  In  one  passage3  Sayana 
thinks  that  it  denotes  the  mada-jalani,  '  drops  of  water  falling 
from  the  temples  of  a  rutting  elephant,'4  but  this  is  doubtful. 
In  another  passage5  Roth  thinks  that  '  pasture  land'  is  meant. 


3  Rv.  viii.  33,  8 ;  Ludwig,  Transla- 
tion of  the  Rigveda,  5,  157. 

4  Dana  in  this  sense,  so  common  in 
the  post-Vedic  language,  is  probably 


derived    from    da,    'divide,' 
originally  '  secretion.' 
5  ii-  13,  7- 


meaning 


3.  Dana  is  in  three  passages  of  the  Rigveda1  held  by  Roth 
to  designate  a  chariot  horse. 


1  v.  27,  5 ;  vii.  18,  23 ;  viii.  46,  24. 
But  in  all  these  cases  '  gifts '  seems  an 


adequate  version,  'horses'  being  under- 
stood. 


Daman,  a  'rope'  or  'girdle,'1  is  often  mentioned  in  the 
Rigveda  and  later.2  Reference  is  made  to  the  rope  of  the 
sacrificial  horse,3  as  well  as  to  the  practice  of  tying  calves  with 
ropes.4  The  word  occurs  in  the  sense  of  a  '  band  '  of  horse  hair 
in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.5 


1  Originally  '  bond,'  from  da,  'bind.' 

2  Rv.  i.  56,  3,  etc.  ;  Av.  vi.  63,  1 ; 
103,,  2  ;  vii.  103,  1.  2 ;  Taittiriya  Sam- 
hita,  ii.  4,  13,  1,  etc. 


3  Rv.  i.  162,  8. 
*  Rv.  ii.  28,  7. 

5  v.  3,  1,   10.     Cf.  Eggeling,  Sacred 
Books  of  the  East,  41,  62,  n.  2. 


Daya  occurs  in  the  Rigveda1  only  in  the  sense  of  'reward' 
of  exertion  (srania),  but  later  it  means  'inheritance' — that  is, 
a  father's  property  which  is  to  be  divided  among  his  sons 
either  during  his  lifetime  or  after  his  death.  The  passages  all 
negative  the  idea  that  the  property  of  the  family  was  legally 
family  property :  it  is  clear  that  it  was  the  property  of  the  head 
of  the  house,  usually  the  father,  and  that  the  other  members 
of  the  family  only  had  moral  claims  upon  it  which  the  father 
could  ignore,  though  he  might  be  coerced  by  his  sons  if  they 
were  physically  stronger. 

Thus  Manu  is  said  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita.2  to  have  divided 
his  property  among   his  sons.     He  omitted  Nabhanedistha, 


1  x.  114,  10. 

2  iii.  1,  9,  4  et  seq.    Cf.  Muir,  Sanskrit 


Texts,  i2,  191-194  ;  Levi,  La  Doctrine  du 
Sacrifice,  67,  68. 


352 


DIVISION  OF  PATERNAL  INHERITANCE  [  Daya 


whom  he  afterwards  taught  how  to  appease  the  Angirases,  and 
to  procure  cows.  This  is  a  significant  indication  that  the 
property  he  divided  was  movable  property,  rather  than  land 
(Urvara).  In  the  Aitareya  Brahmana3  the  division  is  said  to 
have  been  made  during  Manu's  lifetime  by  his  sons,  who  left 
only  their  aged  father  to  Nabhanedistha.  According  to  the 
Jaiminiya  Brahmana,4  again,  four  sons  divided  the  inheritance 
while  their  old  father,  Abhipratarin,  was  still  alive.  It  is, 
of  course,  possible  to  regard  Daya  as  denoting  the  heritable 
property  of  the  family,  but  the  developed  patria  potestas  of  the 
father,  which  was  early  very  marked,  as  shown  by  the  legend 
of  SunahSepa,  is  inconsistent  with  the  view  that  the  sons 
were  legally  owners  with  their  father,  unless  and  until  they 
actually  insisted  on  a  division  of  the  property.5  Probably — 
there  is  no  evidence  of  any  decisive  character — land  was  not 
divided  at  first,  but  no  doubt  its  disposal  began  to  follow  the 
analogy  of  cattle  and  other  movable  property  as  soon  as  the 
available  supply  of  arable  land  became  limited. 

As  for  the  method  of  division,  it  is  clear  from  the  Taittiriya 
Samhita6  that  the  elder  son  was  usually  preferred ;   perhaps 


3  v.  14. 

4  iii.  156  (Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  26,  61,  62). 

5  The  same  question  has  been  raised 
as  to  the  origin  of  English  or  Teutonic 
property  in  land  generally.  Against 
any  idea  even  of  family  ownership  in 
a  strict  sense  of  the  word,  see  Fustel 
de  Coulanges,  Recherches  sur  quelques 
Problemes  d'Histoire,  322  et  seq. ;  Ashley, 
in  Fustel  de  Coulanges,  Origin  of  Pro- 
perty in  Land,  xvi  xxi  ;  Pollock  and 
Maitland,  History  of  English  Law,  2,  237 
et  seq.  The  older  view,  which  accepted 
family  and  communal  ownership,  repre- 
sented in  different  forms  by  Maine  ( Vil- 
lage Communities  in  the  East  and  West), 
Stubbs,  Green,  and  others,  is  defended 
in  a  new  form  by  Vinogradoff,  Villanage 
in  England.  See  also  Keith,  Journal 
of  the  African  Society,  6,  201  et  seq. 
Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  93-96,  does  not 
accept  the  communal  ownership  of  land, 


but,  ibid.,  80,  is  inclined  to  believe  in 
the  joint  ownership  of  a  family.  He 
admits  that  this  is  inconsistent  with  the 
strict  rule  of  patria  potestas,  which  still 
exists  in  Bengal ;  Baden  Powell,  Village 
Communities  in  India,  133  et  seq.,  doubts 
the  existence  in  early  India  of  such  a 
patria  potestas .  But  the  facts  seem  clearly 
to  show  that  there  was  such  a  power, 
and  that  the  father  owned  the  property. 
His  sons,  as  they  grew  up,  came  to 
claim  the  property,  and  he  might  have 
to  divide  it ;  hence  the  idea  naturally 
developed  that  every  child  on  birth  had 
a  legal  share  in  the  property.  No  doubt 
also  from  the  first  the  right  to  part  with 
land  was  one  which  grown-up  sons  and 
the  rest  of  the  community  could  object 
to,  once  the  village  had  acquired  a  fixed 
existence.  This  would  account  ade- 
quately for  the  later  system.  Cf.  also 
pp.  100,  n.  19;  336,  n.  7,  andRajanya. 
6  ii.  5,  2,  7- 


Darteya  ]  WIFE— WOOD— PATRONYMICS  353 

this  was  always  the  case  after  death.  During  the  father's  life- 
time another  might  be  preferred,  as  appears  from  a  passage 
of  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.7  Women  were  excluded  from 
partition  or  inheritance,  according  to  the  Satapatha  Brahmana8 
and  the  Nirukta.9  They  were,  no  doubt,  supported  by  their 
brothers  ;  but  if  they  had  none  they  might  be  reduced  to  prosti- 
tution.10 Detailed  rules  of  inheritance  appear  in  the  Sutras.11 
The  heir  is  called  Dayada,12  'receiver  (d-da)  of  inheritance.' 

xvi.  4,  4.  patha  Brahmana,  i.  7,  2, 22  ;  iii.  2,  1,  18. 

For  the  Sutra  rules,   see  Jolly,  Recht 
und  Sitte,  80  et  seq. 

12  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xii.  4,  3,  9; 
Nirukta,    iii.    4 ;    metaphorically,    Av. 
the  Aitarey a  Brahmana,  vii.  17;  Sahkh-   j    v.  18,6.  14. 
ayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  27,  3  ;  Sata-   ! 

Dara,  'wife,'  is  found  in  the  Sutras  (usually  as  a  plural 
masculine),  and  once  (as  a  singular)  in  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad.1 


8  iv.  4,  2,  13. 

■'  iii.  4. 
30  Cf.  Stri. 
11  Inheritance  is  also  alluded  to  in 


1  vi.  4,  12  (where  dvarena  is  a  varia 
lectio ;  see  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v.).    Cf.  Delbruck,  Die  indogermanischen 


Verwandtschaftsnamen,    415,    416,    who 
ignores  the  Brhadaranyaka  passage. 


Daru,  'wood,'  is  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda  and 
later,1  denoting  amongst  other  things  the  pole  of  a  chariot,2 
logs  as  fuel,3  the  wooden  parts  of  a  car,4  possibly  wooden 
stocks,5  and  so  forth. 


1  Rv.  vi.  3,  4  ;  x.  145,  4,  etc.  ;  Av. 
x.  4,  3  ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  8,  3, 
etc. 

2  Rv.  x.  102,  8. 


3  Rv.  viii.  102,  20. 

4  Satapatha  Brahmana,  vi.  6,  2,  14. 

5  Av.  vi.  121,  2.    But  this  is  doubtful. 
Cf.  Tayu  and  Drupada. 


Dardha-jayanti, '  descendant  of  Drdhajayanta,'  is  the  patro- 
nymic of  Vaipascita  Gupta  Lauhitya  and  of  Vaipascita 
Drdhajayanta  Lauhitya  in  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana 
(iii.  42,  1). 

Darteya,  '  descendant  of  Drti.'  The  Darteyas  are  mentioned 
as  authorities  on  sacrificial  matters  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita.1 
and  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.2 

1  xxxi.  2  (Indische  Studien,  3,  473).  2  xxv.  3,  6. 

VOL.  I.  23 


354 


WOODPECKER— PA  TRONYMICS 


[  Darbhya 


Darbhya,  '  descendant  of  Darbha,'  is  mentioned  in  a  verse 
of  the  Rigveda.1  Roth2  identifies  him  with  SyavaSva,  but  the 
Brhaddevata3  with  Rathaviti.  The  same  patronymic  is 
frequently4  connected  with  Ke£in,  and  is  also  applied  to 
Rathaprota.5    See  also  Dalbhya. 


1  v.  6 1,  17. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  v.  50.  77. 

4  Taittiriya    Samhita,    ii.    6,    2,    3  ; 


MaitrayanI   Samhita,    i.    4,    12 ;    6,   5  ; 
Kausitaki  Brahmana,  vii.  4.     Cf.  Sieg, 
Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  62,  n.  2. 
5  MaitrayanI  Samhita,  ii.  1,  3. 


Darv-ag'hata,  the  '  woodpecker,'  is  included  in  the  list  of 
sacrificial  victims  at  the  Asvamedha,  or  '  horse  sacrifice,'  in  the 
Yajurveda.1 

1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  15,  1 ;  I  saneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  35.  Cf.  Zimmer, 
MaitrayanI  Samhita,  iii.  14,  16  ;  Vaja-   |  Altindisches  Lebeny  92. 


Darv-ahara,  a  ■  gatherer  of  wood,'  is  included  in  the  list  oi 
victims  at  the  Purusamedha,  or  '  human  sacrifice,'  in  the 
Yajurveda.1 

1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  12 ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  8,  1. 

Dalbhi,  *  descendant  of  Dalbha,'  is  the  patronymic  of  Vaka 
in  the  Kathaka  Samhita  (x.  6). 


Dalbhya,  '  descendant  of  Dalbha,'  is  a  variant  of  Darbhya. 
It  is  the  patronymic  of  (a)  Ke£in  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana  ;l 
(b)  Caikitayana  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad2  and  the  JaiminTya 
Upanisad  Brahmana;3  (c)  Vaka  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad4 
and  the  Kathaka  Samhita.5 


1  xiii.  10,  8.  Cf.  the  Itihasa,  reported 
by  Sadgurusisya  (Sarvanukramani, 
ed.  Macdonell,  118).  The  St.  Peters- 
burg Dictionary  quotes  the  Kausitaki 
Brahmana,  vii.  4,  for  Dalbhya  (but 
also  for  Darbhya,  which  is  the  reading 
of  Lindner's  edition). 

2  i.  8,  1. 


3  i.  38,  1  ;  56.  3- 

4  i.  2,  13  ;   12,  1.  3. 

5  xxx.  2,  where  Dalbhya  is  readv 
not  Dalbhi,  as  stated  in  the  St.  Peters 
burg  Dictionary,  s.v.  The  Kapisthala 
Samhita,  xlvi.  5,  has  Darbliasya.  Dalbb  i 
is  found,  however,  in  Kathaka  Samhita , 
x.  6. 


Da&irajna  ]    FOREST  FIRE— BATTLE  OF  TEN  KINGS 


355 


Dava,  'forest  fire,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and 
the  Satapatha  Brahmana.2  In  the  latter  work  such  fires  are 
referred  to  as  occurring  in  spring.  According  to  Sieg,3  a  hymn 
of  the  Rigveda4  describes  a  forest  fire.  Watchers  were 
employed  to  guard  against  surprise  from  such  conflagrations 
(ddva-pa).5 


1  vii.  45,  2. 

2  xi.  2,  7,  32. 

3  Die    Sagenstofe    des    Rgveda,   44   et 


seq. 


*  x.  142.  Sieg's  interpretation  of  this 
hymn  is  not  at  all  probable. 

5  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  16  ;  Tait- 
tirlya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  11,  1. 


Dava-su  Angirasa,  a  seer  of  Samans,  or  chants,  is  mentioned 
in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.1 

1  xxv.  5,  12.  14.     Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  2,  160. 


Da6a,  'fisherman,'  is  mentioned  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the 
Purusamedha,  or  '  human  sacrifice,'  in  the  Yajurveda.1  Cf. 
Dhaivara. 


1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  16  ;  Tait- 
tiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  12,  1.  Weber, 
Indische  Streifen,  1,  81,  renders  the  word 
by  Fischerknecht,  perhaps  regarding  it 


as  equivalent  to  dasa,  '  servant. '  Cf. 
Manu,  x.  34;  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v.  DaSa,  2.  3. 


Dagataya,  '  belonging  to  the  (Rigveda  text)  divided  into  ten 
(books),'  is  an  epithet  of  Adhyaya,  '  section,'  in  the  Nidana 
Sutra.1  The  feminine  form  of  the  word  is  also  found  in  the 
Kausitaki  Brahmana2  and  later.3 


1  ii.  11  (Indische  Studien,  1,  45). 

2  viii.  7. 

3  Rgveda     Pratisakhya,     xvi. 


54 


xvii.  30;  Sahkhayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
xii.  2,  16.  22,  etc.  ;  Baudhayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  xxvi.  13;  xxvii.  4,  etc. 


Dasa-rajna  is  the  name  in  the  Rigveda1  and  the  Athar- 
vaveda2 of  Sudas'  famous  'battle  with  the  ten  kings.'  It  is 
somewhat  difficult  to  make  out  exactly  who  the  kings  were 
(see  TurvaSa),  but  the  number  is  probably  a  round  one,  and 
cannot  be  pressed.     The  actual  battle  hymn3  does  not  contain 


1  vii.  33,  2.  5 ;  83.  8. 


2     x.  128,  12. 


3  vii.  18. 
23—2 


356 


ABORIGINES 


[  Daiarmj 


the  word,  and  the  passages  in  which  it  is  found  may  reasonably 
be  considered  late.4 


*  Cf.  for  the  late  date  of  vii.  33, 
Bergaigne,  Lliistoire  de  la  Samhita,  38, 
72  ;  Oldenberg,  Prolegomena,  198,  200, 


265,  n.  1 ;  Arnold,  Vedic  Metre,  309  ; 
Geldner,  Vedische  Studien,  2, 130,  opposes 
this  view,  but  not  convincingly. 


Da£arma  appears  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita1  as  a  teacher  and 
a  contemporary  of  Aruni. 

1  vii.  6.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  3,  472. 


Dasa,  like  Dasyu,  sometimes  denotes  enemies  of  a  demoniac 
character  in  the  Rigveda,1  but  in  many  passages2  the  word 
refers  to  human  foes  of  the  Aryans.  The  Dasas  are  described 
as  having  forts  (purah),z  and  their  clans  (visah)  are  mentioned.4 
It  is  possible  that  the  forts,  which  are  called  '  autumnal ' 
(sdradih),6  may  be  mythical,  but  it  is  not  essential,  for  the 
epithet  may  allude  to  their  being  resorted  to  in  the  autumn 
season.  The  Dasa  colour  (Varna)6  is  probably  an  allusion  to 
the  black  skin  of  the  aborigines,  which  is  also  directly  men- 
tioned.7 The  aborigines  (as  Dasyus)  are  called  anas,  '  nose- 
less' (?),8  and  tnrdhra-vdc, '  of  hostile  speech,'9  and  are  probably 
meant  by  the  phallus-worshippers  (sisna-devah,  '  whose  deity 
is  a  phallus ')  of  the  Rigveda.10     It  is  significant  that  constant 


1  Cf.    Macdonell,    Vedic    Mythology, 

P-  157- 

2  Cf  Rv.  v.  34,  6 ;  vi.  22,  10  ;  33,  3  ; 
60,  6;  vii.  83,  1;  x.  38,  3;  69,  6; 
83,  1;  Av.  v.  11,  3. 

3  ii.  20,  8  (called  dyas'ih,  'made  of 
iron  ') ;  i.  103,  3  ;  iii.  12,  6  ;  iv.  32,  10. 
They  are  called  sdradih,  'autumnal,' 
in  i.  131,  4  ;  174,  2  ;  vi.  20,  10.  Cf.  also 
dehyah,  '  ramparts,'  in  vi.  47,  2. 

4  ii.  11,4;  iv.  28,  4 ;  vi.  25,  2. 

5  Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology, 
p.  60. 

6  ii.  12,  4 ;  £ankhayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
viii.  25,  6.  Cf.  Rv.  i.  101,  1 ;  130,  8; 
ii.  20,  7 ;  iv.  16,  13  ;  vi.  47,  21 ;  vii.  5,  3. 
The  Arya  colour  is  mentioned  in  iii.  34, 
9,  and  the  Dasa  is  contrasted  with  the 
Varna  (of  the  singers)  in  i.  104,  2.    The 


1  white-hued  (svitnya)  friends '  who,  in 
i.  100,  18,  aid  in  the  conquest  of  the 
Dasyu  and  Simyu  are  doubtless  Aryans. 
In  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  30, 
the  day  and  night  (ahordtre)  are 
paralleled  with  the  Sudraryau — that  is, 
probably  with  the  Aryan  and  Sudra 
(the  compound  is  not  to  be  taken  as 
giving  the  words  in  the  correct  order ; 
cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic  Grammar,  268). 
See  also  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  I9  140 ; 
Weber,  Indische  Studien,  10,  10,  n. 

7  krsnd  tvac,  '  black  skin,'  i.  130,  8 ; 
ix.  41,  1. 

8  Cf.  Dasyu,  notes  6,  7. 

9  v.   29,   10.     See  Dasyu ;   Geldner, 
Rigveda,  Glossar,  138. 


10  vn.    21,   5 ;    x.   99, 
donell,  op.  cit.,  p.  155. 


3.     Cf.    Mac- 


Dasa  ] 


SLAVES— ORIGINAL  SENSE  OF  DASA 


357 


reference  is  made  to  the  differences  in  religion  between  Arya 
and  Dasa  or  Dasyu.11 

Since  the  Dasas  were  in  many  cases  reduced  to  slavery,  the 
word  Dasa  has  the  sense  of '  slave '  in  several  passages  of  the 
Rigveda.12  Dasi,  the  feminine,  always  has  this  sense  from 
the  Atharvaveda13  onwards.  Aboriginal  women  were,  no  doubt, 
the  usual  slaves,  for  on  their  husbands  being  slain  in  battle 
they  would  naturally  have  been  taken  as  servants.  They  would 
sometimes  also  become  concubines ;  thus  Kavasa  was  taunted 
with  being  the  son  of  a  female  slave  {dasyah  putrah)  in  the 
Aitareya  Brahmana.14 

Ludwig15  considers  that  in  some  passages16  Dasa  is  applied, 
in  the  sense  of  '  enemy,'  to  Aryan  foes,  but  this  is  uncertain. 
Zimmer17  and  Meyer18  think  that  Dasa19  originally  meant 
1  enemy '  in  general,  later  developing  in  Iran  into  the  name  of 
the  Dahae20  of  the  Caspian  steppes,  and  in  India  into  a  desig- 
nation of  the  aborigines.  On  the  other  hand,  Hillebrandt21 
argues  that,  as  the  Dasas  and  the  Panis  are  mentioned  together,22 
they  must  be  deemed  to  be  closely  related  tribes,  identifying 


11  Rv.  i.  33,  4.  5 ;  iv.  16,  9 ;  v.  7,  10 ; 
42,  9 ;  vi.  14,  3 ;  viii.  70,  10 ;  x.  22, 
7.  8,  etc. 

12  vii.  86,  7 ;  viii.  56,  3  ;  x.  62,  10. 
Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.,  2, 
suggests  that  in  viii.  46,  32,  the  word 
dasan,  '  slaves,'  should  be  read  in  place 
of  ddsey  qualifying  Balbutha.  Zimmer, 
A  Itindisches  Leben,  117,  quotes  the  passage 
to  indicate  the  admixture  of  Aryan  and 
Dasa  blood.  See  also  Av.  iv.  9,  8  ; 
Chandogya  Upanisad,  vii.  24,  2.  It  is 
uncertain  whether  dasa-pravarga,  as  an 
epithet  of  rayi,  'wealth,'  in  Rv.  i.  92,  8, 
means  '  consisting  of  troops  of  slaves.' 
Geldner,  Rigveda,  Glossar,  82,  so  takes 
the  expression  in  i.  158,  5. 

13  Av.  v.  22,  6 ;  xii.  3,  13  ;  4,  9 ; 
Chandogya  Upanisad,  v.  13,  2  ;  Brhad- 
aranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  1, 10  (Madhyam- 
dina=2,  7  Kanva).  Zimmer,  107,  sees 
this  sense  in  vadhu  in  Rv.  viii.  19,  36. 
See  also  Vadhumant. 

M  ii.  19 ;  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xii.  3. 


15  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  209. 

16  See  i.  158,  5  ;  ii.  13,  8  ;  iv.  30, 
14.  15 ;  vi.  20,  10 ;  vii.  99,  5  ;  x.  49, 
6.  7.  None  of  these  passages  need 
certainly  be  so  taken. 

17  Altindisches  Leben,  no  et  seq. 

18  Geschichte  des  Altertums,  1,  515. 

19  If  derived  from  das  in  the  sense 
of  '  lay  waste '  (Whitney,  Roots),  the 
original  meaning  would  have  been 
'devastator,'  'ravager.' 

20  The  Dahae  may  have  been  closely 
allied  in  race  and  language  with  the 
Iranians,  but  this  is  not  very  clearly 
proved.  Cf.  E.  Kuhn  in  Kuhn's  Zeit- 
schrift,  28,  214 ;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische 
Mythologie,  1,  95.  The  possibility  or 
probability  of  mixture  with  Mongolian 
blood  is  always  present.  So  Zimmer, 
op.  cit.,  112,  calls  the  Daoi  or  Daai  of 
Herodotus,  i.  126,  a  Turanian  tribe. 

21  Op.  cit.,  1,  94. 

22  Rv.  v.  34,  6.  7 ;  vii.  6,  3  (Dasyu 
and  Pani  together) ;  Av.  v.  n,  6. 


358  ORIGINAL  HOME  OF  THE  DASAS         [  Dasavesa 

the  Panis  with  the  Parnians  and  the  Dasas  of  the  Rigveda 
with  the  Dahae.  This  view,  of  course,  necessitates  a  transfer 
of  the  scenes  of  the  Rigveda,  where  Dasas  are  prominent,  and 
especially  those  in  which  Divodasa — '  the  heavenly  Dasa ' — plays 
an  important  part,23  to  the  far  west.  Hillebrandt  justifies  this 
by  regarding  the  scene  of  the  sixth  book  of  the  Rigveda  as 
quite  different  from  that  of  the  seventh  and  third,  in  which 
Sudas,  the  Bharatas,  Vasistha,  and  Visvamitra  appear.  The 
Sarasvati  of  the  sixth  book  he  locates  in  Arachosia,  that  of  the 
seventh  in  the  ■  Middle  Country.'  It  is,  however,  extremely 
doubtful  whether  this  theory  can  be  upheld.  That  Divodasa 
should  have  been  a  Dasa,  and  yet  have  fought  against  other 
Dasas,  is  not  in  itself  likely,  especially  when  his  son  Sudas 
appears  as  a  protagonist  of  Aryan  civilization.  It  also  seems 
unreasonable  to  seek  in  Arachosia  for  the  river  Sarasvati, 
which  it  is  natural  to  locate  in  the  '  Middle  Country.' 

The  wealth  of  the  Dasas  was  no  doubt  considerable,24  but  in 
civilization  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  they  were  ever 
equal  to  the  invaders.25  Leading  Dasas  were  Illbiga,  Cumuri 
and  Dhuni,  Pipru,  Varcin,  Sambara.  For  names  of  aboriginal 
tribes,  see  Kirata,  Kikata,  Candala,  Parnaka,  Simyu. 


23  Op.  cit.,  i,  96  et  seq.  He  argues 
that  Dasa  occurs  only  four  times  in 
Mandala  vii.,  but  eight  times  in  vi., 
and  that  similarly  Sambara,  the  Dasa, 
is  mentioned  six  times  in  vi.,  but  only 
twice  in  vii.  But  Divodasa  much  more 
probably    means,    as    Oldenberg    in- 


25  Cf.  Rv.  ii.  12,  11;  iv.  30,  14; 
vi.  26,  5,  whence  it  appears  that  the 
Dasas  were  often  dwellers  in  moun- 
tains, a  natural  refuge  for  beaten 
tribes. 

Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie, 
3,  269-275,  368  ;  Ludwig,  Translation 


terprets   the    name,    '  the    servant    of  i  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  207-213 ;   Zimmer, 

heaven.'    See  his  Religion  des  Veda,  155,  j  Altindisches    Leben,    101-118;    Weber, 

n.    1  ;  Bergaigne,  Religion   Vedique,   2,  \  Indische  Studien,    18,    35   (who  derives 

209;  below,  p.  363,  n.  11.  j  dasa    from    da,    'bind'),    254;    Muir, 

24  Cf.    Rv.    i.    176,   4  ;    iv.    30,    13  ;  I  Sanskrit  Texts,  2,  359  et  seq.  ;  Geldner, 

viii.  40,  6;  x.  69,  5  ;  Av.  vii.  90,  2.  '  Vedische  Studien,  3,  96. 


Dasa-vesa,  occurring  only  once  in  the  Rigveda,1  probably 
designates  a  Dasa  named  VeSa.  Sayana's  interpretation  of  the 
word  as  '  destruction  of  foes '  can  hardly  be  correct. 

1  ii.  13,  8.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  209. 


>idhi§upati  ]     TWO-YEAR-OLD  BULL— ARROW— WOOER        359 

Dasya  occurs  once  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  (iv.  2, 
Madhyamdina  =  23  Kanva)  in  the  sense  of  slavery.' 


Ditya-vah,  m. ;  Dityauhi,  f.,  '  a  two-year-old  bull  or  cow,' 
mentioned  in  the  later  Samhitas  and  the  Brahmanas.1 


1  Taittiriya    Samhita,    iv.    3,    3,    1  ; 
6, 15,  1;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xiv.  10; 


xviii.  26  ;  xxviii.  25  ;  PancavimSa  Brah- 
mana,  xxi.  i,  etc. 


Didyu,  Didyut,  both1  denote  in  the  Rigveda  '  missile,' '  arrow,' 
hether  divine  or  human. 


1  Didyu :  i.  71,  5 ;  iv.  41,  4 ;  vii.  56,  9  ; 
85,  2,  etc.  ;  Av.  i.  2,  3 ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  ii.  20 ;  x.   17,  etc.     Didyut : 


Rv.  i.  66,  7 ;  v.  86,  3  ;  vii.  25,  1,  etc.  ; 
certainly  divine  in  ii.  13,  7. 


Didhisu  in  the  Rigveda  denotes  a  'wooer.'  It  is  applied1 
to  the  relative,  probably  brother-in-law,2  who  takes  the  place 
of  the  husband  at  the  funeral  rite,  and  who,  as  in  the  Hebraic 
levirate,  is  to  beget  a  child  by  the  brother's  wife  if  there  is 
no  son.3  Hillebrandt4  and  Lanman5  consider  that  the  word 
originally  meant  only  'wooer,'  and  applied  to  the  king  who, 
after  the  chief  queen  had  lain  beside  the  dead  victim  in  the 
Purusamedha  or  '  human  sacrifice,'  claimed  her  again ;  but  this 
view  is  hardly  plausible.6  The  term  is  also  applied  to  the  god 
Pusan7  as  the  wooer  of  his  mother,  apparently  Surya.8 


1  x.  18,  18  =  Av.  xviii.  3,  2  (where 
didhisos  is  merely  a  bad  reading)  = 
Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  vi.  1 ,  3 . 

2  Asvalayana  Srauta  Sutra,  iv.  2,  18, 
where  are  mentioned  the  brother-in-law 
(devr),  a  representative  of  the  husband 
(there  is  nothing  to  show  whether  he 
is  identical  with  the  preceding  or  not), 
a  pupil,  or  an  aged  servant  (jarad-ddsa). 

3  Cf.  Rv.  x.  40,  2 ;  Kaegi,  Der  Rigveda, 
n.  51. 


*  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  40,  708  et  seq. 

5  Sanskrit  Reader,  385. 

6  See  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  848,  849  ;  Keith,  Journal 
of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1907,  946. 

7  vi.  55,  5- 

8  Cf.  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  1,  21  ; 
Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  35. 

Cf.  Geldner,  Rigveda,  Kotnmentar,  154. 


Didhisu-pati  occurs  in  the  Kathaka1  and  Kapisthala  Sam- 
hitas,2 as  well  as  in  the  Apastamba,3  Gautama,4  and  Vasistha 

2  xlvii.  7,  quoted  ibid.,  579,  580. 


1  xxxi.  7,  quoted  in  Delbriick,  Die 

indogermanischen      Verwandtschaftsnamen , 
579- 


J   11.   5,   12,  22. 
4  XV.  16. 


360 


HUSBAND  OF  A   WIDOW— SKY 


[  Div 


Dharma  Sutras,5  in  lists  of  people  who  have  committed  sin 
(enas).  The  traditional  rendering6  is  'husband  of  a  woman 
married  a  second  time ';  Manu7  seems  to  apply  the  term  to  the 
brother-in-law  who  is  'married'  to  his  sister-in-law  after  his 
brother's  death  for  the  purpose  of  begetting  a  child,  if  he 
displays  conjugal  affection  to  her  (anurajyate  kamatah).8  This 
sense  would  be  possible,  since  Didhisu  denotes  a  '  wooer,'  and 
a  widow  could  be  regarded  as  a  '  wooer '  when  able  to  control 
her  own  choice  of  a  spouse.  But  another  tradition9  holds  that 
Didhisu  means  the  elder  sister  whose  younger  sister  has 
married  before  her.  This  view  is  supported  "by  a  passage  in  the 
Vasistha  Dharma  Sutra,10  and  by  the  use  of  the  word  agre- 
didhisu-pati11  which  must  mean  the  '  husband  of  a  younger 
sister  married  before  the  elder.'  In  this  case  also  Didhisu 
would  mean  '  wooer,'  the  elder  sister  being  so  called  because, 
if  her  parents  do  not  arrange  a  marriage  for  her,  she  is, 
according  to  Visnu,12  to  make  her  own  choice  of  a  husband 
(kurydt  svayamvaram).  See  also  Edidhisuhpati  and  Daidhi- 
savya. 


5  i.  18 ;  xx.  7  et  seq. 

6  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 
didhisu,  3. 

7  iii.  173. 

8  Cf.  Leist,  Altarischcs  Jus  Gentium, 
106. 

9  Laugaksi,  quoted  by  Kulluka  on 
Manu,  iii.  160  ;  Commentary  on  Apa- 
stamba,  loc.  cit. 

10  xx.  7  et  seq. 


11  Cf.  agre-didhisu,  '  one  who  woos  (a 
younger  sister)  before  (her  elder  sister 
is  married),'  in  Apastamba,  loc.  cit.  ; 
Gautama,  xv.  16;  Vasistha,  i.  18; 
Kathaka,  loc.  cit. ;  agre-dadhus,  Maitra- 
yani  Samhita,  iv.  j,  9 ;  agre-dadhisu, 
Kapisthala,  loc.  cit.  ;  agra-didhisu,  Tait- 
tiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  2,  8,  11. 

12  Visnu  Dharma  Sutra,  xxiv.  40. 
Cf.  Delbriick,  op.  cit.,  579-586. 


Div,  'sky.'  The  world  as  a  whole  is  regarded  as  divided 
into  the  three  domains  of  'earth,'  'air'  or  'atmosphere,'  and 
'heaven'  or  'sky'  (div),1  or  alternatively  into  'heaven  and 
earth'  (dyavd-prthivi) ,2  which  two  are  then  considered  as  com- 
prising the  universe,  the  atmosphere  being  included  in  the  sky. 
Lightning,  wind,  and  rain  belong  to  the  atmosphere,  solar  and 

1  Rv.  ii.  40 ;  viii.  6,  15  ;  10,  6 
6,  etc. 


90, 


2  Rv.  i.  143,  2 ;  159,  1  ;  160,  1  ; 
iv.  14,  2,  etc. ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upani- 
sad,  iii.  8,  3.  9 ;  Chandogya  Upanisad, 


vn.  4,  2;  viii.  1,  3.  In  the  Aitareya 
Aranyaka,  iii.  1,  2,  and  the  Sankhayana 
Aranyaka,  vii.  3,  it  is  said  that  when 
heavy  and  constant  rain  falls  people 
say,  '  Heaven  and  earth  have  united.' 


Div  ] 


THREEFOLD  DIVISION  OF  HEAVEN 


361 


similar  phenomena  to  the  sky.  In  some  passages3  the  vault 
(ndka)  of  the  sky  is  added  after  the  usual  triad,  and  before  the 
celestial  light  (svar,  jyotis). 

The  threefold  division  of  the  universe  is  reflected  in  a  three- 
fold division  of  the  three  elements — earth,  air,  and  sky.  Thus 
a  highest  (uttama,4  uttara,5  pdrya6),  a  middle,  and  a  lowest 
heaven  are  specified.4  In  the  Atharvaveda7  the  three  heavens 
are  distinguished  as  '  rich  in  water '  (udanvati),  as  pilumati  (of 
uncertain  meaning),  and  as  the  pradyaus,  where  the  Fathers  sit. 
Heaven  is  frequently  called  vyoman  as  well  as  rocana8  (properly 
the  '  luminous  space '  of  heaven),  and  the  dividing  firmament 
which  separates  the  visible  upper  world  from  the  highest 
heaven  is  called,  besides  ndka,  '  vault,'  sdnu,  '  summit,'  vistap, 
*  surface,'  and  prstha,  'ridge,'  and  even  *  ridge  of  the  vault,'9  or 
1  summit  of  the  vault.'10 

Similarly  three  atmospheres  (rajas),  or  oftener  two,  are 
alluded  to,11  but  the  division  here  is  merely  artificial.  In  one 
passage12  six  rajdmsi,  'regions,'  are  referred  to,  the  heavens 
and  the  earths  no  doubt  being  meant.  The  usual  name  for  the 
atmosphere  is  antariksa. 

The  three  earths  are  equally  artificial,  the  origin  of  the  triad 
being  probably  the  use  of  prthivi  in  the  plural 13  to  denote  the 
three  divisions  of  the  universe  (just  as  pitarau,  'two  fathers,' 
denotes  '  father  and  mother  ').14  The  earth  is  called  ksani,  ksd, 
gmd,  or  designated  by  the  epithets  mahl,  '  the  great,'  prthivi  or 
urvl,  'the  broad,'  uttdnd,  'the  extended,'  and  is  regularly  con- 
trasted as  idam,  '  this  world  here,'  with  the  upper  sphere.15 


3  Av.  iv.  14,  3  =  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xvii.  67. 

4  Rv.  v.  60,  6. 

5  Rv.  iv.  26,  6. 

6  Rv.  vi.  40,  5.     In  Rv.  v.  4,  3,  it  is 
called  trtlya. 

7  xviii.  2,  48. 

8  Trlni  or  tri  rocana,  Rv.  i.  102,  8  ; 
149,  4  ;  v.  69,  1,  etc. 

9  Rv.  i.  125,  5.     Cf.  iii.  2,  12. 

10  Rv.  viii.  103,  2.    Cf.  also  ix.  86, 
27. 

11  Rv.  iv.  53,  5;  v.  69,  1.     Cf.  also 
the  references  to  the  '  highest '  atmo- 


sphere, uttama,  ix.  22,  5  ;  par  am  a, 
iii.  30,  2  ;  trtlya,  ix.  74,  6  ;  x.  45,  3  ; 
123,  8.  The  '  lower '  (upara)  or  '  terres- 
trial '  (parthiva)  is  contrasted  with  the 
1  heavenly  '  (divya)  space.  See  i.  62,  5  ; 
iv.  53.  3- 

12  Rv.  i.  164,  6.     Cf.  vii.  87,  5. 

13  Rv.  i.  188,  9.  10  ;  vii.  104,  11. 

14  Cf.  Delbriick,  Altindische  Syntax, 
p.  98 ;  Macdonell,  Sanskrit  Grammar, 
i83c  (p.  158). 

15  Rv.  i.  22,  17;  154,  1,  3;  and 
regularly  in  the  later  Samhitas  and  the 
Brahmanas. 


362  COSMOLOGY  [  Div 

The  shape  of  the  earth  is  compared  with  a  wheel  in  the 
Rigveda,16  and  is  expressly  called  '  circular '  (pari-mandala)  in 
the  Satapatha  Brahmana.17  When  earth  is  conjoined  with 
heaven,  the  two  are  conceived  as  great  bowls  (camva)  turned 
towards  each  other.18  In  the  Aitareya  Aranyaka19  the  two  are 
regarded  as  halves  of  an  egg.  The  distance  of  heaven  from 
the  earth  is  given  by  the  Atharvaveda 20  as  a  thousand  days' 
journey  for  the  sun-bird,  by  the  Aitareya  Brahmana21  as  a 
thousand  days'  journey  for  a  horse,  while  the  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana22  whimsically  estimates  the  distance  as  equivalent 
to  a  thousand  cows  standing  one  on  the  top  of  the  other. 

According  to  Zimmer,23  the  Vedic  poets  conceived  the 
atmosphere  to  be  above  the  earth  in  its  upper  division  only, 
but  below  it  in  its  lower  stratum.  The  evidence,24  however,  for 
the  latter  assumption  is  quite  insufficient.25  The  theory  of 
the  Aitareya  Brahmana26  is  that  the  sun  merely  reverses  its 
bright  side  at  night,  turning  its  light  on  the  stars  and  the  moon 
while  it  retraverses  its  course  to  the  east ;  and  it  has  been 
shown25  that  this  is  probably  the  doctrine  of  the  Rigveda  also.27 
See  also  Surya  and  Candramas.  For  the  Vedic  knowledge 
of  the  planets,  see  Graha. 

There  is  no  geographical  division  of  the  earth  in  Vedic 
literature.  The  Jaiminlya  Upanisad  Brahmana28  states  that 
the  centre  of  the  earth  is  a  span  north  of  the  Plaksa  Praspavana, 
and  that  the  centre  of  the  sky  is  the  constellation  of  the  seven 
Esis,  the  Great  Bear.     For  the  quarters,  see  Dig. 

26  iii.  44,  4.  Speyer's  interpretation 
of  this  passage,  Journal  of  the  Royal 
Asiatic  Society,  1906,  723-727,  is  antici- 
pated and  supplemented  by  Macdonell, 
loc.  cit. 


16  x.  89,  4.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  earth  is  regarded  as  catur-bhrsti, 
'four-cornered,'  in  Rv.  x.  58,  3. 

17  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  9. 

18  Rv.  iii.  55,  20. 

19  iii.  1,  2;  Sankhayana  Aranyaka, 
vii.  3. 

20  x.  8,  i8  =  xiii.  2,  38;  3,  14. 

21  ii.  17.    Cf.  ASvina. 

22  xvi.  8,  6;  in  xxi.  1,  9,  with  the 
alternatives  of  1,000  days  of  the  journey 
of  a  horse,  or  of  the  sun,  or  1,000 
leagues. 

23  Altindisches  Leben,  357,  358. 

24  Rv.  v.  81,  4  ;  vi.  9,  1  ;  vii.  80,  1. 

25  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  10. 


27 


115.  5;  *•  37.  3 


28  iv.  26,  12.  Cf.  Pancavimsa  Brah- 
mana, xxv.  10,  16 ;  Hopkins,  Transac- 
tions of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts 
and  Sciences,  15,  31,  n.  2.  Cf.  Bergaigne, 
Religion  Vedique,  1,  1-3 ;  Wallis,  Cos- 
mology of  the  Rigveda,  1 1 1- 1 17  ;  Zimmer, 
op.  cit.,  357-359;  Macdonell,  op.  cit., 
pp.  8-1 1  ;  Thibaut,  Astronomie,  Astrologie 
und  Mathematik,  5,  6;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  9,  358-364. 


Divodasa  Atitbigva  ]       KING  DIVODASA 


363 


Divodasa  Atithigva  is  one  of  the  leading  princes  of  the 
early  Vedic  age.  He  was  a  son  of  Vadhryasva,1  and  father, 
or  more  probably  grandfather,  of  Sudas,  the  famous  king  of  the 
Trtsu  family,  among  the  Bharatas.  Probably  Pijavana  was 
the  son  and  Sudas  the  grandson.  Divodasa  was  naturally  a 
Bharata,2  and,  like  Sudas,  was  an  opponent  of  the  TurvaSas 
and  Yadus.3  His  great  enemy  was  Sambara,  the  Dasa,  who 
was  apparently  chief  of  a  mountain  people,4  and  whom  he 
repeatedly  defeated.6  He  was  also,  it  seems,  like  his  father 
Vadhryasva,6  an  energetic  supporter  of  the  fire  ritual,  for  Agni 
is  once  called  by  his  name  in  the  Rigveda.7  On  the  other  hand, 
he  was  defeated,  with  Ayu  and  Kutsa,  by  Indra's  aid.  In 
several  passages  he  seems  closely  connected  with  the  singer 
family,  the  Bharadvajas.8 

From  one  passage,9  where  Divodasa  is  said  to  have  fought 
against  the  Panis,  the  Paravatas,  and  Brsaya,  Hillebrandt10 
has  inferred  that  he  was  engaged  in  conflicts  with  the  tribes 
of  Arachosia,  and  interpreting  the  name  as  the  '  heavenly 
Dasa'11  conjectures  that  he  was  himself  a  Dasa.  This  con- 
clusion is  not  probable,  for  the  Sarasvati  on  which  the  battle 
in  question  took  place,  and  which  can  hardly  be  the  Haraqaiti 
of  Arachosia,  would  naturally  designate  the  later  Sarasvati, 
while  the  Paravatas  are  mentioned  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brah- 
mana,12  as   in    the    east,   about    the   Yamuna.      Bergaigne's 


1  Rv.  vi.  61,  1. 

2  Rv.  vi.  16,  4.  5.  19.  For  Sudas  as 
his  descendant,  see  vii.  18,  25,  with 
verse  23,  where  Paijavana  is  an  epithet 
of  Sudas. 

3  As  Atithigva,  Rv.  vii.  19,  8 ;  as 
Divodasa,  ix.  61,  2. 

4  Rv.  i.  130,  7;  ii.  12,  11;  vi.  26, 
5  ;  vii.  18,  20.  Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic 
Mythology,  p.  161. 

5  See  Rv.  i.  112,  14;  116,  18;  119, 
4 ;  130,  7-10 ;  ii.  19,  6 ;  iv.  26,  3 ;  30, 
20;  vi.  26,  3.  5;  43,  1;  47,  21.  22; 
ix.  61,  2. 

6  Rv.  x.  69,  1  et  seq.  Cf.  Ludwig, 
Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  176 ; 
Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  96, 
n.  2. 


7  Daivodasa,  *  worshipped  by  Divo- 
dasa ' :  viii.  103,  2.  Cf.  vi.  16,  5.  19; 
31, 1.  For  the  defeat  by  Indra,  cf.  Rv. 
i.  53,  10;  ii.  14,  7;  vi.  18,  13;  viii.  64, 
2 ;  Bergaigne,  Religion  Vedique,  2,  337, 

344- 

8  Cf.  Rv.  i.  112,  13.  14;  116,  18; 
vi.  16,  5 ;  31,  4 ;  47,  22  et  seq. ;  Panca- 
vimsa Brahmana,  xv.  3,  7  ;  Hillebrandt, 
op.  cit.,  1,  104. 

9  vi.  61,  1  et  seq. 

10  Op.  cit.,  1,  97  et  seq. 

11  This  is  very  improbable.  See 
Bergaigne,  op.  cit.,  2,  209;  Oldenberg, 
Religion  des  Veda,  155 ;  Zeitschrift  der 
Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft, 
49,175;  51.  272. 

12  ix.  4,  11.     See  Paravata. 


364 


ORDEALS 


[  Divodasa  Bhaimaseni 


opinion13  that  Divodasa  and  Atithigva  were  different  people 
cannot  be  supported  in  view  of  the  complete  parallelism  in  the 
acts  of  the  two  persons.14    See  also  Pratardana. 

The  people  of  Divodasa  are  referred  to  in  a  hymn  of  the 
Rigveda.16 


13  Op.  cit.,  2,  342  et  seq. 

14  Compare,  e.g. ,  vii.  19,  8,  with 
ix.  61 ,  2  (opposed  to Turvasa and  Yadu); 
i.  51,  6;  vi.  26,  3,  with  ii.  19,  6; 
vi.  31,  4  (defeat  of  Sambara) ;  and  see 
Hillebrandt,  op.  cit.,  3,  268  ;  Oldenberg, 
Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen 
Gesellschaft,  42,  210  et  seq.  ;  Macdonell, 
op.  cit.,  p.  161. 

15  i.  130,  10  (one  of  the  series  attri- 
buted to  Parucchepa) . 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  126; 
Oldenberg,  Buddha,  406 ;  Ludwig,  op.  cit., 
3,  114,  176;  Grierson,  Journal  of  the 
Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1908,  604,  837; 
Keith,  ibid.,  831  et  seq.  ;  1138  et  seq. 
Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v., 
distinguishes  two  Divodasas,  one  being 
the  ancestor  or  father  of  Sudas,  the 
other  the  enemy  of  Sambara.  Divodasa 
is  not  mentioned  in  Mandalas,  iii,  v, 
viii,  x. 


Divo-dasa  Bhaima-seni  ('  descendant  of  Bhlmasena ')  is 
mentioned  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita1  as  a  contemporary  of 
Aruni. 

1  vii.  1,  8.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  3,  472. 

Divya,  '  ordeal,'  is  a  term  not  found  until  the  later  literature, 
but  several  references  to  the  practice  of  ordeals  have  been  seen 
in  Vedic  literature.  The  fire  ordeal  seen  in  the  Atharvaveda x 
by  Schlagintweit,2  Weber,3  Ludwig,4  Zimmer,5  and  others,  has 
been  disproved  by  Grill,6  Bloomfield,7  and  Whitney.8  But  such 
an  ordeal  appears  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,9  and  an  ordeal 
with  a  glowing  axe10  occurs  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad  as 
applied  in  an  accusation  of  theft.  Geldner11  suggests  that  this 
usage  is  referred  to  even  in  the  Rigveda,12  but  this  is  most 
improbable.13      Ludwig14  and   Griffith15   discover   in   another 


1  ii.  12. 

2  Die  Gottesuriheile  der  Indier,  13  et  seq. 

3  Indische  Studien,  13,  768. 

*  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  445. 

5  Altindisches  Leben,  184. 

6  Hundert  Lieder,2  45,  87. 

7  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  13,  ccxxi ;  American  Journal  of 
Philology,  11,  334,  335  ;  Hymns  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  294. 


54- 


8  Translation   of  the  Atharvaveda, 

9  xiv.  6,  6. 

10  Chandogya  Upanisad,  vi.  16. 

11  Vedische  Studien,  2,  159. 

12  iii.  53,  22. 

13  Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  254. 

14  Op.  cit.,  4,  44. 

15  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  1,  210. 


Dii] 


THE  STAR  SIRIUS— CARDINAL  POINTS 


365 


passage  of  the  Rigveda16  references  to  Dirghatamas'  having 
been  subjected  to  the  fire  and  water  ordeals,  but  this  view 
cannot  be  supported.  According  to  Weber,17  the  '  balance ' 
ordeal  is  referred  to  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,18  but  see  Tula. 


16  i.  158,  4  et  seq. 

17  Indische  Streifen,  1,  21  ;  2,  363. 
is  xi.  2,  7,  33. 

Cf.  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  145 ;  Zeit- 


schrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen 
Gesellschaft,  44,  347,  348  ;  Stenzler, 
ibid.,  9,  669  et  seq. 


Divya  Svan,  the  '  divine  dog,'  in  one  passage  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda1  appears  to  denote  Canis  major  or  Sirius.  But  Bloom- 
field2  thinks  that  the  two  divine  dogs  referred  to  in  the 
Maitrayani  Samhita3  and  the  Taittirlya  Brahmana4  are  the  sun 
and  moon,  and  that  the  sun  is  meant  in  the  Atharvaveda. 


1  vi.  80,  I. 

2  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  15,  163  ;  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 500,  501. 

3  i.  6,  9. 


4  i.  1,  2,  4-6. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  353  ; 
Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharva 
veda,  341. 


Dis,  *  direction,'  is  a  word  very  frequently  used  in  the  Rigveda 
and  later1  to  denote  a  quarter  of  the  sky.  As  a  general  rule, 
four  quarters  are  mentioned — east,  south,  west,  north.2  But 
the  number  of  the  '  directions '  is  sometimes  increased  up  to 
ten  by  the  addition  to  these  four  of  various  others.  The  five 
points  include  the  zenith  (urdhvd)  ;3  the  six,  the  zenith  and 
the  nadir  (urdhvd  and  avact)  ;4  the  seven,  the  zenith,  the 
ground  on  which  one  stands  (dhruva),  and  the  air  (antariksa) 
between  these  two  (vyadhva)  ;6  the  eight  include  the  inter- 
mediate quarters  (S.E.,  S.W.,  N.E.,  N.W.)  ;6  the  nine  add  to 
these  the   zenith  ;7  the  ten,  zenith  and  nadir.8     The  number 


1  Rv.  i.  124,  3;  183,  5;  iii.  30,  12; 
Av.  iii.  31,  4  ;  xi.  2,  12,  etc. 

2  Rv.  vii.  72,  5;  x.  36,  14;  42,  11; 
Av.  xv.  2,  1  et  seq.,  etc. 

3  Taittirlya  Samhita,  vii.  1,  15  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  8,  9. 

4  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  12,  8; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxii.  24 ;  Brhad- 
aranyaka  Upanisad,  iv.  2,  4. 

5  Rv.    ix.    114,    3 ;    Av.    iv.  40,    1  ; 


Satapatha  Brahmana,   vii.    4,    1,  20 ; 
ix.  5,  2,  8  ;  Taittirlya  Aranyaka,  i.  7. 
f  6  Taittiriya    Samhita,    vii,    1,     15  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  8,  1,  40,  etc. 

7  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xvi. 
28,  2. 

8  Rv.  i.  164,  14;  viii.  101,  13;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  vi.  2,  2,  34 ;  viii.  4, 
2,  13,  etc. 


366        LEGENDS  OF  THE  SEER  DIRGHATAMAS    [  Dirghatamas 


five  is  sometimes  made  up  by  the  ground  beneath  the  observer's 
feet  (dhruva),9  and  the  number  six  by  that  point  (dhruva)  and 
the  zenith  (urdhva)  ;10  the  '  lofty '  (brhatl) u  sometimes  taking 
the  place  of  the  '  vertical '  (urdhva). 


9  Av.  viii.  g,  15;  xiii.  3,  6;  xv.  14, 
1-5  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  ix.  32  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  ix.  4,  3,  to,  and 
cf.  Dhruva. 

10  Av.  iii.  27,  1  ;  iv.  14,  8 ;  xii.  3, 
55 ;  xv.  4,  1  et  seq.  ;  xviii.  3,  34 ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  14,  etc.  Cf. 
Rv.  x,  14,  16. 


11  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xiv.  13 ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xvii.  8. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  AUindisches  Leben,  359  ; 
Weber,  Proceedings  of  the  Berlin  Academy, 

1895,   846;    Indische  Studien,    17,  293, 

294 ;  18,  153  ;  St.  Petersburg  Dic- 
tionary, s.v. 


Dirgfha-tamas  ('  long  darkness ')  Mamateya  ('  son  of  Mamata ') 
Aucathya  ('  son  of  Ucatha ')  is  mentioned  as  a  singer  in  one 
hymn  of  the  Rigveda,1  and  is  referred  to  in  several  passages  2 
by  his  metronymic,  Mamateya,  alone.  He  is  said,  both  in  the 
Rigveda1  and  in  the  Sarikhayana  Aranyaka,3  to  have  attained 
the  tenth  decade  of  life.  In  the  Aitareya  Brahmana4  he 
appears  as  the  priest  of  Bharata.  The  Brhaddevata5  contains 
a  preposterous  legend  made  up  of  fragments  of  the  Rigveda,6 
according  to  which  Dirghatamas  was  born  blind,  but  recovered 
his  sight ;  in  old  age  he  was  thrown  into  a  river  by  his  servants, 
one  of  whom,  Traitana,  attacked  him,  but  killed  himself 
instead.  Carried  down  by  the  stream,  he  was  cast  up  in  the 
Ahga  country,  where  he  married  Usij,  a  slave  girl,  and  begot 
Kaksivant.  The  two  legends  here  combined  are  not  even  con- 
sistent, for  the  second  ignores  Dirghatamas'  recovery  of  sight. 
To  attach  any  historical  importance  to  them,  as  does  Pargiter,7 
would  seem  to  be  unwise. 


1  i.  158,  1.  6. 

2  i.  147,  3;  152,  6;  iv.  4,  13.  In 
viii.  9,  10,  Dirghatamas  is  mentioned 
with  Kaksivant,  but  not  as  a  relative. 

3  ii.  17;  Keith,  Sahkhay ana  Ar any aha, 
14. 

4  viii.  23. 

6  iv.  11-15;  21-25,  with  Macdonell's 
notes. 
6  From  i.  140-164,  which  hymns  are 


traditionally  attributed  to  Dirghatamas. 
But  see  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der 
Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft, 
42,  221. 

7  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society, 
1910,  44. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig 
veda,  3,  164,  165  ;  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts, 
i2,  226,  232,  247,  268,  279. 


Dirgharanya]    NAMES— LONGEVITY— FOREST  TRACTS 


367 


Dirgha-nitha  appears  to  be  the  proper  name  of  a  sacrificer 
in  one  hymn  of  the  Rigveda.1 


1  viii.  50,  10.     Cf.  Roth,  St.  Peters- 
burg Dictionary,  s.v.     Ludwig  under- 


stands the  word  as  an  adjective,  mean- 
ing '  of  long  duration.' 


DiFgha-gravas  ('  far-famed ')  is  the  name  of  a  royal  seer  who, 
according  to  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,1  having  been  banished 
from  his  kingdom,  and  suffering  from  actual  hunger,  '  saw '  a 
certain  Saman  (chant),  and  thus  obtained  food.  In  one  passage 
of  the  Rigveda2  an  Ausija,3  a  merchant  {vanij),  is  mentioned  as 
dirgha-sravas,  which  may  be  a  proper  name,  as  Sayana  holds, 
or  an  adjective,  as  it  is  understood  by  Roth.4 


*  xv.  3,  25. 

2  i.  112,  11. 

3  A  metronymic,  *  descendant  of 
Usij,'  according  to  Sayana  ;  but  an 
adjective,  meaning  « desirous,'  accord- 


ing to  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dic- 
tionary, s.v. 

4  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  114. 


Dirghapsas,  used  in  the  Rigveda1  as  an  epithet  of  a  chariot, 
means,  according  to  Roth,2  '  having  a  long  front  part.' 


1  i.  122,  15. 

2  St.     Petersburg 


Dictionary,     s.v. 


Cf. 
312. 


Pischel,      Vedische      Studien,      1, 


Dirghayutva,  'longevity,'  is  a  constant  object  of  the  prayers 
of  the  Vedic  Indians,1  and  length  of  life  is  never  deprecated  in 
the  Samhitas  and  Brahmanas,  while  the  Atharvaveda2  is  full 
of  spells  intended  to  prolong  existence  {ayusyani). 


1  Rv.  x.  62,  2 ;  Av.  i.  22,  2,  etc. ; 
Vafasaneyi  Samhita,  xviii.  6 ;  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,  i.  9,  1,  13,  etc.  So 
the  adjective  dlrghayus,  Rv.  iv.  15,  9. 
10  ;  x.  85,  39 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xii.  100,  etc.  The  Brahmanas  regularly 
express  the  reward  for  ritual  actions 
by  the  phrase  sarvam  ayur  eti,  '  he  lives 


all  his  days.'  The  ideal  of  life  is  100 
years.  See  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  17, 
193 ;  Festgruss  an  Roth,  137 ;  Lanman, 
Sanskrit  Reader,  384. 

2  ii.  13  ;  28 ;  29 ;  vii.  32,  and  many 
other  hymns.  See  Bloomfield,  Hymns 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  49  et  seq.  ;  Atharva- 
veda, 63-65. 


Dirgharanya,  'wide  tract  of  forest,'  in  the  Aitareya1  and 
Satapatha2  Brahmanas  refers  to  the  extensive  jungles  which 


1  iii.  44  ;  vi.  23. 


2  xiii.  3,  7,  10. 


368 


DICE— CO  W—DR  UM—DOOR 


[Div 


must  clearly  then  have  covered  Northern  India.  In  one  of  the 
Aitareya  passages3  it  is  said  that  in  the  east  the  villages  are 
close  together  and  frequent,  while  in  the  west  there  are  forests. 


Div  (fern.)  in  the  Rigveda1  and  the  Atharvaveda2  denotes 
the  '  game  of  dice.'     See  Aksa. 


x.  27,  17. 


vii.  50.  9  ;  109,  5. 


Dugfha,  *  yielding  milk,'  denotes  'cow'  in  a  few  passages  in 
the  Samhitas.1 

1  Rv.  viii.  50,  3 ;  x.  67,  1 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxviii.  16.  39,  etc. 


Dundubhi,  apparently  an  onomatopoetic  word,  means  '  drum,' 
as  used  in  both  war  and  peace.  It  is  often  mentioned  from 
the  Rigveda1  onwards.2  A  special  sort  of  drum  was  the  '  earth 
drum,'  made  by  digging  a  hole  in  the  ground  and  covering  it 
with  a  hide.  This  was  employed  in  the  Mahavrata,  a  rite 
performed  at  the  winter  solstice,  for  the  purpose  of  driving 
away  influences  hostile  to  the  return  of  the  sun.3  A  '  drum- 
beater'  is  included  in  the  list  of  sacrificial  victims  at  the 
Purusamedha  or  'human  sacrifice.'4 


1  i.  28,  5;  vi.  47,  29.  31. 

2  Av.  v.  20,  1  et  seq.  ;  21,  7;  31,  7; 
vi.  38,  4 ;  xii.  1,  41 ;  Taittiriya  Brah- 
mana, i.  3,  6,  2  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
v.  1,  5,  6;  dundubhya,  'connected  with 
the  drum,'    Vajasaneyi   Samhita,  xvi. 

35- 

3  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxxiv.  5  (Indische 
Studien,  3,  477)  ;  Sankhayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  xvii.  14,  11 ;  Aitareya  Aranyaka, 


v.  1,  5,  with  Keith's  notes ;  Hillebrandt, 
Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  148,  n.  2;  Fried- 
laender,  Sankhayana  Aranyaka,  29,  45. 

4  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  13,  1 
(not  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita).  Cf. 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  4,  6. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  289; 
and  for  the  epic  drum  in  battle, 
Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  13,  318. 


Dur  is  used  several  times  in  the  Rigveda1  to  denote  'door,' 
both  literally  and  metaphorically. 


1  i.  68,  10 ;  113,  4  ;  121,  4 ;  188,  5 ;  ii.  2,  7,  etc. 


Durgaha]  HOME— FORT— KING  DURGAHA  369 

Dupona  is  used  in  the  Rigveda,1  and  sometimes  later,2  to 
denote  *  home,'  both  literally  and  metaphorically.     See  Grha. 

1  iii.  1,  18;  25,  5;  iv.  13,  1;  v.  76,   1       2  Av.  vii.  17,  3  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
4,  etc.  I  xxxiii.  72,  etc. 


Dur-ga,  'hard  to  approach,'  occurs  in  the  Rigveda  as  a 
neuter  substantive  only,  sometimes  in  the  sense  of  '  fort,' 
'stronghold.'1    Cf.  Pup. 

1  v.  34,  7 ;  vii.  25,  2. 


Dup-g"aha  is  mentioned  in  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda,1  where 
his  grandsons  are  lauded  for  their  generosity,  though  Sayana 
renders  the  word  adjectivally.2  In  another  passage  of  the 
Rigveda,3  however,  Sayana  sees  in  the  epithet  Daurgaha  a 
description  of  Pupukutsa  as  Durgaha's  son,  who  was  either 
captured  by  the  enemy  or  slain,  and  whose  wife,  Pupukutsani, 
then  obtained  a  son,  Tpasadasyu,  to  restore  the  line ;  he  also 
quotes  a  story,  not  found  in  the  Brhaddevata,4  to  support  this 
interpretation.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Satapatha  Brahmana6 
seems  to  take  Daurgaha  as  meaning  a  horse.  Sieg6  thinks 
that  the  same  sense  should  be  adopted  in  the  Rigveda  passage, 
which  he  interprets  as  referring  to  the  sacrifice  of  a  horse, 
Daurgaha,  by  King  Purukutsa  to  gain  a  son ;  he  also  sees  in 
Dadhikravan,  with  Pischel7  and  Ludwig,8  a  real  horse,  the 
charger  of  Trasadasyu.  The  Satapatha  Brahmana's  inter- 
pretation of  Daurgaha  is,  however,  doubtful,  and  cannot  be 
regarded  as  receiving  support  from  the  case  of  Dadhikravan, 
who  was  probably  a  divinity,  and  not  a  real  horse  at  all.9 


1  viii.  65,  12. 

2  '  Plunged  in  distress '  (duhkham 
gahamana). 

3  iv.  42,  8. 

4  As  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v.,  says  it  is. 

5  xiii.  5,  4,  5.  According  to  the 
Naighantuka  (i.  14),  Daurgaha  is  a 
synonym  of  '  horse. ' 

VOL.  I.  24 


6  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  96-102. 

7  Vedische  Studien,  i,  124. 

8  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  4,  79. 
Cf.  Oldenberg,  Religion  des  Veda,  71. 

9  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  pp.  148, 
149. 

Cf.    Ludwig,   op.   cit.,   3,    163,    174; 
Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  301,  302. 


37o 


DEMON— DWELLING— BOAR— LEPROSY    [  Durnanu 


Dur-naman,  '  of  evil  name,'  is  the  designation  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  the  Atharvaveda2  of  a  demon  causing  disease,  or  the 
disease  itself.  The  Nirukta8  explains  the  words  as  meaning 
a  'worm,'  an  interpretation  which  accords  with  the  wide- 
spread belief  in  disease-causing  worms.4  Later  Durnaman 
denotes  'haemorrhoids.'5 


1  X.   l62,  2. 

2  ii.  25,  2 ;  viii.  6,  1  et  seq.  ;  xvi.  6,  7 ; 
xix.  36,  1  et  seq.  So  also  the  feminine 
Durnamni,  iv.  17,  5  ;  xix.  36,  6. 


6  vi.  12. 

4  Bloomfield,  Atharvaveda,  61  ;  Hymns 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  314  et  seq.,  351. 
8  Susruta,  x,  177,  10,  etc. 


Dur-mukha,  'ugly-faced,'  is  the  name,  in  the  Aitareya 
Brahmana,1  of  a  Pancala,  that  is,  Pancala  king,  who  conquered 
the  world,  and  whose  priest  was  Brhaduktha. 

1  viii.  23.     The  reading  may  be  a-raja,  '  not  a  king,'  but  this  is  not  necessary. 

Durya,  '  belonging  to  the  door  or  house,'  appears  in  several 
passages  of  the  Samhitas1  as  a  plural  substantive  denoting  the 
1  door-posts,'  or  more  generally  '  dwelling.' 

1  Masculine  plural,  Rv.  i.  91,  19;  1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  i.  11;  feminine 
x.  40,  12 ;  Taittirlya  Samhita,  i.  6,  3,  1  ;    |  plural,  Rv.  iv.  1, 9. 18  ;  2,  12  ;  vii.  1,114 

Duryona  occurs  a  few  times  in  the  Rigveda1  in  the  sense 
of '  house.' 

1  i.  174,  7 ;  v.  29,  10 ;  32,  8. 


Dur-varaha  probably  denotes  a  '  wild  boar.'  It  is  mentioned 
in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  and  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad 
Brahmana.2 


xii.  4,  1,  4. 


i.  51,  4  (Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  23,  332). 


Dula.     See  Naksatra  (Krttikas). 


Dug-carman,  'afflicted  with  a  skin  disease,'  occurs  in  the 
Taittirlya  Samhita1  and  Brahmana.2  The  disease  meant  is 
probably  leprosy,  the  usual  name  of  which  is  Kilasa.3 

Taittirlya    Aranyaka,, 


1  "•  1.  4.  3;  5.  1.  7- 

2  i.  7,  8,  3. 

8  PancavimSa  Brahmana,  xiv.  3,  17 ; 


xxin.    16,     11 

v.  4,  12. 


Duta] 


NAMES— DA  UGHTER— MESSENGER 


37 1 


Duh-gasu  is  possibly  a  proper  name  in  the  Rigveda,1  and 
would  then  denote  an  enemy  of  KuruSravana.  Ludwig2  thinks 
that  he  was  a  Pargu  or  Persian,  but  this  is  most  improbable, 
and  the  word  may  simply  be  an  adjective  meaning  '  malignant.' 

1  x.  33,  1.  2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  165. 


Duh-gima  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1  as  a  generous  donor, 
his  patronymic  perhaps  being  Tanva.2 


x.  93,  14. 

x.  93. 15- 


Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  166. 


Dus-taritu,  '  hard  to  defeat,'  is  the  name  of  a  king  of  the 
Srnjayas,  who  was  deposed  from  a  principality  that  had 
existed  for  ten  generations,  but  was  re-instated  by  Cakra 
Sthapati  in  spite  of  the  resistance  of  Balhika  Pratipiya, 
according  to  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.1 

1  xii.  9,  3,  1  et  seq.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  205  207. 

Duh-santa.    See  Dauhsanti. 


Duhitr  is  the  regular  designation  of  *  daughter '  from  the 
Rigveda  onwards.1  The  word  appears  to  be  derived  from 
duh,  '  milk,'  in  the  sense  of  one  who  nourishes  a  child,  rather 
than  as  the  '  milker '  of  the  primitive  family  or  the  suckling.2 
See  also  Stri,  Pati,  Pitr,  Bhratr. 


1  Rv.  viii.  101,  15;  x.  17,  1;  40,  5; 
61,  5.  7;  Av.  ii.  14,  2;  vi.  100,  3; 
vii.  12,  1;  x.  1,  25;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, i.  7,  4,  1 ;  8,  1,  8,  etc. 


2  Delbriick,  Die  indogermanischen  Ver- 
wandtschaftsnamen,  454. 


Duta,  '  messenger'  or  *  envoy,'  is  found  several  times  in  the 
Rigveda1  and  later,2  used  metaphorically.  The  Suta  seems  to 
have  performed  the  duties  later  assigned  to  the  Duta. 


1  iii.  3,  2  ;  vi. 


4  ;  vn.  3,  3  ;  x.  14, 


2  Av.  viii.  8,  10,  etc. ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  iii.  5,  1,  6 ;  Kausitaki 
Upanisad,    ii.    1,   etc.     The   feminine 


form  Duti  is  found  in  Rv.  x.  108,  2.  3, 
in  the  story  of  Sarama's  mission  to  the 
Panis.  Dutya,  *  mission, '  occurs  in 
Rv.  i.  12,  4;  161,  1  ;  iv.  7,  8 ;  8,  4, 
etc. 

24—2 


372      A  GRASS— GARMENT— RHEUM— LEATHER  BAG    [  Durva 

Durva,  a  species  of  grass  (Panicum  dactylon),  is  mentioned 
frequently  from  the  Rigveda1  onwards.2  It  grew  in  damp 
ground.3  A  simile  occurring  in  the  Rigveda4  seems  to  indicate 
that  the  ears  lay  horizontal  with  the  stem.     Cf.  Pakadurva. 


i  x.  16,  13;  134.5;  142,  8. 

2  Taittirlya  Samhita,  iv.  2,  9,  2  ; 
v.  2,  8,  3  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xiii.  20  ; 
Aitareya   Brahmana,  viii.  5.  8 ;  Sata- 


patha  Brahmana,  iv.  5,  10,  5  ;  vii.  4,  2, 
10.  12,  etc. 

3  Rv.  x.  16,  13  ;  142,  8. 

4  x.  134,  5. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  70. 


Dur6a,  denoting  some  kind  of  garment,  is  mentioned  twice 
in  the  Atharvaveda.1  Weber2  thinks  that  it  was  worn  by  the 
aborigines. 


1  iv.  7,  6;  viii.  6,  11. 


2  Indische  Studien,  18,  29. 


Duslka,  *  rheum  of  the  eyes,'  is  mentioned  as  a  disease  h 
the  Atharvaveda1  and  later.2 

1  xvi.  6,  8.  I  saneyi    Samhita,    xxv.    9 ;    Satapatha 

2  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxxiv.  12 ;  Vaja-  |  Brahmana,  iii.  1,  3,  10. 


Drdha-cyut  Agfasti  ('  descendant  of  Agastya ')  is  mentionec 
in  the  Jaiminiya  Brahmana1  as  having  been  Udga.tr  priest  at 
the  Sattra  ('  sacrificial  session  ')  of  the  Vibhinduklyas. 

1  iii.  233  {Journal  of  the  American  of  the  patronymic  is  Agastya)  as  the 
Oriental  Society,  18,  38).  He  is  given  author  of  Rv.  ix.  25.  Cf.  Indische 
in   the  Anukramani  (where  the  form       Studien,  3,  219. 


Drdha-jayanta.     See  VipaScit  and  VaipaScita. 


1.  Drti,  a  *  leather  bag  to  hold  fluids,'  is  frequently  mentionec 
in  the  Rigveda1  and  later.2     In  one  passage3  it  is  called  dhmata, 
'  inflated,'  the  man  afflicted  with  dropsy  being  compared  with 
such  a  bag.     Milk  (Ksira)  and  intoxicating  liquor  (Sura)  are 
mentioned  as  kept  in  bags.4 


1  i.  191,  10;  iv.  51,  1.  3 ;  v.  83, 


vi.   48,    18 ;    103,    2 ;    viii.   5,    19 ;    9, 
18. 

2  Av.  vii.  18,  1  ;  Taittirlya  Sam- 
hita, i.  8,  19,  1 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xxvi.  18.  19;  Taittirlya  Brahmana,  i.  8, 


3,  4  ;  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  v.  10,  2, 
etc. 

3  Rv.  vii.  89,  2.    Cf.  Hopkins,  Journal 
of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  20,  30. 

4  Pancavimsa    Brahmana,    xiv.    n, 
26  ;  xvi.  13,  13. 


Dr§ad  ] 


NA  MES— MILLSTONE 


373 


2.  Drti  Aindrota  ('  descendant  of  Indrota  ')  is  mentioned  in 
the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana1  as  a  contemporary  of  Abhipratarin 
Kaksaseni  and  as  a  pupil  of  Indrota  Daivapa  in  a  Vamsa  (list 
of  teachers)  in  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana.2  Possibly 
the  same  Drti  is  meant  in  the  compound  Drti-Vatavantau, 
which  is  found  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.3  The  former  is 
here  said  to  have  continued,  after  the  Mahavrata  was  over,  the 
sacrificial  session  in  which  both  had  been  engaged,  with  the 
result  that  his  descendants  prospered  more  than  the  Vatavatas. 


1  xiv.  i,  i2. 15. 

2  iii.  40,  2. 

3  xxv.  3,  6.  So  a  Sattra  of  a  year's 
duration  is  later  called  Drti-vatavator 
ay  ana,  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xxiv.  4, 
16 ;  6,  25 ;   Asvalayana  Srauta  Sutra, 


xii.  3;  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
xiii.  23,  1  ;  Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
x.  10,  7. 

Cf.  Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the  Con- 
necticut Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15, 
52,  53- 


Dppta-balaki  Gargya  ('  descendant  of  Gargra ')  is  the  name  of 
a  teacher  who  is  mentioned  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad 
(ii.  1,  1)  as  a  contemporary  of  Ajatagatru  of  Kaii. 


Drbhika  is  the  name  of  a  man1  or  a  demon,2  who,  according 
to  the  Rigveda,3  was  slain  by  Indra. 


1  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  152,  207,  who  compares  the 
Derbikes ;  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology, 
p.  162. 


2  Grassmann,  Worterbuch,  s.v. ;  Roth, 
St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  ; 
Geldner,  Rigveda,  Glossar,  85. 

3  ii.  14,  3. 


Dr&ina  Bharg-ava  ('  descendant  of  Bhrgu  ')  is  mentioned  as 
a  seer  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita.1 

1  xvi.  8.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  3,  459. 


Drsad  appears  in  the  Rigveda1  and  Atharvaveda2  to  denote 
not  a  millstone,3  but  merely  a  stone  used  to  pound  grain,  which 
was  placed  on  another  stone  as  a  support.     When  used  later4 


1  vii.  104,  22  ;  via.  72,  4. 

2  ii.  31,  1 ;  v.  23,  8. 

3  Roth,   St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v. ;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  269. 


4  Taittirlya  Samhita,  i.  6,  8,  3  ;  9,  3  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  X,  1,22;  ii.  6 
1,  9,  etc. 


374 


THE  RIVER  DRSADVATI— NAMES        [  Drsadvati 


in  connexion  with  Upala,  the  lower  and  the  upper  millstone,  or 
mortar  and  pestle  may  be  meant ;  but  this  is  not  certain. 
Eggeling5  renders  them  as  the  large  and  small  millstones.  See 
also  Upara  and  Upala. 

5  Sacred  Boohs  of   the  East,    12,    11   I   guished    from    '  mortar    and    pestle,' 
(drsad  -  upale,   which    are    here   distin-   |   ulukhala-musale). 

Cf.  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  1,  108,  109. 


Drsadvati,  '  stony,'  is  the  name  of  a  river  which  flows  into 
the  Sarasvati  after  running  for  a  time  parallel  to  it.  It  is 
mentioned  in  the  Rigveda,1  along  with  the  Sarasvati  and  the 
Apaya,  as  the  scene  of  action  of  the  Bharata  princes.  In  the 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana2  and  later3  the  Drsadvati  and  the 
Sarasvati  are  the  scene  of  special  sacrifices.  In  Manu4  these 
two  rivers  form  the  western  boundary  of  the  Middle  Country. 


1  m.  23,  4. 

2  xxv.  10.  13. 

3  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xxiv.  6,  6. 
38 ;  Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  x.  19,  4. 

*  ii.  17. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  18; 
Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  34  ;  Indian 
Literature,  67,  102 ;  Macdonell,  Vedic 
Mythology,  p.  87. 


Drsta.     See  Adrsta. 


Devaka  Manyamana  ('  descendant  of  Manyamana ')  appears 
in  the  Rigveda1  as  an  opponent  of  the  Trtsus,  and  as  connected 
with  Sambara.  Possibly,  however,  as  Grassmann  suggests, 
the  words  should  be  understood  as  denoting  Sambara,  '  who 
deemed  himself  a  god,'  devaka  being  used  contemptuously.2 


vii.    18,    20    (devakam    cin    manya- 


2  Cf.  Rv.  ii.  11,  2  (amartyam  cid  dasam 
manyamanam). 


Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  173. 


Devakl-putra,  *  son  of  Devaki,'  is  the  metronymic  of  Krsna 
in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad.1  According  to  the  Epic,2  a 
Devaka  was  father  of  Devaki,  Kysna's  mother ;  the  St.  Peters- 
burg Dictionary  suggests  that  he  was  the  '  king  of  the  Gandh- 
arvas',  also  referred  to  in  the  Epic.3 

1  iii.  17,  6.  2  Mahabharata,  i.  4480  ;  v.  80,  etc.  3  Ibid.,  i.  2704. 


Devabhaga  ]    NAMES— DICEBOARD— LUNAR  MANSIONS         375 

Deva-jana-vidya,  '  knowledge  of  divine  beings,'  is  one  of  the 
sciences  enumerated  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  and  the 
Chandogya  Upanisad.2 


1  xiii.  4,  3,  10.     Cf,  x.  5,  2,  20. 


vn.  1,  2.  4;  2,  1 ;  7,  1, 


Deva-taras Syavasayana  KaSyapa  ('descendant  of  Kasyapa') 
is  mentioned  in  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana1  as  a  pupil 
of  RgyaSrhg-a.  In  the  Vamsa  Brahmana,2  as  Savasayana,  he  is 
a  pupil  of  his  father  Savas,  who  again  was  a  pupil  of  Kasyapa. 

1  iii.  40,  2.  2  Indische  Studien,  4,  373. 


Devatya  occurs  in  the  text  of  the  Atharvaveda,1  where  it 
must,  if  the  reading  is  correct,  denote  some  animal.2  But  the 
reading  should  no  doubt  be  rohim-devatyas,  '  having  the  red  one 
as  deity.'3 


1  i-  22,  3. 

2  Roth,  St.    Petersburg  Dictionary, 


3  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 23. 


Devana  is  mentioned  once  in  the  Rigveda1  in  connexion  with 
dicing.  The  word  must  designate  the  place  on  which  the  dice 
are  thrown  (elsewhere  called  Adhidevana),  and  it  is  so  explained 
by  Durga  in  his  commentary  on  the  Nirukta.2 


1  x.  43,  5. 


Cf.  Liiders,  Das  Wiirfelspiel  im  alten 
Indien,  14. 


Deva-naksatra,  '  asterism  of  the  gods,'  is  the  name  applied 
in  the  Taittinya  Brahmana1  to  the  first  fourteen  lunar  mansions, 
which  are  said  to  be  south,  while  the  others  are  called  Yama- 
naksatra,  '  asterisms  of  Yama,'  and  are  said  to  be  north.  See 
Naksatra. 

1  i.  5,  2,  6.  7.     Cf.  Weber,  Naxatra,  2,  309,  310. 


Deva-bhagra    Srautarsa    is    mentioned    in    the    Satapatha 
Brahmana1  as  the  Purohita,  or  'domestic  priest,'  of  both  the 

1  ii.  4,   4,   5.     This  passage  is  mis-   I  Weber,    Indische    Studien,    2,    9,    n.  ; 
quoted  by  Sayana  on  Rv.  i.  81,  3.     See  I   Geldner,  Vedische  Studien,  3,  152. 


376  NAMES  [  Devamalimluc 

Sriijayas  and  the  Kurus.  In  the  Aitareya  Brahmana2  he  is 
said  to  have  taught  Girija  Babhravya  the  science  of  the 
dissection  of  the  sacrificial  animal  (pa&or  vibhakti).  In  the 
Taittiriya  Brahmana3  he  is  an  authority  on  the  Savitra  Agni. 

2  vii.  i.  3  iii.  10,  9,  11. 

Deva-malimluc,  '  robber  of  the  gods,'  is  the  epithet  of 
Rahasya,1  who  is  said  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana2  to  have 
slain  the  pious  Vaikhanasas  at  Munimarana  (*  saint's  death  '). 
He  was  apparently  an  Asura,  but  may  have  been  a  real  person. 

1  Or  Rahasyu.  1   of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and 

2  xiv.  4,  7.    Cf.  Hopkins,  Transactions  \   Sciences,  15,  51,  52. 

Deva-muni,  'divine  saint,'  is  the  epithet  of  Tura  in  the 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana  (xxv.  14,  5).  The  name  is  given  in  the 
AnukramanI  to  the  author  of  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda  (x.  146). 

Deva-rajan  apparently  denotes  a  king  of  Brahminical  descent 
in  the  phrase  '  Samans  of  Devarajans '  in  the  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana  (xviii.  10,  5).     Cf.  Rajanyarsi  and  Varna. 

Deva-rata  ('  god-given ')  VaiSvamitra  ('  descendant  of  ViSva- 
mitra ')  is  the  name  given  to  Sunahsepa  after  his  adoption  by 
Visvamitra  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana.1 

1  vii.  17.     Cf.  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  27. 

Devala  is  mentioned  as  a  Esi  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita 
(xxii.  11).     See  also  Daivala. 

Devavant  is  mentioned  in  a  Danastuti  ('  Praise  of  Gifts  ')  in 
the  Rigveda1  as  the  ancestor  of  Sudas,  apparently  his  grand- 
father; or  if  Pijavana  be  accepted  as  Sudas'  father,  and 
Divodasa  as  his  grandfather,  then  his  great-great-grandfather, 
and  father  of  Vadhryagva.  The  succession  in  the  latter  case 
would  then  be  Devavant,  Vadhryasva,  Divodasa,  Pijavana, 
Sudas. 

1  vii.   18,  22.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,   171 ;   Geldner, 
Vedische  Studien,  2,  138. 


Devapi  Ar§ti§ena  J    NAMES  OF  PRINCES  AND  SEERS  377 

Deva-vata  ('  desired  of  the  gods ')  is  the  name  of  a  Bharata 
prince  in  the  Rigveda,1  where  he  is  mentioned  as  sacrificing  on 
the  Drsadvati,  Sarasvati,  and  Apaya. 

1  iii.  23,  2.     Cf.  Oldenberg,  Buddha,  409 ;  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  2,  218. 

Deva-vidya,  '  knowledge  of  the  gods,'  is  one  of  the  sciences 
enumerated  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad  (vii.  1,  2,4;  2,  1 ;  7,  1). 

Deva-sravas  is  the  name  of  a  Bharata  prince  who  with 
Devayata  appears  as  a  sacrificer  on  the  Drsadvati,  Sarasvati, 
and  Apaya  in  the  Rigveda.1 

1  iii.  23,  2.  3.  In  the  Anukramani  he  is  called  a  son  of  Yama,  and  has  a 
hymn,  x.  17,  ascribed  to  him. 

Devatithi  Kanva  {■  descendant  of  Kanva ')  is  mentioned  in 
the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana1  as  the  seer  of  a  Saman  (chant)  by 
which  he  turned  pumpkins  into  cows  for  himself  and  his  son 
when  they  were  starving  in  the  desert,  whither  they  had  been 
driven  by  rivals.  He  is  also  the  reputed  author  of  a  hymn 
of  the  Rigveda.2 

1  ix.  2,  19.  j  necticut  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15, 

8  viii.  4.  61. 

Cf.  Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the  Con-   \ 

Devapi  Arstisena  ('  descendant  of  Rstisena')  is  mentioned 
in  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda1  and  in  the  Nirukta.2  According  to 
the  latter  source  there  were  two  brothers,  Devapi  and  Santanu, 
princes  of  the  Kurus.  The  elder  was  Devapi,  but  Santanu  got 
himself  anointed  king,  whereupon  no  rain  fell  for  twelve  years. 
The  drought  being  attributed  by  the  Brahmins  to  his  having 
superseded  his  elder  brother,  Santanu  offered  the  kingdom  to 
Devapi.  The  latter,  however,  refused,  but  acting  as  Purohita, 
or  domestic  priest,  for  his  brother,  obtained  rain.  The  Brhad- 
devata3  tells  much  the  same  tale,  but  adds  that  the  reason  for 
Devapi's  exclusion  from  the  throne  was  the  fact  that  he  suffered 
from   a   skin   disease.     The    Epic   and   later   legends  further 

1  x.  98.  8  vii.   148  et  seq.,  with   MacdonelPs 

2  ii.  10.  I  notes. 


378  LEGEND  OF  DEV API— BROTHER-IN-LAW  [  Dei 

develop  the  story,  presenting  two  somewhat  discrepant  accounts 

According  to  the  one  version,4  the  ground  of  Devapi's  being 

passed   over  was   leprosy,    while    in   the   other    his   devoting 

himself  to  asceticism  in  his  youth  was  the  cause  of  his  brother's 

taking  his  place.     The  Epic,5  moreover,  treats  him  as  a  son  of 

Pratlpa,  and  names  as  his  brothers  Bahlika6  and  Arstisena,7 

who  is  a  new  figure  developed  from  the  patronymic  of  Devapi. 

Possibly  Sieg8  is  right  in  holding  that  two  stories,  those  of 

Devapi,  Pratlpa's  son,  and  of  Devapi,  Kstisena's  son,  have  been 

confused;  but  in  any  case  it  is  impossible  to  extract  history 

from  them.9 

The  Rigvedic  hymn  certainly  appears  to  represent   Devapi 

as  sacrificing  for  Santanu,  who  seems  to  be  called  Aulana.10 

But  there  is  no  trace  in  it  of  the  brotherhood  of  the  two  men, 

nor  is  there  anything  to  show  that  Devapi  was  not  a  Brahmin, 

but   a   Ksatriya.      Sieg,11   who   interprets    the    hymn   by   the 

Nirukta,  thinks  that  he  was  a  Ksatriya,  but  on  this  occasioi 

was  enabled  by  the  favour  of  Brhaspati  to  officiate  as  priest, 

and  that  the  hymn   shows  clear   recognition  of  the  unusual 

character  of  his  action  ;  but  this  view  seems  very  improbable. 

4  Mahabharata,  v.  yyfretseq.  (=149,   |       7  Ibid.,  cited  in  n.  5. 
15  et  seq.),  where  Santanu  is  (as  also  in   |       8  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  136. 
the  Agni,  eclxxvii.   34,    the   Brahma,  9  As   does   Pargiter,  Journal   of   th 


xiii.  114,  118,  and  the  Visnu  Puranas) 
the  form  of  the  name  ;  Matsya  Purana, 
1.  39  et  seq.,  in  which,  as  well  as  in  the 
Bhagavata,  ix.  22,  12.  13,  and  the 
Vayu  Purana,  xcix.  234,  237,  the  form 
is  Santanu. 

5  Mahabharata,  i.  3751  (  =  94,  62); 
ix.  2285  (  =  40,  1)  ;  Vayu  Purana, 
»■  37.  230,  etc. 

6  Mahabharata,  cited  in  n.  4;  Hari- 
vamsa,  18 19. 


Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1910,  52,  53. 

10  RV.  x.  98,  11. 

11  Op.  cit.,  129-142. 
Cf.    Muir,    Sanskrit    Texts,    i2,    272 

et  seq.  ;  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  203 
Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3, 
192^  seq.;  Macdonell,  Brhaddevatd,  1, 
xxix;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  131, 
132. 


Devr  is  a  rare  word   denoting  the  wife's  '  brother-in-law 
(that  is,  the   husband's   brother).      He  is  included  with   the 
sisters  of  the  husband  among  those  over  whom  the  wife  of  the 
husband — his  elder  brother — rules  j1  at  the  same  time  the  wife 
is  to  be  devoted  to  him,2  and  friendly  to  him.3     After  the  death 

1  Rv.  x.  85,  46.     Cf.  Pati.  2  Rv.  x.  85,  44. 

Av.  xiv.  2,  18.     Cf.  xiv.  1,  39. 


Daidhi§avya  ]    LAND— DIKE— SON  OF  YOUNGER  SISTER       379 

of  the  husband  the  Devr  could  perform  the  duty  of  begetting 
a  son  for  him.4  No  word  occurs  for  the  wife's  brother 
corresponding  to  Devr. 


4  Rv.  x.  40,  2.  Cf.  x.  18,  8  ;  Kaegi, 
Der  Rigveda,  n.  51 ;  Lanman,  Sanskrit 
Reader,  385  ;  Whitney,  Translation  of 


the  Atharvaveda,  948.  Cf.  Delbriick, 
Die  indogermanischen  Verwandtschafts- 
namen,  516. 


De§a,  '  land,'  is  a  word  that  does  not  come  into  use  till  the 
time  of  the  Upanisads  and  Sutras,1  excepting  one  occurrence 
in  the  latest  period  of  the  Brahmana2  literature,  and  one  in 
a  much-discussed  passage  of  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,3  where 
the  Sarasvati  is  mentioned  as  having  live  tributaries.  This 
passage  militates  against  the  view  that  Sarasvati  was  a  name 
of  the  Indus,  because  the  use  of  Desa  here  seems  to  indicate4 
that  the  seer  of  the  verse  placed  the  Sarasvati  in  the  Madhya- 
desa  or  *  Middle  Country,'  to  which  all  the  geographical  data 
of  the  Yajurvedas  point.5 

1  Where  its  use  becomes  common:    I       3  xxxiv.  11. 


Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  iv.  1,  16 ; 
2,  3 ;  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  iv.  14, 
6 ;  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  4,  17, 
etc.  So  the  adjective  des'iya,  '  belong- 
ing to  a  land,'  Katyayana,  xxii.  4,  22; 
Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  viii.  6,  28. 

2  Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  10  (a  late 
passage) . 


4  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  io, 
who  thinks  that  the  word  crept  into 
the  text,  where  the  Sarasvati  originally 
meant  the  Indus,  with  the  five  tribu- 
taries of  the  Panjab. 

5  Macdonell,  Sanskrit  Literature, 
174. 


Dehi  in  two  passages  of  the  Rigveda1  refers  to  defences 
thrown  up  against  an  enemy,  apparently  earthworks  or  dikes. 
Cf.  Pup. 

1  vi.  47,  2;  vii.  6,  5.  Cf.  Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  344;  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  143. 

Daidhisavya  is  mentioned  in  a  Mantra  of  the  Taittiriya 
Samhita.1  Apparently  the  word  (as  derived  from  Didhisu) 
denotes  the  son  of  a  younger  sister  married  before  the  elder 
sister,2  rather  than  the  son  of  a  woman  twice  married,  the 
explanation  of  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary. 

1  iii.  2,  4,  4  ;  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  I  2  American  Journal  of  Philology,  17, 
ii.  1,  22  ;  Kausika  Sutra,  3,  5  ;  137,  37.    |  431,  n. 


380  PATRONYMICS— SCIENCE  OF  PORTENTS    [  Daiyampati 

Daiyampati,  'descendant  of  Dayampata,'  is  the  name  of  a 
teacher  of  the  east,  who  was  instructed  by  Safldilyayana, 
according  to  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (ix.  5,  1,  £4),  in  the  lore 
of  the  construction  of  the  fire-altar.  The  same  patronymic  is 
given,  in  the  form  of  Dayyampati,  to  Plaksa,  the  contemporary 
of  Atyamhas  in  the  Taittirfya  Brahmana  (iii.  10,  9,  3-5). 

1.  Daiva  (masc.)  appears  in  the  list  of  sciences  in  the 
Chandogya  Upanisad,1  where  Sankara  explains  it  as  utpdta- 
jfldna,  apparently  the  'knowledge  of  portents.'  The  St.  Peters- 
burg Dictionary  suggests  that  the  word  is  here  used  adjectivally, 
and  this  view  is  followed  by  Little2  and  by  Bohtlingk  in  his 
translation.3 

1  vii.  i,  2.  4 ;  2,  1 ;  7,  1.  3  Though    he    does    not    render    it. 

2  Grammatical  Index,  83.  I    (Daiva  Nidhi). 

2.  Daiva  is  the  patronymic  of  the  mythical  Atharvan  in  the 
first  two  Vamsas  (lists  of  teachers)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad.1 

1  ii.  5,  22;  iv.  5,  28  (Madhyamdina) . 

Daivala,  '  descendant  of  Devala,'  is  the  patronymic  of  Asita 
in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana  (xiv.  11,  18). 

Daiva- vata,  '  descendant  of  Devavata,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
Spfijaya,  probably  the  Srnjaya  king,  in  the  Rigveda.  He  is 
mentioned1  as  a  devotee  of  the  fire  cult,  and  as  victorious  over 
the  TupvaSa  king  and  the  Vrcivants.2  According  to  Zimmer,a 
his  name  was  Abhyavartin  Cayamana  Parthava  ('  descendant 
of  Prthu  '),  but  Hillebrandt4  recognizes  this  as  doubtful,  though 
he  none  the  less  places  the  Srnjayas  to  the  west  of  the  Indus 
with  Divodasa.  What  is  more  important  is  to  note  that  the 
name  suggests  connexion  with  the  Bharata  Devavata,  and  as 
Kurus  and  Srnjayas  were  closely  connected5  this  is  not 
immaterial. 


1  Rv.  iv.  15,  4. 

2  Rv.  vi.  27,  7. 

3  Altindisches  Leben,  133,  134. 

4  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  105,  106. 


6  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  4,  4,  5. 

Cf.  Oldenberg,  Buddha,  402,  405 ; 
Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda, 
3,  153. 


DaureSravas  ]    PATRONYMICS— EVENING    MILKING 


38i 


Daivapa,  '  descendant  of  Devapi,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
Indrota  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  and  the  Jaiminiya 
Upanisad  Brahmana.2  No  connexion  can  be  traced  with  the 
Devapi  of  the  Rigveda.3 


1  xm.  5,  4,  I. 

2  iii.  40,  1. 

3  x.  98.     See  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift 


der    Deutschen    Morgenldndischen    Gesell- 
schaft,  42,  240. 


Daivavrdha,  'descendant  of  Devavrdha,'  is  the  patronymic 
of  Babhru  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana  (vii.  34). 

Daivo-dasi,  '  descendant  of  Divodasa,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
Pratardana  in  the  Kausltaki  Brahmana1  and  the  Kausitaki 
Upanisad.2  It  is  impossible  to  ascertain  whether  the  famous 
Divodasa  is  meant. 

1  xxvi.  5.  2  iii.  1.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  i,  214. 


Dosa,  'evening,'  is  frequently  referred  to  from  the  Rigveda1 
onwards,2  usually  as  contrasted  with  usas,  '  dawn.'  In  the 
Chandogya  Upanisad3  the  word  is  contrasted  with  pratar, 
1  early.'     See  also  Ahan. 


1  i.  34.  3  ;  179.  1;  ii.  8,  3;  iv.  2, 
v-  5>  6 ;  32,  11 ;  vi.  5,  2,  etc. 


Av.  vi.  1,  1 ;  Nirukta,  iv.  17. 
vi.  13,  1. 


Doha,  'milking,'  is  a  common  word  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and 
later.2  Reference  is  made  in  the  Sutras3  to  the  sdyam-doha, 
'  evening  milking,'  and  the  pratar-doha,  '  morning  milking.' 
Dohana  has  the  same  sense.4     See  also  Go. 


1  iv.  11,  4.  9.  12;  v.  17,  17;  viii.  9, 
15  (where  five  milkings  are  referred  to 
metaphorically).  In  Rv.  x.  42,  2,  the 
literal  sense  is  found. 

2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  viii.  62 ;  Tait- 
tiriya  Brahmana,  i.  i,  10,  2 ;  ii.  2,  9,  9, 
etc. 


3  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  iv.  2,  38, 
etc. 

*  Rv.  viii.  12,  32  ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, ix.  2,  3,  30 ;  Katyayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  iv.  2,  37,  etc. 


Daure-sravas, '  descendant  of  Duresravas,'  is  the  patronymic 
of  the  priest  Prthusravas,  who  officiated  at  the  snake  sacrifice 
described  in  the  Paficavimsa  Brahmana  (xxv.  15,  3). 


382  PATRONYMICS— DICING— A  PRINCE    [  DaureSruta 

Daure-gruta,  'descendant  of  Duresruta,'  is  the  patronymic 
of  the  priest  Timirgha,  who  officiated  at  the  snake  sacrifice 
described  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana  (xxv.  15,  3). 

Daur-g-aha.     See  Durgraha. 

Dauh-santi  ('  descendant  of  Duhsanta ')  is  the  patronymic  of 
Bharata  in  the  Aitareya  (viii.  23)  and  Satapatha  (xiii.  5,  4,  11) 
Brahmanas. 

Dyutana  Maruta  ('  descendant  of  the  Maruts ')  is  the  name 
of  a  divine  being  invoked  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita1  and 
the  Taittiriya  Samhita,2  and  also  mentioned  in  the  Kathaka 
Samhita.3  In  the  Satapatha4  Brahmana  the  name  is  explained 
to  mean  Vayu,  while  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana6  he  seems 
to  be  regarded  as  the  author  of  a  Saman  (chant).  He  is 
treated  as  a  Rsi  by  the  AnukramanI,  which  credits  him  with 
the  authorship  of  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda  (viii.  96). 


v.  27. 

v-  5, 

8  xv.  7. 

4  iii.  6,  1,  16. 


5  xvii.  1,  7.     Cf.  vi.  4,  2. 
Cf.  Hillebrandt,   Vedische  Mythologie, 
3,  311  ;  Indische  Studien,  3,  220. 


Dyumna,  according  to  Pischel,1  denotes  '  raft '  in  one 
passage  of  the  Rigveda.2 

1  Zeitschrift    der    Deutschen    Morgen-  I  2  viii.  19,  14. 

Idndischen  Gesellscha/t,  35,  720  et  seq. 

Dyuta,  '  dicing,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  the 
Sutras.2     See  Ak§a. 

1  xii.  3,  46.  I  Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  iv.   io,   23, 

2  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  6,  2  ;    |  etc. 

Dyotana  is,  according  to  Sayana,  the  name  of  a  prince  in 
the  Rigveda.1  This  is  probably  correct,  though  the  word  may 
also2  be  interpreted  as  denoting  'glorification';  but  it  is  not 
clear  what  relation  existed  between  Dyotana  and  the  other 
persons  mentioned  in  the  same  passage,  Vetasu,  DaSoni, 
Tutuji,  and  Tugra. 


1  vi.  20,  8. 

2  As  by  Griffith,  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda, 
1,  380. 


Cf.  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  55,  328. 


Dm  ] 


DROP— CLOAK— WOODEN  VESSEL 


383 


Drapsa  is  a  common  word  from  the  Rigveda  onwards1  for 
a  '  drop  ' :  according  to  Sayana,2  a  '  thick  drop  '  as  opposed  to 
stoka,  a  '  small  drop.'  Hence  there  frequently  occurs  the  ex- 
pression dadhi-drapsaS  drop  of  curds.' 3  In  the  Rigveda4  the  word 
normally  denotes  the  thick  drops  of  Soma  or  the  Soma  itself. 

In  two  passages5  Roth6  sees  the  sense  of 'banner,'  which  is 
adopted  by  Oldenberg.7  Geldner,8  on  the  other  hand,  con- 
siders that  '  dust '  is  meant,  but  this  interpretation  is  not  very 
probable.  Max  M tiller9  renders  the  word  *  rain-drop '  in  one 
of  the  passages. 


1  Rv.  i.  94,  11  (perhaps  a  'drop'  of 
fire)  ;  v.  63,  4  ('rain-drop')  ;  vii.  33, 
11  (  =  retas)  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  vi.  1, 
2,  6;  drapsin  ('thick-flowing'),  xi.  4, 
«i  15. 

*  Taittiriya  Samhita,  1,  p.  70,  7. 
Cf.  the  epithet  uru-drapsa,  Taittiriya 
Samhita,  iii.  3,  10,  2  ;  Sayana,  on 
Av.  xviii.  4,  18,  takes  drapsa  to  mean 
1  drops  of  curd ' ;  so  Agnisvamin  on 
Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  iii.  2,  4. 

3  Satapatha    Brahmana,    ix.    2,    3, 


40. 


ix.   78,  4 


10 ; 


2;  97.  56 


106,  8;  x.  11,  4;  17,  11.  12.     Cf.  Tait- 
tiriya Samhita,  iii.  3,  9,  1. 

5  iv.  13,  2,  and  drapsin  in  i.  64,  2. 

6  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 
satvan  ;  Bohtlingk,  Dictionary,  s.v. 
drapsa,  drapsin. 

7  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  46,  357 ; 
Rgveda-Noten,  1,  64,  65. 

8  Vedische  Studien,  3,  57,  58  ;  Rigveda, 
Glossar,  88. 

9  Sacred  Boohs  of  the  East,  32,  104. 
Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  80, 
with  reference  to  Rv.  i.  64,  2. 

Cf.  Macdonell,  op.  cit.,  pp.  105,  113. 


Drapi  occurs  several  times  in  the  Rigveda1  in  the  sense  of 
1  mantle  '  or  *  cloak.'2  Sayana,  however,  renders  the  word  by 
*  coat  of  mail  '3  (kavaca).  This  seems  needless,  but  none  of  the 
passages  are  very  decisive  one  way  or  the  other. 

ix.  86, 


1  i.  25,  13  ;  116,  10 ;  iv.  53,  2 
14  ;  100,  9 ;  Av.  iii.  13,  1. 

2  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary 
s.v.  ;  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  5,  472 
Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  333. 


3  Cf.  Max  Muller,  Ancient  Sanskrit 
Literature,  536;  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien, 
2,  201 1 1  202. 


Dru  denotes  a  vessel  made  of  wood,1  and  in  particular  the 
vessel  used  at  the  Soma  sacrifice,2  perhaps,  as  Hillebrandt3  sug- 
gests, to  catch  the  Soma  juice  when  running  through  the  sieve. 
In  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana4  the  word  simply  means  *  wood.' 


1  Rv.  i.  161,  1;  v.  86,  3  ;  viii.  66, 
11 ;  in  x.  101,  10,  the  mortar  seems 
meant.  In  v.  86,  3,  Bohtlingk  takes  it 
to  denote  a  '  wooden  handle. ' 


2  ix.  1,  2 ;  65,  6;  98,  2. 

3  Vedische  My thologie,  1,  191,  192. 

4  i.  3,  9,  1.     So  often  in  compounds, 
e.g.,  Rv.  ii.  7,  6;  vi.  12,  4,  etc. 


384  CLUB— POST— TREE— WOOD-CUTTER     [  Drughana 

Dru-grhana  is  found  in  the  Mudgala  hymn  of  the  Rigveda1 
and  in  the  Atharvaveda.2  The  sense  is  uncertain.  Yaska3 
renders  it  as  a  '  ghana  made  of  wood,'  probably,  as  Roth4  takes 
it,  meaning  a  'club  of  wood.'  Geldner6  thinks  that  it  was  a 
wooden  bull  used  by  Mudgala  as  a  substitute  for  a  second  bull 
when  he  wanted  to  join  in  a  race.  But  this  interpretation  of 
the  legend  is  very  improbable.6  Whitney7  translates  the  word 
as  '  tree-smiter '  in  the  Atharvaveda,  quoting  Say  ana,  who 
explains  it  as  a  *  cutting  instrument,'  so  called  because  trees  are 
struck  with  it. 

1  x.  102,  9.  I   Deutschen   Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft, 

2  vii.  28,  1.  (   46,   462  ;    Bloomfield,   ibid.,   48,    456 ; 

3  Nirukta,  ix.  23.  Franke,     Vienna    Oriental   Journal,    8, 

4  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  \   342. 

5  Vedische  Studien,  2,  3,  4.  7  Translation    of   the   Atharvaveda, 

6  Cf.    von    Bradke,    Zeitschri/t  der   '   407. 

Dru-pada,  a  '  wooden  pillar  '  or  '  post,'  is  several  times 
referred  to  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later.2  Sunahsepa  was  bound 
to  three  posts  for  sacrifice.3  Thieves,  there  is  some  evidence  to 
show,  were  tied  to  posts  as  a  penalty  for  stealing.4 


1  i.  24,  13 ;  iv.  32,  23. 

2  Av.  vi.  63,  3  ;  115,  2;  xix.  47,  9 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xx.  20. 

3  Rv.  i.  24,  13. 


4  Av.  xix.  47,  9  ;  50,  1.     Cf.  vi.  63,  3 

=  84, 4.    See  Zimmer,  A  Itindisches  Leben, 
181,  182,  and  Taskara,  n.  26. 


Druma,   'tree,'   is  not  found  until  the  later  period  in  the 
Sadvimsa  Brahmana  (v.  11)  and  the  Nirukta  (iv.  19;  v.  26;  ix.  23). 

Druvaya,    'wooden,'   is   used   in    the   Atharvaveda1  as   an 
epithet  of  the  drum. 

in  part  read  dhruvaye,  and  the   Paip- 
palada  has  druye. 


1  v.  20,  2.  Cf.  xi.  1,  12,  where  it  is 
an  epithet  of  upasvasa,  'blower,'  pos- 
sibly '  bellows  '  ;  but  the  manuscripts 


Dru-han,  '  wood-cutter,'  seems  to  be  meant  by  the  word 
druhantara  in  the  Rigveda,1  where  it  is  usually  taken  as  druham- 
tara,  '  fiend-overpowering.'  But  as  an  epithet  of  parasu,  '  axe,' 
the  other  sense  ('  mighty  wood-cutter ')  2  is  more  probable.8 

1  i.  127,  2.  of  the  comparative.     See  Oldenberg, 

2  But  if  this  explanation  is  correct,       Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  46,  132. 

the  word  should  have  the  accentuation  3  Cf.  Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten,  1, 130. 


Dvapara  ]     THE  DRUHYUS— TROUGH-- BUCKETS— YEAR        385 

Druhyu  is  the  name  of  a  people  mentioned  several  times  in 
the  Rigveda.  In  one  passage1  it  occurs,  in  the  plural,  with  the 
Yadus,  Turvasas,  Anus,  and  Purus,  suggesting  that  these  are 
the  famous  five  peoples  of  the  Rigveda.2  Again,  the  Druhyu 
king  shared  in  the  defeat  of  his  allies  by  Sudas,  and  appears  to 
have  perished  in  the  waters.3  In  a  second  passage  Druhyu, 
Anu,  Turvasa,  and  Yadu  are  all  mentioned  in  the  singular,4 
while  in  another  Puru  and  Druhyu  occur.5  From  the  tribal 
grouping  it  is  probable  that  the  Druhyus  were  a  north-western 
people,6  and  the  later  tradition  of  the  Epic  connects  Gandhara 
and  Druhyu.7 


1  i.  108,  8. 

2  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  122, 
125;  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  15,  258  et  seq. 

3  vii.  18. 


vin.  10,  5. 


6  vi.  46,  8. 


6  Roth,  Zur  Litteratur  und  Geschichte 
des  Weda,  131-133. 

7  Pargiter,  Journal  of  the  Royal  A  siatic 
Society,  1910,  49. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  205 ;  Macdonell,  Vedic  Myth- 
ology, p.  140. 


Drona  denotes  in  the  Rigveda1  a  *  wooden  trough,'  and  more 
specifically  it  designates  in  the  plural  vessels  used  for  holding 
Soma.2  The  great  wooden  reservoir  for  Soma  is  called  a 
Drona-kalasa.3  The  altar  was  sometimes  made  in  the  form  of 
3l  Drona.4 

1  vi.  2,  8;  37,  2;  44,  20;  ix.  93,  1;  \  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xviii.  21 ;  xix.  27; 
Nirukta,  v.  26.  j    Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  17.  32.    Sata- 

2  ix.  3,  1;  15.  7i  28,  4;  30,  4;  67, 
14,  etc.    Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben, 


280. 

3  Taittiriya    Samhita,   iii.    2,    1,   2; 


patha  Brahmana,  i.  6,  3,  17,  etc. 

*  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  4,  7 ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxi.  4;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  vi.  7,  2,8. 


Dronahava  is  used  as  an  epithet  of  Avata,  'well,'  in  the 
Rigveda,1  apparently  in  the  sense  of  '  having  wooden  buckets  ' 
with  reference  to  the  drawing  up  of  water. 

1  x.  1 01,  7.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  157. 

Dvada^a,  '  consisting  of  twelve,'1  is  used  of  the  year  in  the 
Rigveda  (vii.  103,  9).     See  Naksatra. 

1  Cf.  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlcindischen  Gesellschaft,  48,  645  etseq. 

Dvapara.     See  Aksa  and  Yuga. 

VOL.  I.  25 


386 


DOOR— JANITOR— A  SEER— ARYANS-BIPED      [  Dvar 


Dvar  is  frequently  used  from  the  Rigveda1  onwards2  to 
denote  the  *  door  '  of  a  house.  The  later  form,  Dvara,  has  the 
same  sense.3  Cf.  Grha.  The  *  door-fastener  '  is  called  Dvara- 
pidhana  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.4 


1  i.  13.  6. 

2  Av.  viii.  3,  22 ;  xiv.  1,  63 ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  10;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  xi.  1,  1,  2 ;  xiv.  3,  1,  13, 
etc. 

3  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  6,  1,  19 ; 


iv-  3,  5,  9  ;  6,  7,  9  ;  xi.  4,  4,  2,  etc. 
Av.  x.  8,  43,  has  nava-dvara,  '  having 
nine  openings,'  of  the  body. 

4  xi.  1,  1,  1.  Cf.  dvara-bahu,  '  door- 
posts,' in  Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
i-  3.  1 ;  "•  3,  9- 


Dvara-pa,  *  door-keeper,'  is  only  found  in  a  metaphorical 
sense  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana  (i.  30),  where  Visnu  is  called 
the  *  doorkeeper '  of  the  gods,  and  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad 
(iii.  13,  6). 

Dvi-gat  Bharg-ava  ('  descendant  of  Bhrgu ')  is  mentioned  in 
the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana  (xiv.  9)  as  the  seer  of  a  Saman  or 
Chant,  by  means  of  which  he  twice  went  to  the  heavenly  world. 

Dvi-ja,  '  twice-born,'  as  an  epithet  of  the  Aryans  generally, 
or  of  the  Brahmins  in  particular,  is  not  found  in  Vedic  litera- 
ture except  in  a  quite  obscure  verse  of  the  Atharvaveda.1 


1  xix.  71,  1.  Cf.  Whitney,  Transla- 
tion of  the  Atharvaveda,  1008  ;  Zimmer, 
Altindisches   Leben,   204.      Neither   dvi- 


janman  nor  dvi-jati  occurs  early,  and 
the  idea  is  not  in  this  form  an  early 
one. 


Dvi-pad,  *  two-footed,'  *  biped,'  denotes  man,  as  opposed  to 
quadrupeds,  from  the  Rigveda1  onwards.2 


1  i.  49,  3  ;  iii.  62,  14  ;  viii.  27,  12  ; 
x.  97,  20  ;  117,  8. 

2  Av.  ii.  34,  1 ;  x.  i,  24;  Vajasaneyi 


Samhita,    viii.    30 ;    ix.    31  ;    xiii.    17 
xiv.  8,  etc. 


Dvi-bandhu  is  in  an  obscure  hymn  of  the  Rigveda,1  according 
to  Roth2  and  Grassmann,3  the  name  of  a  man,  while  Ludwig4 
renders  it  as  a  simple  adjective  meaning  '  of  double  kinship.' 

1  x.  61,  17.  I       3  Worterbuch.s.v.,  and  Translation  of 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary.  |  the  Rigveda,  2,  475. 

4  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  2,  643,  and  5,  526. 


DvyopaSa  ]  BATTLE— ASS  AND  MARE— ISLAND— PANTHER  387 

Dvi-raja  (neut.),  'conflict  between  two  kings,'  or  'battle,'  is 
mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda  (v.  20,  9).     Cf.  Daiarajna. 


Dvi-retas,  *  having  double  seed,'  is  an  epithet  of  both  the 
ass1  and  the  mare.2 

1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iv.  9;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  vi.  3,  1,  23.    Cf.  Gardabha. 

2  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  vi.  1,  4. 


Dvipa,  '  island,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later.2  But 
there  is  no  reason  to  imagine  that  the  islands  referred  to  were 
other  than  sandbanks  in  the  great  rivers,  Indus  or  Ganges.3 
Vedic  literature  knows  nothing  of  the  system  of  geography 
according  to  which  the  earth  consists  of  four,  seven,  or  thirteen 
Dvlpas  grouped  round  Mount  Meru. 

1  i.  169,  3.  I  patha  Brahmana,  xii.  2,   1,  3  ;  Latya- 

2  Kathaka    Samhita,   xiii.   2;    Sata-   I  yana  Srauta  Sutra,  i.  6,  10. 

3  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  256. 


Dvipin,1  '  panther'  or  '  leopard,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Athar- 
vaveda2 and  the  Maitrayani  Samhita.3 


1  Lit.,  'insulated' — i.e.,  'spotted.' 

2  iv.  8,  7  ;  vi.  38,  2  ;  xix.  49,  4,  in 
every  case  associated  with  the  tiger. 


3  h.  1,  9. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  80. 


Dvaita-vana,  'descendant  of  Dvitavana,'  is  the  patronymic 
of  Dhvasan,  the  king  of  the  Matsyas,  whose  Asvamedha,  or 
\  horse  sacrifice,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana 
(xiii.  5,  4,  9). 


Dvy-opaSa.    See  OpaSa. 


25—2 


388 


PRIZE— TREASURY— ASTERISM— SANDBANK    [  Dhana 


DH. 

Dhana,  '  prize,'  is  often  found  in  the  Rigveda,1  probably  the 
prize  in  racing  rather  than  the  '  booty '  in  battle.  It  also 
denotes2  the  'stake'  at  dicing.  In  some  passages  it  possibly 
means  the  '  contest '  itself.3  More  generally  it  denotes  '  wealth  ' 
or  •  gift.'4  But  it  sometimes  expresses  '  booty,'5  probably  from 
the  notion  of  { wealth '  rather  than  of  ■  prize/ 


1  Rv.  i.  81,  3 ;  vi.  45,  2 ;  viii.  80,  8  ; 
ix.  53,  2 ;  109,  10.  Cf.  Geldner,  Ve- 
dische  Studien,  1,  120;  Pischel,  ibid.,  1, 
171. 

2  Rv.  x.  34,  10  ;  Av.  iv.  38,  3. 

8  Rv.  i.  31,  6;  v.  35,  7;  vii.  38,  8; 


viii.  5,  26;  8,  21 ;  49,  9 ;  50,  9 ;  x.  48, 
5,  etc. 

4  Rv.  i.  42,  6;  x.  18,  2;  84,  7;  Av. 
i.  15,  3;  ii-  7,  4;  iii-  15.  2;  v.  19, 
vi.  81,  1  ;  vii.  81,  4;  viii.  5,  16,  etc. 

5  Rv.  i.  74,  3  ;  157,  2,  etc. 


Dhana-dham,  a  'treasure  house,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Taittirr 
Aranyaka  (x.  67). 

Dhanistha  ('  very  rich  '),  used  in  the  plural,  is  the  later  name 
of  the  lunar  mansion  (Naksatpa)  Sravi§tha. 

1  Santikalpa,  13  ;  Sankhayana  Gyhya  Sutra,  i.  26. 


Dhanu  (fern.),  'sandbank,'  occurs  several  times  in  the  Rif 
veda,1  but  only  metaphorically  of  the  clouds  in  the  atmosphere 
Dhanu  is  found  in  the  Atharvaveda,2  where  it  seems  to  denot 
a  sandbag  used  to  prevent  bleeding.3     Cf.  Dhanvan. 


1  1.  33.  4 ;  144. 5 ;  via.  3, 19 ;  x.  4,  3 ; 
27, 17. 

2  i.  17.  4- 

3  Weber,    Indische    Studien,   4,   411  ; 


Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Athai 
veda,    18 ;    Bloomfield,   Hymns  of  tl 
Atharvaveda,  259,  260. 


Dhanus,  the  'bow,'  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda ] 
and  later,2  was  the  chief  weapon  of  the  Vedic  Indian.3  The 
last  act  of  the  funeral  rite  included  the  removal  of  the  bow  from 


1  viii.  72,  4 ;  77,  11 ;  ix.  99,  1  ;  x.  18, 
9 ;  125.  6- 

2  Av.  iv.  4.  6  ;  6,  6  ;  v.  18,  8 ;  vii.  50, 
9;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  10;  Paftca- 
vimsa  Brahmana,  vii.  5,  6;   Aitareya 


Brahmana,  vii.   14;   Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, i.  5,  4,  6 ;  v.  3,  1,  11,  etc. 

3  Rv.  vi.  75,  2.  Practically  no  other 
weapon  plays  any  substantial  part  in 
Vedic  warfare. 


Dhanvan  ] 


BOW— DESERT 


389 


the  right  hand  of  the  dead  man.4  The  weapon  was  composed 
of  a  stout  staff  bent  into  a  curved  shape  (vakra),5  and  of  a  bow- 
string (Jya)  made  of  a  strip  of  cowhide6  which  joined  the  ends. 
The  tips  of  the  bow,  when  the  string  was  fastened,  were  called 
Artni.  Relaxed  when  not  in  actual  use,  the  bow  was  specially 
strung  up  when  needed  for  shooting.7  The  stages  of  the 
process  are  given  in  detail  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita  :8  the 
stringing  (a-tan)  of  the  bow,  the  placing  (prati-dhd)  of  the 
arrow,  the  bending  (a-yani)  of  the  bow,  and  the  shooting  (as). 
The  arrow  was  discharged  from  the  ear,9  and  is  hence  called 
karna-yoni,10  *  having  the  ear  as  its  point  of  origin.'10  The 
making  of  bows  was  a  regular  profession  (dhanus-kdra,11 
dhanus-krt).12  For  the  arrow  see  Isu,  and  for  the  handguard 
Hastag-hna. 


4  Rv.  x.  18,  9. 

5  Av.  iv.  6,  4. 

6  Rv.  vi.  75,  11 ;  Av.  i.  2,  3. 

7  Rv.  x.  166,  3  ;  Av.  vi.  42,  1. 

8  xvi.  22. 

9  Rv.  vi.  75,  2  et  seq.  So  also  in  the 
Epic,  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  13,  271.     The  Homeric 


method  is  to  draw  to  the  breast — e.g., 
Iliad,  iv.  123. 

10  Rv.  ii.  24,  8. 

11  xxx.  7.  12  xvi.  46. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Lebcn,  298, 
299;  Hopkins,  op.  cit.,  13,  270  et  seq. 
The  Epic  bow  is  about  5J  feet,  and  the 
arrow  3  feet  in  length. 


i.  Dhanvan,  '  bow,'  is  found  frequently  in  the  Rigveda1  and 
later.2  It  also  occurs  in  the  compounds  isu-dhanva,  '  bow  and 
arrow,'3  ajya-dhanva,4  'having  clarified  butter  for  its  bow,'5 
adhijya-dhanva,  '  bow  with  string  fixed,'  etc.     Cf.  Dhanus. 


.    1  ii.  24,  8;  33,  10;  vi.  59,  7 ;  75,  2 
viii.  20,  2 ;  ix.  69,  1 ;  Nirukta,  ix.  17. 
2  Av.  i.  3,  9 ;  iv.  4,  7;  xi.  9,  1,  etc. 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  9,  etc. 


3  Aitareya  Brahmana,   vii.   19 ;   isu- 
dhanvin}  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  1,  2. 

4  Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  25. 

5  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ix.  1,  1,  6. 


2.  Dhanvan,  '  desert,'  is  repeatedly  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  later.2     Death  from  thirst  in  the  desert  was  not  rare,3  and 


l  ii.  38,  7;  iii.  45,  1  ;  iv.  17,  2; 
19>  7;  33,  7'>  v-  53.  6;  83,  10,  etc. 
In  i.  116,  4,  the  strand  of  the  ocean 
(Samudra)  is  mentioned. 


2  Av.  v.  13,  1  ;  vi.  100,  1  ;  vii.  41,  i, 
etc. 

3  Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  19. 


39<> 


REED— CALF— LAW  AND  CUSTOM        [  Dhamani 


the  value  of  a  spring  in  the  desert  was  fully  appreciated.4 
The  great  desert  east  of  the  Sindhu  (Indus)  and  the 
Sutudri  (Sutlej)  is  possibly  referred  to  in  one  hymn  of  the 
Rigveda.5 


4  Rv.  x.  4,   i.     Cf.  vi.  34,  4,  etc.  ; 
Av.  i.  6,  4  ;  xix.  2,  2. 

5  x.  86,  20. 


Cf.   Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,   47, 


Dhamani,  *  reed,'  appears  to  denote  '  pipe '  in  a  passage  of 
the  Rigveda1  and  in  a  citation  appearing  in  the  Nirukta.2  In 
the  Atharvaveda3  it  denotes,  perhaps,  'artery'  or  'vein,'  or 
more  generally  '  intestinal  channel,'  being  coupled  in  some 
passages4  with  Hira. 


1  ii.  11,  8.  2  vi.  24. 

3  i.    17,   23 ;  ii.    33,   6 ;    vi.   90,    2 ; 

vii.  35,  2.  Cf.  Chandogya  Upanisad, 
iii.  19,  2. 


*  i.  17,  3 ;  vii.  35,  2. 
Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 259,  546. 


Dharuna  in  one  passage  of  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita  (viii.  51) 
denotes  a  ■  sucking  calf.' 


Dharma,1  Dharman,2  are  the  regular  words,  the  latter  in  the 
Rigveda,1  and  both  later,2  for  '  law '  or  '  custom.'  But  there  is 
very  little  evidence  in  the  early  literature  as  to  the  administra- 
tion of  justice  or  the  code  of  law  followed.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  Dharma  Sutras3  contain  full  particulars. 

(1)  Criminal  Law. — The  crimes  recognized  in  Vedic  litera- 
ture vary  greatly  in  importance,  while  there  is  no  distinction 
adopted  in  principle  between  real  crimes  and  what  now  are 
regarded  as  fanciful  bodily  defects  or  infringements  of  merely 


1  i.  22,  18;  164,  43.  50;  iii.  3,  1; 
17,  1;  6o,  6;  v.  26,  6;  63,  7;  72,  2, 
etc. ;  Av.  xiv.  1,51;  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 
hita, x.  29,  etc.  Cf.  Geldner,  Rigveda, 
Glossar,  90. 

2  Dharma  is  found  in  Av.  xi.  7,  17  ; 
xii.  5,  7 ;  xviii.  3,  1  ;  Taittiriya  Sam- 


hita, iii.  5,  2,  2  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xv.  6 ;  xx.  9;  xxx.  6,  etc. 

3  See  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte;  Foy, 
Die  konigliche  Gewalt  nach  den  altindischen 
Rechtsbiichern  ;  Biihler,  Sacred  Books  of 
the  East,  2  and  14. 


Dharma,  Dharman  ] 


CRIMINAL  LAW 


39 1 


conventional  practices.4  The  crimes  enumerated  include  the 
slaying  of  an  embryo  (bhruna),5  the  slaying  of  a  man  {vira),6  and 
the  slaying  of  a  Brahmin,7  a  much  more  serious  crime. 
Treachery  is  mentioned  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana8  as  being 
punishable  by  death,  as  it  was  punished  later.9  But  there  is  no 
trace  of  an  organized  criminal  justice  vested  either  in  the 
king  or  in  the  people.  There  still  seems  to  have  prevailed  the 
system  of  wergeld  (Vaira),  which  indicates  that  criminal  justice 
remained  in  the  hands  of  those  who  were  wronged.  In  the 
Sutras,10  on  the  other  hand,  the  king's  peace  is  recognized  as 
infringed  by  crimes,  a  penalty  being  paid  to  him,  or,  according 
to  the  Brahminical  textbooks,  to  the  Brahmins.     It  may  there- 


4  Compare  the  list  in  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  iv.  1,  9  ;  Kathaka  Samhita, 
xxxi.  7 ;  Kapisthala  Samhita,  xlvii.  7 ; 
and  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  2,  8,  11 
(see  Delbriick,  Die  indogermanischen  Ver- 
wandtschaftsnamen,  579  et  seq.),  where 
bodily  defects  (bad  nails  and  discoloured 
teeth),  marrying  a  younger  daughter 
when  her  elder  sister  was  unmarried, 
are  coupled  with  murder,  though  not 
equated  with  it.  See  also  Chandogya 
Upanisad,  v.  11,  5,  where  Asvapati's 
list  of  sinners  includes  a  drinker  of 
intoxicating  liquor,  a  thief,  and  one 
who  does  not  maintain  a  sacrificial  fire. 

5  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  5,  10,  2; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxvii.  9  ;  xxxi.  7  ; 
Kapisthala  Samhita,  xli.  7  ;  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  iv.  1,9;  Taittiriya  Brahmana, 
iii.  2,  8,  12;  Taittiriya  Aranyaka, 
ii.  7, 8  ;  8, 3  ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad, 
iv.  1,  22  ;  Nirukta,  vi.  27;  Kausltaki 
Upanisad,  iii.  1.  Cf.  Av.  vi.  112.  3; 
113,  2  ;  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  9,  481  ; 
10,  66 ;  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  522;  American  Journal  of 
Philology,  17,  430. 

6  Kathaka,  xxxi.  7 ;  Kapisthala,  he. 
cit. ;  Maitrayani,  loc.  cit. ;  Taittiriya 
Brahmana,  loc.  cit.  ;  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 
hita, xxx.  5,  and  cf.  Vaira.  For  cases 
of  justifiable  homicide,  see,  e.g., 
Vasistha  Dharma  Sutra,  iii.  15-18. 
Cf.   also   the  story   of  Vr^a   Jana   in 


Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xiii.  3,  12, 
where  the  death  of  a  boy  by  careless 
driving  is  mentioned,  and  the  king  is 
reproached  for  it  by  his  Purohita* 
They  dispute  as  to  the  guilt,  and, 
according  to  one  version  (see  Sieg,  Die 
Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  66,  67),  the 
Iksvakus  decide  that  the  action  was 
sinful,  and  required  expiation. 

7  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  1,  2  ; 
v.  3,  12,  1  ;  vi.  5,  10,  2 ;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  xxxi.  7  (where  the  Kapisthala 
has  brahma-jya,  '  oppressor  of  a  Brah- 
min'); Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  2,  8, 
12.  The  Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  x.  38, 
declares  that  the  slaying  of  a  Brahmin 
alone  is  truly  murder,  and  the  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,  xiii.  3,  1,  1  et  seq., 
states  that  the  sin  of  murdering  a 
Brahmin  can  be  expiated  only  by  the 
performance  of  an  Asvamedha,  or  'horse 
sacrifice ' — the  ne  phis  ultra  of  human 
generosity  to  Brahmins.  See  also 
Nirukta,  vi.  27.  The  later  tradition 
also  interprets  bhruna  as  Brahmin  (see 
Sankara,  cited  in  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  1,  410,  n. ;  Keith,  Sahkhayana 
Aranyaka,  30,  n.  5 ;  Konow,  Sama- 
vidhana  Brahmana,  46,  n.  1,  and  cf. 
Vasistha  Dharma  Sutra,  xx.  23) . 

8  xiv.  6,  8,  the  story  of  Kutsa. 

9  Jolly,  op.  cit.,  127. 

10  See  references  in  Buhler,  Sacred 
Books  of  the  East,  14,  345. 


392 


CRIMINAL  PROCEDURE        [  Dharma,  Dharman 


fore  reasonably  be  conjectured  that  the  royal  power  of  jurisdic- 
tion steadily  increased ;  the  references  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana  to  the  king  as  wielding  punishment  (Danda)  confirm 
this  supposition.  Whether,  as  the  analogy  of  other  systems 
suggests,  the  king  was  assisted  in  his  judicial  duties,  as  he 
undoubtedly  was  later,  by  assessors,  presumably  of  the  Brahmin 
caste,  cannot  be  made  out  clearly.11 

The  procedure  adopted  in  deciding  cases  is  quite  uncertain. 
In  the  Chandogya  Upanisad12  the  ordeal  of  the  red-hot  axe  is 
mentioned  as  applied  in  an  accusation  of  theft.  It  must 
apparently  be  understood  to  have  been  inflicted  by  the  direction 
of  the  king.  But  no  other  judicial  ordeal  is  known  to  Vedic 
literature  (see  Divya).  The  punishment  of  theft  was  in  some 
cases  at  least  death,  probably  when  the  thief  was  taken  red- 
handed;13  in  other  cases  binding  to  posts  was  the  penalty,14 
presumably  accompanied  by  the  return  of  the  stolen  goods.  In 
the  Chandogya  Upanisad15  the  list  of  sins  given  as  apparently 
equal  in  wickedness  is  stealing  gold,  drinking  spirits,  defiling  a 
Guru's  bed,  and  the  murder  of  a  Brahmin. 

(2)  Civil  Law. — There  is  little  recorded  as  to  civil  law  in 
Vedic  literature.  The  relations  of  the  family  and  the  question 
of  family  property  are  dealt  with  under  Urvara,  Ksetra,  Pati ; 
succession  and  partition  of  property  are  treated  under  Daya. 
As  regards  the  transfer  of  chattels — for  land  as  transferable 
inter  vivos  is  hardly  yet  recognized,  save  exceptionally  as  a 
sacrificial  fee  (Daksina),  and  then  disapproved16 — the  recognized 
modes  are  gift  (Dana)  and  barter  or  sale  (Kraya),  which  includes 
exchange.     Original  acquisition  of  land  was  no  doubt  brought 


11  Compare  the  story  of  the  death 
of  the  child  killed  by  Tryaruna,  and 
the  decision  of  the  Iksvakus  referred 
to  in  n.  6  above,  and  the  notice  in 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxvii.  4,  that  a 
Raj  any  a  is  adhyaksa,  when  a  Sudra  is 
punished  (han). 

13  vi.  16.  Cf.  Weber,  Indian  Litera- 
ture, 72,  73. 

13  Gautama  Dharma  Sutra,  xii.  43  ; 
Apastamba  Dharma  Sutra,  i.  9,  25,  4. 

14  See  Av.  xix.  47,  9 ;  50,  1,  and 
Taskara. 


16  v.  10,  9.  Another  list  is  given  in 
Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  x.  65,  which  in- 
cludes slaying  a  Brahmin,  defiling  a 
Guru's  bed,  stealing  a  cow,  drinking 
Sura,  and  killing  an  embryo,  along  with 
irregularities  in  offering  a  Sraddha, 
'water  offering  to  the  dead.'  Cf.  also 
Nirukta,  vi.  27,  for  a  list  of  seven. 
Many  more  appear  in  the  Samavidhana 
Brahmana,  but  that  work  cannot  claim 
to  be  a  Brahmana  proper. 

16  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  7,  i, 
13. 


Dharma,  Dharman  ] 


CIVIL  LAW 


393 


about  by  occupation  and  apportionment  among  the  tribesmen,17 
while  chattels  were  acquired  by  taking  possession  of  them, 
provided  that  they  were  found  on  one's  own  land  or  on 
unoccupied  land,  and  did  not  belong  to  any  other  person 
originally.  The  Sutras18  contain  rules  for  the  disposal  of  lost 
property,  which  tend  to  give  it  to  the  king,  with  the  deduction 
of  a  percentage  for  the  finder,  unless  the  latter  is  a  Brahmin, 
who  keeps  it  all.  As  for  contract,  save  in  regard  to  money- 
lending  (for  which  see  Rna),  practically  nothing  is  to  be  gathered 
from  Vedic  literature,  doubtless  because  of  the  primitive 
conditions  prevailing  in  that  early  period.  Much  of  the  labour, 
which  would  in  a  more  developed  society  have  been  done  by 
workers  for  hire,  would  be  performed  by  slaves  (cf.  Dasa, 
Sudra),  while  the  technical  workers  of  the  village — of  whom 
long  lists  are  given  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita19  and  the 
Taittiriya  Brahmana20 — may  have  been  recompensed  not  by 
any  sum  based  on  each  piece  of  work  done,  but  by  fixed  allow- 
ances, much  as  the  village  servants  are  in  modern  times.21  But 
this  must  remain  a  matter  of  conjecture,  and  it  is  uncertain 
what  exact  status  the  carpenter  or  smith  held  in  the  village. 
Similarly  it  is  impossible  to  trace  in  the  early  literature  any 
legal  theory  or  practice  as  to  torts,  but  rules  as  to  penalties  for 
insults  appear  in  the  Sutras.22 

Very  little  is  recorded  as  to  procedure.  The  list23  of  victims 
at  the  Purusamedha,  or  '  horse  sacrifice,'  includes  a  prasnin, 
an  abhi-prasnin,  and  a  prasna-vivdka,  in  whom  it  is  not  un- 
reasonable to  see  the  plaintiff,  the  defendant,  and  the  arbitrator 
or  judge :  the  terms  may  refer  to  what  is  probably  an  early 


17  Cf  Caesar,  Bcllum  Gallicum,  iv.  i  ; 
vi.  22  ;  Tacitus,  Germania,  26,  for 
Germany ;  Mommsen,  Romisches  Staats- 
recht,  3,  1,  21,  for  the  Roman  hortus  ; 
and  the  Greek  tcXr/pos,  Lang,  Homer  and 
the  Epic,  236-241  ;  Ridgeway,  Journal 
of  Hellenic  Studies,  6,  319  et  seq.  ; 
Grote,  History  of  Greece,  2,  36,  37.  See 
also  Pollock  and  Maitland,  History  of 
English  Laiv,  2,  337  et  seq.  ;  Baden 
Powell,  Village  Communities  in  India, 
6    et  seq.  ;   131. 


18  Gautama    Dharma    Sutra,   x.   36 

et  seq. 

19  xxx. 

20  iii.  4.  See  Zimmer,  Altindisches 
Leben,  426  et  seq.  ;  Weber,  Indische 
Streifen,  1,  75  et  seq. 

21  Cf.  Maine,  Village  Communities,  127, 
175  ;  Baden  Powell,  op.  cit.,  124  et  seq.  ; 
Grote,  History  of  Greece,  2,  36,  n.  2. 

22  Cf.  Jolly,  op.  cit.,  126-128. 

23  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  10;  Tait- 
tiriya Brahmana,  iii.  4,  6,  1. 


394 


LEGAL  PROCEDURE       [  Dharma,  Dharman 


form  of  judicial  procedure,  a  voluntary  arbitration.  The  same 
idea  may  be  conveyed  by  the  word  madhyama-si,  *  lying  in  the 
midst,'  which  occurs  in  the  Rigveda,24  and  which  Roth,25 
followed  by  Zimmer,26  understood  to  mean  an  arbitrator  or 
judge,  the  expression  being  derived  from  the  judge  acting  with 
other  judicial  persons,27  and  being  surrounded  by  the  assembly 
of  the  people.  But  this  interpretation  is  uncertain  ;  Whitney28 
thinks  that  the  word  merely  alludes  to  a  chief  round  whom 
his  men  encamp.  The  king  is  later  the  chief  civil  judge,  and 
may  presumably  have  been  so  earlier,  no  doubt  in  conjunction 
with  the  elders  of  the  tribe,  but  for  this  we  are  reduced  to 
conjecture.29 

The  use  of  witnesses  as  evidence  is  uncertain  (see  Jfiatr), 
and  the  ordeal  is  not  recorded  as  deciding  any  civil  matter 
except  the  dispute  between  Vatsa  and  his  rival  as  to  the  true 
Brahminical  descent  of  the  former,  which  was  settled  by  his 
walking  unharmed  through  the  flame  of  a  fire.30  But  it  is 
probable  on  analogy  that  the  ordeal  may  have  been  used  for 
the  purpose  of  deciding  disputes.  Whether  the  oath  was 
so  used  cannot  be  certainly  shown.  It  appears,  however,  that 
a  Brahmin  was  preferred  in  legal  matters  to  a  non-Brahmin.31 

There  are  very  few  references  to  police  officials:  no  doubt 
the  king  employed  some  of  his  dependents  to  execute  sentences 
and  arrest  offenders  (see  Ugra,  Jivagrbh). 

(3)  Morality. — It   is  convenient  to  notice  under   this   head 


24  x.  97,  i2  =  Av.  iv.  9,  4  =  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xii.  86.  Madhyamailvan,  in 
the  Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  ii.  408,  is  of 
quite  doubtful  sense. 

25  Siebenzig  Lieder,  174.  This  fact 
renders  doubtful  Lanman's  view 
(Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda,  159)  that  the  St.  Petersburg 
Dictionary,  in  giving  intercessor  as  the 
interpretation,  did  not  mean  '  mediator,' 
but  '  adversary. ' 

26  Aliindisches  Leben,  180. 

27  As,  apparently,  in  early  Germany. 
See  Caesar,  Bellum  Gallicum,  vi.  23  ; 
Tacitus,  Germania,  11.  12;  Coulanges, 
Recherches  stir  quelques  problemes  d'histoire, 
361  et  seq. 


28  See  n.  25. 

29  Cf.  the  later  Parisad,  Gautama 
Dharma  Sutra,  xxviii.  48.  49;  Baudha- 
yana  Dharma  Sutra,  i.  i,  7-16;  Vasistha 
Dharma  Sutra,  xi.  5-7,  20  ;  Jolly, 
op.  cit.,  132  et  seq.  The  parallels  from 
other  Aryan  peoples  suggest  the  use  of 
assessors,  as  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  courts 
of  the  shire  and  hundred.  Cf.  Sohm, 
A  ltdeutsches  Reichs-  tmd  Gerichtsverfassung, 
6  et  seq. 

30  PaiicavimSa  Brahmana,  xiv.  6,  6. 

31  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  n,  9. 
which  seems  to  refer  either  to  giving 
evidence  for  or  passing  judgment  on  a 
case  when  both  a  Brahmin  and  a  non- 
Brahmin  are  engaged. 


Dharma,  Dharman  ] 


MORALITY 


395 


several  points  bearing  on  the  moral  condition  of  the  people : 
(a)  the  exposure  of  children ;  (6)  the  exposure  of  the  aged ; 
(c)  prostitution  ;   (d)  adultery ;  (e)  incest. 

(a)  The  exposure  of  girl  infants  is  asserted  by  Zimmer32  on 
the  strength  of  a  passage  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita,33  but  it 
seems  clear  that  the  passage  has  been  misunderstood,34  and 
that  it  refers  merely  to  laying  the  child  aside,  not  exposing  it, 
while  a  boy  was  lifted  up.  It  is,  however,  true  that  the  birth 
of  a  girl  was  not  at  all  popular,  not  an  unnatural  sentiment  in 
an  early  society,  and  paralleled  among  other  Aryan  peoples.35 

(b)  The  exposure  of  the  aged  is  also  inferred  by  Zimmer36 
from  a  passage  of  the  Rigveda,37  and  from  the  mention  of 
persons  exposed  (ud-hitah)  in  the  Atharvaveda.38  The  latter 
passage  may  well  refer  merely  to  the  bodies  being  exposed 
after  death  to  the  elements  (as  is  done  by  the  Parsis).  The 
former  passage  merely  refers  to  the  individual  case  of  some 
person  who  may  have  been  cast  out,  and  proves  absolutely 
nothing  as  to  a  habitual  or  recognized  custom,  nor  can  such  a 
custom  be  inferred  from,  e.g.,  the  legend  of  Cyavana. 

(c)  That  prostitution  existed  in  Rigvedic  times  is  certain, 
but  its  extent  is  disputed.  Brotherless  girls  were  frequently 
reduced  to  becoming  prostitutes;39  the  putting  away  of  an 
illegitimate  child  is  referred  to  in  the  Rigveda;40  besides  the 


32  Altindisches  Leben,  319,  320.  Cf. 
also  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  5,  54,  260  ; 
Kaegi,  Der  Rigveda,  n.  49;  Schrader, 
Prehistoric  Antiquities,  389,  390  ;  Ludwig, 
Translation  of  the  Rigveda.  6,  142  ; 
Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  2,  48. 

33  xxvii.  9.  Cf.  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
vi.  5,  10,  3  ;  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
xv.  17,  12  ;  Nirukta   iii.  4. 

34  Bohtlingk,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  44,  494- 
496.  The  traditional  rendering  of  the 
passages  is  not  that  it  refers  to  ex- 
posure, but  to  getting  rid  of  a  daughter 
on  her  marriage. 

35  Av.  viii.  6,  25 ;  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana,  vii.  15 ;  Max  Muller,  Ancient 
Sanskrit  Literature,  409  ;  Zimmer,  op.  cit., 
320  ;  Schrader,  op.  cit.,  390. 


36  Op.  cit.,  327,  328.  Strabo,  pp.  513  , 
517,  520,  reports  the  practice  as  pre- 
vailing in  Iran,  Bactria,  and  the 
Massagetae ;  it  prevailed  among  the 
Norsemen,  Weinhold,  Altnordisches 
Leben,  473,  and  conceivably  among  the 
early  Romans  (depontani  senes,  Cicero, 
Pro  Roscio,  100 ;  but  this  and  other 
cases  may  be  really  instances  of  the 
ritual  casting  into  water  of  the  worn- 
out  vegetation  spirit  for  the  purpose  of 
reviving  it).  See  Kaegi,  op.  cit.,  n.  50  ; 
Schrader,  op.  cit.,  379,  n. 


37 


vm.  51,  2. 


38  xviii.  2,  34.     See  Anagnidagdha. 

39  Rv.  i.  124,  7  ;  iv.  5,  5  ;  Av.  i.  17,  1  ; 
and  cf.  Ayogu. 

40  ii.  29,  1.     Cf.  Max  Muller,  op.  cit.* 
26. 


?96 


PROSTITUTION  AND  ADULTERY    [  Dharma,  Dharman 


terms  pumscali41  and  mahdnagm,42  which  undoubtedly  mean 
'  harlot,'  there  are  other  clear  references  to  prostitution  ;43  and 
expressions  like  kumarl-pntra,  'son  of  a  maiden,'44  and  the 
'son  of  an  unmarried  girl '  (agru),  spoken  of  in  the  Rigveda45 
as  exposed  and  attacked  by  animals,  point  in  the  same 
direction.  The  Vajasaneyi  Samhita46  seems  to  recognize 
prostitution  as  a  profession.  Pischel47  sees  many  references 
to  Hetairai  in  the  Rigveda,  which  as  Geldner48  insists  reflects  in 
its  imagery  the  court  life  of  Indian  princes.  But  the  correct- 
ness of  the  view  of  these  two  scholars  on  this  point  is  not  b] 
any  means  certain.49 

(d)  Adultery  was  generally  regarded  among  Aryan  peoples 
as  a  serious  offence  against  the  husband  of  the  woman  affected. 
We  accordingly  find  in  the  legal  literature  of  India  traces  oi 
the  rule  that  an  adulterer  can  be  slain  with  impunity  if  takei 
in  the  act.60     Weber,61  however,  has  adduced  some  materia 
indicating  an  indifference  to  these  matters  in  Vedic  times,  and 
Ludwig62  has  adopted  the  same  view.     But,  as  Delbriick53  has 
clearly  shown,  the  evidence  is  not  convincing ;  the  cited  pre- 
scriptions64  forbidding    connexion   with   another    man's   wife 
during  a  certain  rite  do  not  imply  that  such  connexion  would 
otherwise  be  allowed :    the  ritual  of  the  Varuna-praghasas,£ 
when  a  wife  names  her  lover  or  lovers,  seems  originally  to  have 
been  a  solemn  means  of  banishing  the  evil  brought  on  a  family 
by  a  wife's  fall;  Yajhavalkya's  famous  saying56  that  no  one 


41  Av.  xv.  2,  etc. 

42  Av.  xiv.  i,  36;  xx.  136,  5  et  seq.  ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  27.  Cf.  nagnd 
in  Av.  v.  7,  8. 

43  Rv.  i.  167,  4  (Wilson,  Translation 
of  the  Rigveda,  2,  xvii),  can  hardly  be 
so  interpreted  ;  see  Zimmer,  op.  cit., 
332,  n.  Max  M tiller,  Sacred  Books  of 
the  East,  32,  277,  interprets  it  as  a 
reference  to  polyandry,  but  this  is  still 
more  doubtful ;  but  see  Rv.  viii.  17,  7. 

44  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  6  ;  Tait- 
tiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  2,  1. 

45  iv.  19,  9;  30,  16.  19;  ii.  13,  12; 
15,  17;  Zimmer,  op.  cit.,  334,  335. 

46  Apparently  this  is  meant  by  the 
epithets  atiskadvarl  (apaskadvarl  in  the 
Taittinya    Brahmana,    iii.    4,    11,    1), 


atltvarl,    vijarjara,    in   the    Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxx.  15. 

47  Vedische  Studien,  1,  xxv  ;  196,  275, 
299,  309,  etc.  ;  2,  120. 

48  Ibid.,  2,  154. 

49  Cf.   Winternitz,   Geschichte  dcr  in- 
dischen  Litteratur,  1 ,  60 ;  Jolly,  op.  cit. , 48. 

50  Leist,  Altarisches  Jus  Gentium,  276 
et  seq.,  309. 

51  Indische  Studien,  10 ,  83  et  seq. 

52  op.  cit.,  5,  573. 

53  Die      indogermanischen      Verwandt- 
schaftsnamen,  545  et  seq. 

54  Taittiriya    Samhita,   v.    6,    8,    3  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  4,  7. 

55  Maitrayani    Samhita,    i.    10,    11  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  5,  2,  20. 

56  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  3,  1,  21. 


Dhava  ] 


INCEST 


397 


cares  whether  a  wife  is  '  unchaste '  (parah-pumsd)  or  not  is  a 
mere  mistranslation,57  the  expression  parah-pumsa  really  mean- 
ing '  removed  from  the  male  persons.'  And  the  uncertainty 
asserted  in  some  passages58  as  to  origin  from  a  Esi  is  not  a 
sign  of  doubtful  descent,  but  is  due  to  the  fact  that  Rsihood 
was  a  difficult  matter  to  ascertain.  None  the  less  woman's 
position  was  lowered  by  the  prevalence  of  polygamy,  and  such 
stories  as  that  of  Ahalya  and  Indra59  are  not  compatible  with 
a  very  high  standard  of  morality.  A  similar  conclusion  is 
pointed  to  by  references  in  the  Yajurveda60  to  relations  between 
the  Arya  man  and  the  Sudra  woman,  and  by  a  spell  given  in 
the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad61  to  expiate  relations  with  the 
wife  of  a  Srotriya  (Brahmin  theologian). 

{e)  Incest  was  recognized  in  the  marriage  of  brother  and 
sister  as  appears  from  the  legend  of  Yama  and  Yarn!  in  the 
Rigveda,02  which  clearly  shows  that  such  a  marriage  was  not 
approved  by  the  feeling  of  the  Vedic  age.  There  is  also  another 
hymn63  in  which  reference  to  such  intercourse  appears  to  be 
made.  Mention  is  further  made  in  the  Rigveda64  to  the 
wedlock  of  Prajapati  and  his  daughter,  which  is,  however, 
interpreted  mythologically  in  the  Brahmanas,65  an  interpre- 
tation which  may  be  correct.  That  incest,  however,  actually 
did  take  place  is  clear  from  the  Atharvaveda  j66  but  even  though 
the  mythological  interpretation  of  the  passage  were  not  justi- 
fied, no  conclusion  could  be  drawn  from  the  hymn  as  to  the 
normal  occurrence  of  such  relations. 


57  So  Bohtlingk,  Dictionary,  s.v.  ; 
Delbriick,  op.  cit.,  548. 

58  Mai  tray  ani  Samhita,  i.  4,  11  ; 
Gopatha  Brahmana,  cited  in  Ludwig, 
loc.  cit. 

59  Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology, 
p.  65. 

60  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  4,  19,  2.  3  ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiii.  30.  31. 


01  vi.  4,  11.  w  x.  10. 

63  x.  162,  5. 

64  x.  61,  5-7. 

65  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iii.  33  ;  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,  i.  7,  4,  1 ;  Muir, 
Sanskrit  Texts,  4,  46,  47  ;  Max  Muller, 
op.  cit.,  529,  530. 

66  viii.  6,  7. 


I.  Dhava  is  the  name  of  a  tree  (Grislea  tormentosa)  mentioned, 
together  with  the  Plaksa,  Asvattha,  and  Khadira,  in  the 
Atharvaveda.1 


v.  5,  5  ;  xx.  137,  11.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  62. 


39? 


MA  N—FA  N—GRA  IN 


[  DhaT 


2.  Dhava,  '  man,'  is  not  found  before  the  Nirukta.1  The 
word  clearly  owes  its  existence  merely  to  vidhavd,  *  widow,' 
wrongly  interpreted  as  vi-dhava,  ■  without  a  husband.' 

1  iii.  15.     Cf.  Naighantuka,  ii.  3. 


Dhavitra,  occurring  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  and  the 
Taittiriya  Aranyaka,2  denotes  a  '  fan '  of  hide  or  leather  for 
blowing  the  sacrificial  fire. 


xiv.  i,  3,  30;  3,  i, 


2  v.  4,  33- 


Dhanam-jayya,    'descendant    of   Dhanam -jaya,'    is   the 
patronymic  of  Amsu  in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana.1 


1  Indische  Studien,  4,  373.  Under  this 
patronymic  he  is  frequently  named  by 
Latyayana    Srauta    Sutra,    i.    1,    25  ; 


ii.  1,  2;  9,  10,  etc.  (misread  Dhanam- 
japya  in  many  manuscripts).  Cf. 
Weber,  Indian  Literature,  76,  77,  82. 


Dhana,  always  used  in  the  plural,  and  frequently  referred  to 
in  the  Rigveda1  and  later,2  means  '  grains  of  corn.'  They  were 
sometimes  parched  (bhrjj),3  and  were  regularly  mixed  with 
Soma.4 


1  i.  16,  2;  iii.  35,  3;  52,5;  vi.  29,  4, 
etc. 

2  Av.  xviii.  3,  69;  4,  32.  34;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xix.  21.  22;  Taittiriya 
Brahmana,  i.  5,  11,  2,  etc. 

3  Rv.  iv.  24,  7. 


4  Rv.  iii.  43,  4  ;  52,  1  ;  viii.  91,  2  ; 
Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  i,  10,  2  ;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  iv.  4,  3,  9. 

Cf.  Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities, 
283. 


Dhanya  (neut.),  a  derivative  from  the  preceding  word,1 
denotes  'grain'  in  general.  It  is  found  in  the  Rigveda2  and 
later.3  According  to  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,4  there  are 
ten  cultivated  (grdmydni)  kinds  of  grain :  rice  and  barley  (vrihi- 
y avdh),  sesamum  and  beans  (tila-masdh),  Panicum  Miliaceum 
and  Italicum  (anu-priyangavah),  maize  (godhumdh),  lentils 
(masurah),  Khalvah  and  Dolichos  uniflorus  (khala-kulah) .     The 


1  Primarily  as  an   adjective,    '  con- 
sisting of  grain.' 

2  vi.  13,  4. 

3  Av.  iii.  24,  2.  4 ;  v.  29,  7 ;  vi.  50,  1 ; 


Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xi.  8 ;  Sadvimsa 
Brahmana,  v.  5,  etc. 

4  vi.  3,  22  (Madhyamdina=i3  Kanva). 


Dhisana  ]      DWELLING— EDGE  OF  WEAPON-BOWL 


399 


horse  is  called  '  corn- eating '  {dhanyada)  in  the  Aitareya5  and 
Satapatha6  Brahmanas,  and  men  are  mentioned  as  '  purifying 
corn '  (dhanyd-krt)  in  the  Rigveda.8 


5  viii.  21. 

6 


xni.  5,  4,  2. 


7  Lit.,  '  preparing  corn.' 


x.  94,  13. 


Dhanva  is  the  patronymic  of  Asita  in  the  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana.1  In  the  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra2  the  form  of  the 
name  is  Dhanvana. 


1  xiii.  4,  3,  11  ;  Asvalayana  Srauta  Sutra,  x.  7. 


xvi.  2,  20. 


Dhaman  denotes  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  'dwelling'  and 
'house,'  or  sometimes3  its  inmates.  The  word  is  also4  found 
in  the  sense  of  '  ordinance,'  '  law,'  expressing  much  the  same 
as  Dharman,  especially  in  conjunction5  with  Eta,  'eternal 
order.'  Hillebrandt6  sees  in  one  passage7  the  sense  of 
Naksatra. 


1.  144.  i 


in.  55,  10 


vii.  61,  4  ;  87,  2  ;  x.  13,  1,  etc. 

2  Av.  iv.  25,  7  ;  vii.  68,  1  ;  xii.  1,  52  ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  iv.  34 ;  Taittiriya 
Aranyaka,  ii.  7,  2. 

3  Rv.  viii.  101,  6  ;  ix.  63,  I4  ;  x.  82,  3  ; 
Av.  ii.  14,  6.  Many  of  the  examples 
given  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v.,  C,  are  doubtful. 


4  Rv.  iv.  55,  2 ;  vi.  21,  3 ;  vii.  63,  3  ; 
viii.  41,  10;  x.  48,  11. 

5  Rv.  i.  123,  9  ;  iv.  7,  7  ;  vii.  36,  5  ; 
x.  124,  3. 

6  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  446. 

7  Rv.  ix.  66,  2. 

Cf.   Geldner,    Rigveda,    Glossar,   92, 
93- 


Dhara  denotes   the   '  edge '   of    a  weapon,1  as   of   an   axe 
(svadhiti)y2  or  of  a  razor  (ksura).3    See  also  Asi. 


1  Rv.  vi.  3,  5  ;  47,  10.  Cf.  viii.  73,  9  ; 
Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  iv.  38,  1,  for 
metaphorical  applications. 


2  Kausika  Sutra,  44. 

3  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  iii.  3,  2. 


Dhisana,  according  to  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  denotes1 
an  implement  used  in  preparing  the  Soma,  '  bowl '  or  '  vat,' 
and  by  metonymy  also  the  Soma  draught  itself.2    The  dual,  by 


1  Rv.  i.  96,  1  ;  102,  1  ;  109,  3.  4  ; 
iii.  49,  1  ;  iv.  34,  1  ;  36,  8  ;  viii.  61,  9  ; 
ix.  59,  2  ;  x.  17,  12  ;  30,  6 ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  i.  19 ;  vi.  26.  35,  etc. 


2  Rv.  i.  102,  7  ;  iii.  32,  14 ;  49,  4  ; 
vi.  19,  2  ;  vii.  90,  3  ;  viii.  15,  7  ;  x.  96, 
10,  etc. 


4oo 


PLANKS  OF  SOMA  PRESS— PRAYER 


[  Dhl 


a  metaphor,3  also  expresses  the  '  two  worlds,'  heaven  and  earth. 
Hillebrandt,5  however,  thinks  that  the  word  properly  means 
earth,6  in  the  dual  heaven  and  earth,7  in  the  plural  the  triad, 
earth,  atmosphere,  and  heaven,8  while  in  some  passages1 
Dhisana  denotes  the  Vedi,  the  excavated  ground  used  as  an 
altar.  This  is  not,  however,  certain,  while  it  seems  clear  that 
the  Vajasaneyi10  and  Taittiriya11  Samhitas  understand  the 
Dhisanas  (dual)  to  be  the  planks  over  which  the  pressing  of 
the  Soma  took  place  (adhisavana-phalake)  .12  Pischel13  sees  in 
Dhisana  a  goddess  of  wealth  akin  to  Aditi  and  the  earth. 


3  Like  Camu. 

4  Rv.  i.  160,  i  ;  vi.  3,  3  ;  50,  3  ;  70,  3; 
x.  44,  8;  in  the  plural,  'the  three 
worlds, '  Rv.  v.  69,  2.  In  other  passages, 
Rv.  i.  22,  10;  iii.  56,  6;  v.  41,  8; 
vi.  11,  3;  x.  35,  7,  the  sense  of  'a 
genius  of  prosperity '  was  assigned  to 
Dhisana  by  Roth. 

5  Vedische  My  thologiet  1,  1 75-181. 

6  Rv.  i.  22,  10;  96,  I  ;  102, 1 ;  iii.  31, 
13 ;  56,  6 ;  vi.  19,  2 ;  vii.  90,  3  ; 
viii.  15,  7 ;  x.  30,  6  ;  35,  7 ;  96,  10. 

7  See  n.  3  ;  also  Rv.  viii.  61,  2  ;  nivid 
in  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  viii.  19,  4. 


8  Rv.  iv.  36,  8  ;  v.  69,  2  ;  ix.  59,  2. 

y  Rv.  i.  109,  3.  4 ;  iii.  2,  1  ;  49,  4  (or 
perhaps  'earth  ')  ;  iv.  34,  1  ;  v.  41,  8  ; 
vi.  11,  3  ;  x.  17,  12. 

10  vii.  26. 

J1  iii.  1,  10,  1. 

12  Mahldhara  on  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 
hita,  vii.  26;  Sayana  on  Taittiriya 
Samhita,  loc.  cil. 

13  Vedische  Studien,  2,  82-87.  Cf- 
Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  124 ; 
Oldenberg,  Sacred  Boohs  of  the  East, 
46,  120122. 


Dhl,  'thought,'  is  used  several  times  in  the  Rigveda1  to 
denote  the  '  prayer '  or  '  hymn  of  praise '  of  the  singer.  One 
poet  speaks  of  himself  as  'weaving'  such  a  prayer,2  while 
another  refers  to  his  '  ancient  ancestral  hymn,'  which  he 
refurbishes  presumably  for  use.3 


1  i.  3,  5;  135,  5:  ^L  6;  185,  8; 
ii.  3,  8  (where  it  is  connected  with 
Sarasvati) ;  40,  5,  etc. 


2  Rv.  ii.  28,  5. 

3  Rv.  iii.  39,  2. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  338. 


Dhiti  has  in  several  passages  of  the  Rigveda1  practically  the 
same  sense  as  Dhl,  '  prayer,'  or  ■  hymn  of  praise.' 

1  i.  no,  1 ;  iii.  12,  7 ;  52,  6 ;  v.  25,  3 ;  53,  n  ;  vi.  15,  9,  etc.  ;  Nirukta,  ii.  24. 


Dhira  Sata-parneya  ('descendant  of  Sataparna')  is  men- 
tioned in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (x.  3,  3,  1)  as  a  pupil  of 
MahaSala. 


Dhur  ]        FISHERMAN— ABORIGINAL  CHIEF— YOKE 


401 


Dhivan  occurs  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  where  it  may  either  be 
taken  with  Roth,2  Bloomfield,3  and  Whitney4  as  an  epithet  of 
'chariot-builders'  (ratha-kavah) ,  meaning  'clever,'  or  be  con- 
strued with  the  scholiast  as  denoting  'fishermen'  (dhwara). 
The  Paippalada  recension  has  taksanah,  *  carpenters.' 


1  iii.  5.  6. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  114. 


4  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  114. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  17,   194 

et  seq. ;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  252. 


Dhunksa  is  the  name  of  some  sort  of  bird  in  the  list  of 
victims  at  the  Asvamedha,  or  •  horse  sacrifice,'  in  the  Yajurveda 
Samhitas.1     See  also  Dhuriksna  and  Dhvaftksa. 

1  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  12  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  31.    Cf.  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  93. 


Dhuni  is  the  name  of  a  foe  of  Indra,  normally  mentioned 
along  with  Cumuri  in  the  Rigveda.1  He  and  Cumuri  seem  to 
have  been  opposed  to  Dabhiti.2  His  name  is  probably  that 
of  an  aboriginal  chief.3 


11.  15,  9  ;  vi.  11 


20,  13  ;  vn.  19,  4. 


2  Rv.  x.  113,  9. 

2  Wackernagel,  A  Itindische  Gvammatih, 


1,  xxii ;  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology, 
p.  162.  Cf.  Oldenberg,  Religion  des 
Veda,  157,  158. 


Dhur  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  denotes,  according  to  the 
St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  that  part  of  the  yoke  which  is 
placed  on  the  shoulders  of  the  animals  drawing  the  chariot  or 
cart,  whence  they  are  called  dhur-sdh,  l  yoke-bearing,'  in  the 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita.3  In  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda4  the 
sense  is  uncertain :  Roth5  takes  it  to  mean  the  pin  at  either 
end  of  the  axle  (Aksa)  which  goes  through  the  nave  of  the 
wheel,  and  would  thus  be  equivalent  to  Ani,  and  Oldenberg6 


1  i.  84,  16 ;  100,  16 ;  134,  3  ;  164,  19 ; 
ii.  18,  7 ;  iii.  35,  2 ;  v.  55,  6 ;  vii.  34,  4, 
etc. 

3  Av.  v.  17,  18  ;  Aitareya  Brahmana 
vi.  18;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  1,  2 
10  ;  4,  4,  13,  etc.  ;  Aitareya  Aranyaka 
i.  5,  2  (the  Dhur  is  the  end),  etc. 

3  iv.  33.    Cf.  Usra. 
VOL.  I. 


4  v.  43,  8. 

5  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.,  2. 

6  Rgveda  -  Noten,  1,  339  ;  Griffith, 
Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  1,  508.  The  aksa- 
dhurau  axe  mentioned  in  the  Apastamba 
Srauta  Sutra,  xi.  6,  5  ;  Katyayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  viii.  3,  22.  Cf.  Caland 
and  Henry,  L'Agnistoma,  81. 

26 


4o2  A  BIRD— DEATH— CAMEL— CHARIOTEER    [  Dhuiik§nl 

seems  to  adopt  the  same  view.  Monier  Williams7  seems  t( 
think  that  '  load '  is  meant,  but  this  is  not  probable.  It  is 
possible  that  Dhur  has  the  sense  of  'pole,'8  and  then  mon 
generally  still  the  pole  and  the  axle  together  regarded  as  th( 
drawing  part  of  the  chariot :  this  might  explain  the  use  in  th( 
doubtful  passage  of  the  Rigveda. 

7  Dictionary,  s.v.  ;  Aitareya  Aranyaka  (n.  2).     This  modi- 

8  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  246.  j  fication  of  meaning  seems  to  be  due  to 
Later,  the  word  means  the  '  end  of  the  J  the  fact  that  the  yoke  is  at  the  end  of 
pole,'  a  sense    already  found  in   the  |  the  pole.     See  also  Dhursad. 


Dhunksna  is  the  form  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita1  of  th( 
name  of  the  bird  elsewhere  found  as  Dhunksa.  It  is  glossed 
as  *  white  crow'  (sveta-kdki). 

1  v-  5.  I9>  !•  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  93,  gives  the  form  as  Dhunksna, 
perhaps  in  error.    Cf.  also  Dhvanksa. 


Dhuma-ketu,  *  smoke-bannered,'  is  an  epithet  of  Mytyu, 
'death,'  in  the  Atharvaveda.1  Zimmer2  thinks  that  a  comet 
is  meant,  but  Whitney3  considers  this  extremely  improbable. 
Lanman4  plausibly  suggests  that  the  smoke  of  the  funeral  pile 
is  referred  to. 


1  xix.  9,  10.  I      3  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  91 

2  Altindisches  Leben,  358.  |      4  Ibid. 


Dhumra  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita  (i.  8,  21,  1)  denotes 
'  camel '  according  to  Bohtlingk's  Dictionary. 

Dhur-sad  means,  according  to  Roth,1  '  standing  under  the 
yoke'  and  so  'burden-bearing,'  and  thus  metaphorically 
'  promoting,'  in  the  passages  of  the  Rigveda2  where  it  occurs. 
More  probable,  however,  is  the  view3  that  it  means  'sitting  on 
the  pole,'  that  is,  '  charioteer,'  with  reference  to  the  fact  that 


1  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

2  i.143,7;  ii.  2, 1;  34,4(buU/.Pischel, 
Vedische  Studien,  i,  301).     In  x.  132,  7,    ]  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  195. 
Roth  renders  '  resting  on  the  yoke.' 


3  Cf.  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  13,  237  et  seq.  ;  Keith,. 


Dhr§ti]    A  SNAKE  DEMON— KING  DHRTARASTRA— TONGS    403 

to  get  near  his  horses  the  charioteer  might  well  go  forward 
and  sit  on  the  pole  or  even  on  the  yoke.4 

4  Cf.  Mahabharata,  viii.  617  :  dhurydn  dhuryagaldn  siitdn. 

i.  Dhrta-rastra  ('  having  his  kingdom  firmly  established  ')  is 
the  name  of  a  snake  demon  with  the  patronymic  Airavata, 
1  descendant  of  Iravant,'  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  the  Panca- 
vimsa  Brahmana.2 

1  viii.  10,  29.  I  Brahmana,  iv.  26,  15  ;  Weber,  Indische 

2  xxv.  15,  3.   Cf.  Jaiminiya  Upanisad   |  Studien,  17,  257. 

2.  Dhrtarastra  Vaicitra-vlrya  ('  descendant  of  Vicitra- 
vlrya')  is  mentioned  in  a  passage  of  the  Kathaka  Samhita,1 
which  is,  unhappily,  far  from  intelligible.  But  there  is  no 
ground  for  supposing  that  he  was  a  Kuru-Pancala  king ;  he 
seems  rather  to  have  lived  at  some  distance  from  the  Kuru- 
Pancalas.  There  is  no  good  reason  to  deny  his  identity2  with 
the  Dhrtarastra  of  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,3  king  of  Kaii,  who 
was  defeated,  when  he  attempted  to  offer  a  horse  sacrifice,  by 
Satrajita  3atamka.  The  fact  that  the  latter  was  a  Bharata 
also  points  to  Dhrtarastra's  not  having  been  a  Kuru-Paiicala  at 
all.  In  the  Kathaka  Samhita  he  appears  as  having  a  dispute 
with  Vaka  Dalbhi ;  but  even  assuming  that  the  latter  was 
a  Pancala,  there  is  nothing  to  hint  that  the  former  was  a  Kuru 
or  that  this  dispute  is  a  sign  of  an  early  hostility  of  Kuru  and 
Pancala.4  It  is  true  that  in  the  Epic  Santanu  and  Vicitravlrya 
and  Dhrtarastra  himself  are  all  connected,  but  this  connexion 
seems  to  be  due,  as  so  often  in  the  Epic,  to  a  confused  derange- 
ment of  great  figures  of  the  past. 


1  x.  6.  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien, 
3,  469  et  seq. 

2  As  does  Weber,  Indian  Literature, 
90,  114,  125  ;  Episches  im  vedischen  Ritual, 
7,  8.  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v.,  treats  them  as  identical. 


3  xin.  5,  4,  22. 

4  Keith,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society,  1908,  831  et  seq.  This  argument 
is  independent  of  the  identification  of 
the  two  Dhrtarastras,  but  is  confirmed 
by  it. 


Dhrsti,  found  in  the  dual  in  the  Taittiriya  Aranyaka,1  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana,2  and  the  Sutras,3  seems  to  denote  '  fire- 
tongs.' 

1  v.  9,  8.  I       3  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xxvi.  2, 

2  xiv.  3,  1,  22.  I   10,  etc. 

26 — 2 


404 


MILCH  COW— FISHERMAN 


[  Dhena 


Dhena  denotes  a  g  milch  cow,'1  or  in  the  plural,  '  draughts  of 
milk.'2  In  two  passages3  Roth4  takes  the  word  to  mean  '  mare,' 
and  in  another  the  '  team '  of  Vayu's  chariot.  Benfey,6  on  the 
other  hand,  renders  it  '  lips '  in  one  passage,7  with  Sayana  and 
with  Durga's  commentary  on  the  Nirukta.8  Geldner9  assigns 
to  the  word  the  senses  of  '  lips,'10  '  speech,'11  '  cow,'12  '  beloved,'13 
and  '  streams.'14 


1  Rv.  iii.  34,  3  (Macdonell,  Vedic 
Mythology,  p.  61) ;  v.  62,  2.  Cf.  Geldner, 
Vedische  Studien,  3,  114. 

2  Rv.  iii.  1,  9;  iv.  58,  6,  etc. 

3  i.  101,  10 ;  v.  30,  9. 

4  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

5  Rv.  i.  2,  3. 

6  Orient  und  Occident,  3,  130. 

7  Rv.  i.  101,  10. 

8  vi.  17.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches 
Leben,  249. 


9  Vedische  Studien,   3,    35  -  43  ;    166  ; 
Rigveda,  Glossar,  95. 

10  Rv.  i.  ioi,  10;  iii.  X,  9. 

11  Rv.  iv.   58,   6;   i.   55,  4;   141,   1  ; 
viii.  32,  22;  x.  104,  3.  10. 

12  Rv.  v.  62,  2,  and  Vayu's  cow  of 
plenty,  i.  2,  3. 

13  Rv.  v.  30,  9. 

14  Rv.  vii.  21,  3 ;  iii.  34,  3. 

Cf.  Max  Mviller,  Sacred  Books  of  the 
East,  32,  441,  442. 


Dhenu  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  means  *  milch  cow,'  which 
is  often  mentioned  with  special  reference  to  the  production  of 
milk,3  and  is  contrasted  with  the  '  bull '  (vrsabha,4  pumaonsf 
anadvdh).6  In  the  plural7  the  word  denotes  *  draughts  of  milk.' 
The  derivative,  dhenukd,  means  merely  *  female.'8 


1  i.  32,  9  (saha-vatsd, '  with  her  calf ') ; 
134,  4;  ii.  2,  2;  34,  8;  vi.  135,  8, 
etc. 

2  Av.  v.  17,  18  ;  vii.  104,  1 ;  Taittiriya 
Samhita,  ii.  6,  2,  3  ;  Maitrayani  Sam- 
hita, iv.  4,  8 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xviii.  27;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  2, 
1,  21,  etc. 

3  Rv.  vii.  33,  22 ;  viii.  14,  3 ;  Av. 
iv.  34,  8  (Mma-dugha,  '  milking  desires,' 


the  later  '  cow  of  plenty'  of  the  Epic) ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  xii.  8,  2,  2. 
4  Rv.  x.  5,  7.  5  Av.  xi.  i,  34. 

6  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xviii.  27  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii.  1,  2,  21. 

7  Rv.   iv.   22,  6;    viii.    2,    6;    4,  8 
ix.  61,  21 ;  72,  1,  etc. 

8  Av.  iii.  23,  4 ;  PancavimSa  Brah- 
mana, xxv.  10,  23 ;  AsValayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  xii.  6,  etc. 


Dhenu-stari  in  the  Kathaka  (xiii.  6)  and  Maitrayani  Samhita 
(ii.  5,  4)  denotes  a  cow  which  has  ceased  to  give  milk. 

Dhaivara  means  a  *  fisherman,'  as  a  member  of  a  caste,1  in 
the  list  of  victims  at  the  Purusamedha,  or  '  human  sacrifice,"  in 
the  Yajurveda.2    Cf.  Dhivara. 

1  This  seems  to  be  shown  by  the  2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  16 ;  Tait- 

patronymic    form,    'descendant    of    a       tiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  15,  1. 
dhivara. ' 


Dhruva  ] 


SMELTER— GALES— POLE  STAR 


405 


Dhmatr  (lit.  '  blower ')  occurs  twice  in  one  passage  of  the 
Rigveda1  in  the  two  forms,  dhmata,  nom.  '  smelter,'  and 
dhmatarl,  which,  according  to  the  Padapatha,  stands  for 
dhmatari,  a  locative  probably  meaning  '  in  the  smelting  furnace.'2 
Geldner,3  Bartholomae,4  and  Oldenburg5  regard  the  latter  form 
as  a  locative  infinitive,  'in  the  smelting.'  Ludwig6  and  Neisser7 
think  dhmatarl  is  a  nom.  sing.  masc.  used  in  the  same  sense  as 
dhmata.  Smelting  is  also  clearly  referred  to,8  and  the  smelter 
is  described  as  using  the  wings  of  birds  (parna  sakunanam)  to 
fan  the  flame.9  That  the  art  was  widely  applied  is  shown  by 
the  fact  that  reference  is  made  to  arrows  with  points  of  Ayas,10 
to  kettles  which  were  fashioned  of  the  same  metal  and  could  be 
placed  upon  a  fire,11  and  to  Soma  cups  of  beaten  Ayas.12 


1  v.  9,  5. 

2  Macdonell,   Journal    of   the    Royal 
Asiatic  Society,  1893,  446. 

3  Vedische  Studien,  1,  146,  n.  1. 

4  Indogermanische  Forschungen,  1,  496, 
n.  2. 

5  Sacred  Boohs  of  the  East,  46,  388. 

6  Jnfinitiv  im  Veda,  9  ;  Translation  of 
the  Rigveda,  4,  334. 

7  Bezzenberger's  Beitrdge,  20,  40. 


8  Rv.  iv.  2,  17.  In  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  vi.  1,  3,  5,  Ayas  is  smelted 
from  the  ore  {aiman),  and  gold  from 
the  Ayas. 

9  Rv.  ix.  112,  2. 

10  Cf.  Isu. 

11  Rv.  v.  30,  15. 

12  RV.  ix.  1,  2. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  252  ; 
Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  159. 


Dhraji  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  denotes  the  ■  sweep  '  of  the 
wind,  referring  no  doubt  to  the  violent  gales  which  often  blow 
in  India  devastating  the  forests,  and  which  figure  in  the 
descriptions  of  the  Maruts,  or  storm  gods.3 

1  i.  164,  44  ;  x.  97,  13  ;  136,  2.  I       3  Cf.  Max  Muller,  Sacred  Books  of  the 

2  Av.  iii.  1,  5;  Maitrayani  Samhita,       East,   xxxii,    xxiii   et  seq.;    Macdonell, 
i.  2,  17  ;  iv.  9,  5  ;  Taittiriya  Aranyaka,       Vedic  Mythology,  p.  79. 

in,  19,  etc. 


Dhruva  in  the  Sutras1  denotes  the  pole  star,  being  mentioned 
in  connexion  with  the  marriage  ritual,  in  which  the  star  is 
pointed  out  to  the  bride  as  an  emblem  of  constancy.     In  the 


1  Asvalayana  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  7,  22  ; 
Sankhayana  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  17, 2  et  seq. ; 
Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  iii.  3,  6,  etc. 
It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  marriage 
Mantras,   of  which  we  have  a  great 


many,  do  not  include  any  reference  to 
the  Dhruva;  but  it  is  not  possible  to 
say  definitely  whether  the  practice  is 
really  an  old  one  or  not. 


406 


POLE  STAR— CARDINAL  POINT— BANNER    [  Dhruva 


Maitrayani  Upanisad,2  a  late  work,  the  movement  of  the 
Dhruva  (dhruvasya  pracalanam)  is  mentioned,  but  this  can  hardly 
be  interpreted  as  referring  to  an  actual  observed  motion  of  the 
nominal  pole  star,3  but  rather  to  an  extraordinary  event,  such 
as  a  destruction  of  the  world,  as  Cowell  understood  the 
expression.4  Jacobi5  sees  in  the  motion  of  the  Dhruva  the 
possibility  of  fixing  a  date,  on  the  ground  that  the  only  star 
which  could  have  been  deemed  a  pole  star,  as  '  immovable,'  was 
one  (a  Draconis)  of  the  third  millenium  B.C.  But  this  attempt 
to  extract  chronology  from  the  name  of  the  star  is  of  very 
doubtful  validity.6 


2  See  Max  Miiller,  Sacred  Books  of 
the  East,  15,  289 ;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  2,  396. 

3  As  understood  by  Weber,  Indian 
Literature,  98,  n.  103  ;  Biihler,  Indian 
Antiquary,  23,  245,  n.  21  ;  Jacobi,  Zeit- 
schrift  der  Deutschen  M orgenldndischen 
Gesellschaft,  49,  228,  n.  2. 

4  In  his  edition  of  the  Upanisad, 
p.  244. 


5  Indian  Antiquary,  23,157;  Zeitschrift, 
loc.  tit.,  50,  69  et  seq.  ;  Journal  of  the 
Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1909,  721  et  seq.  ; 
1910,  461  et  seq. 

6  Whitney,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  16,  xc ;  Keith,  Journal 
of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1909,  1102 
1910,  465  et  seq. 


Dhruva,  '  fixed,'  as  an  epithet  of  Dig,  '  cardinal  point,'  denotes 
the  ground  under  one's  feet. 


1  Av.  iii.  27,  5  ;  xii.  3,  59 ;  xv.  6,  I  ; 

AitareyaBrahmana,  viii.  14  (cf.  Madhya- 


de£a) ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  iii.  9, 
25,  etc. 


Dhvaja  occurs  twice  in  the  Rigveda1  in  the  sense  of  '  banner ' 
used  in  battle.  It  is  characteristic  of  Vedic  fighting  that  in 
both  passages  reference  is  made  to  arrows  being  discharged  and 
falling  on  the  banners. 


1  vii.  85,  2;  x.  103,  11.  In  Epic 
warfare  banners  are  of  vast  importance 
— e.g.,  Ramayana,  ii.  67,  26  ;  they  were 
attached   to   a   pole   on    the    chariot, 


Mahabharata,  vii.  3332,  etc.  The  army 
was  called  dhvajinl,  'bannered  host,' 
ibid.,  i.  2875,  etc. 


Dhvanya  is  apparently  the  name  of  a  patron,  son  of  Laks- 
mana,  in  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda.1 


1  v.  33,  10.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  155. 


Dhvasra  ]  A  MATSYA  KING— PATRONS  407 

Dhvasan  Dvaita-vana  ('  descendant  of  Dvitavana ')  is  the 
name  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  of  the  king  of  the  Matsyas 
who  celebrated  an  Asvamedha,  or  'horse  sacrifice,'  near  the 
Sarasvati. 

1  xiii.  5,  4,  9.  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  211  ;  Episches  im  vedischen 
Ritual,  6. 


Dhvasan ti  is  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda1  mentioned 
together  with  Purusanti  as  having  been  aided  by  the  Asvins. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  is  the  longer  form  of  the  name 
Dhvasra,  which  is  found  with  Purusanti  both  in  the  Rigveda2 
and  in  the  Paficavimsa  Brahmana.3 

1  i.  112,  23.                                                I  Cf.  Sieg,  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda, 

2  ix.  58.  3  =  Sv.  ii.  409.                          J  62,   63 ;   Benfey,   Samaveda,    105,    126, 

3  xiii.  7,  12  (where  the  dual  of  who  is  inclined  to  think  that  Dhvasanti 
Dhvasra  appears  as  a  feminine  Dhvasre).  |  and  Purusanti  are  names  of  women. 

Dhvasra  is  named  with  Purusanti  in  the  Paficavimsa  Brah- 
mana1 as  giving  gifts  to  Taranta  and  Purumidha.  These  two, 
being  kings,  could  not2  properly  accept  gifts  which  Brahmanas 
alone  could  accept,  but  by  becoming  authors  of  a  verse  of  the 
Rigveda3  they  qualified  themselves  to  accept  them.  The  verse 
mentions  the  names  in  the  dual  as  Dhvasrayoh,  Purusantyoh, 
'from  the  two,  Dhvasra  and  Purusanti.'4  In  the  Paficavimsa 
Brahmana6  the  names  occur  in  the  dual  as  Dhvasre  Purusanti, 
a  reading  which  is  confirmed  by  the  Nidana  Sutra.6  The 
former  is  necessarily  a  feminine  form,  though  Sayana,  in  his 
comment  on  the  passage,  explains  it  as  really  an  irregular 
masculine.  According  to  Roth,7  the  feminine  is  a  corruption 
based  on  the  dual  form  in  the  verse  of  the  Rigveda  mentioned 
above;  but  the  names  may  be  those  of  women,8  as  Benfey9 

1  xiii.    7,    12.     Cf.  Jaiminiya  Brah-    1       5  Loc.  cit. 
mana,    iii.     139  ;    Satyayanaka,    apud   |       6  ix.  9. 
Sayana,  on  Rv.  ix.  58,  3.  7  St.     Petersburg    Dictionary,     s.v. 


2  Manava  Dharma  Sastra,  x.  75-77. 

3  ix.  58,  3. 

4  Both  words  are  in  the  dual,  as  if 
they  were  members  of  a  Dvandva  com- 
pound. Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic  Grammar, 
261. 


dhvasra. 

8  The  first  would  in  that  case  be 
Dhvasra. 

9  Samaveda,  105, 126,  under  Dhvasanti 
and  Purusanti. 


4o8 


CRO  W—  WIND—ICHNE  UMON 


[  Dhvanksa 


inclines  to  believe.  Weber10  suggests  that  the  two  were 
demons,  but  this  is,  as  Sieg11  shows,  quite  unnecessary. 
Dhvasra  is  no  doubt  identical  with  Dhvasanti. 


10  Episches    im    vedischen    Ritual,    27, 
n.  1. 

11  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  62,  63. 
Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 

veda,  3,  139 ;  Oertel,  Journal  of  the 
American  Oriental  Society,  18,  39  ;  Max 
Muller,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32, 
360,  points  out  that  the  sense  of  the 


Rigveda  passage  is  quite  uncertain, 
and  that  the  two,  Taranta  and  Puru- 
milha,  as  they  appear  in  Rv.  v.  61, 
are  rather  donors  than  receivers  (see, 
however,  verse  9,  Purum'ilhaya  vipraya). 
See  also  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der 
Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft, 
42,  232  ;  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  354. 


Dhvanksa,  '  crow,'  is  mentioned  twice  in  the  Atharvaveda,1 
and  in  the  Sutras.2  Possibly  the  same  bird  is  meant  by  the 
words  Dhufiksa  and  Dhunksna. 

1  xi.  9,  9  ;  xii.  4,  8.  2  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra  xxv.  6,  9. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  88. 


Dhvanta  is  the  name  of  some  wind  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas1 
and  later.2 

1  Taittirlya    Samhita,    i.    7,    7,    2  ;   I       2  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  ii.  7,  16,  1  ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxxix.  7.  |   Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  iv.  24,  1 ;  25,  1. 


N. 

Nakula,  'ichneumon,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda1  as 
being  able  to  cut  a  snake  in  two  and  then  join  it  up  again. 
Its  knowledge2  of  a  remedy  against  snake  poison  is  also 
mentioned.  The  animal  figures  in  the  list  of  sacrificial  victims 
at  the  Asvamedha,  or  '  horse  sacrifice,'  in  the  Yajurveda 
Samhitas.3 


1  vi.  139,  5. 

2  Av.  viii. 


-  7-  23. 

3  Taittiriya  Samhita,   v.    5,    12,    1  ; 

2i,   1  ;   Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  26. 

2  ;    Maitrayani    Samhita,   iii.   14,    7. 


In  the  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  3,  18,  1  ; 
Rgveda  PratiSakhya,  xvii.  9,  nakula 
denotes  a  colour — no  doubt  that  of  the 
ichneumon. 


Naksatra  ] 


NIGHT— STARS 


409 


Nakta,  'night,'  is  found  frequently  in  the  Rigveda,1  and 
sometimes  later,2  usually  in  the  adverbial  form  naktam,  'by 
night.' 


1  i.  13,  7;  73.  7;  96,  5;  vii.  2,  6; 
x.  70,  6 ;  adverbially,  i.  24,  10 ;  90,  7 ; 
v«  76,  3  ;  vii.  15,  15  ;  104, 17  ;  viii.  96,  1. 


2  Chandogya  Upanisad,  viii.  4,  2  ; 
adverbially,  Av.  vi.  128,  4 ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  ii.  1,  4,  2  ;  xiii.  i,  5,  5,  etc. 


Naksatra  is  a  word  of  obscure  origin  and  derivation.  The 
Indian  interpreters  already  show  a  great  divergence  of  opinion 
as  to  its  primary  meaning.  The  Satapatha  Brahmana1  re- 
solves it  into  na-ksatra  ('  no  power '),  explaining  it  by  a  legend. 
The  Nirukta2  refers  it  to  the  root  naks,  'obtain,'  following  the 
Taittiriya  Brahmana.3  Aufrecht4  and  Weber5  derived  it  from 
nakta-tra,  '  guardian  of  night,'  and  more  recently6  the  derivation 
from  nak-ksatra,  '  having  rule  over  night,'  seems  to  be  gaining 
acceptance.  The  generic  meaning  of  the  word  therefore  seems 
to  be  '  star.' 

The  Naksatras  as  Stars  in  the  Rigveda  and  Later. — The  sense 
of  '  star '  appears  to  be  adequate  for  all  or  nearly  all  the  passages 
in  which  Naksatra  occurs  in  the  Rigveda.7  The  same  sense 
occurs  in  the  later  Samhitas  also  :  the  sun  and  the  Naksatras  are 
mentioned  together,8  or  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  Naksatras,9 
or  the  moon  and  the  Naksatras,10  or  the  Naksatras  alone;11 


1  ii.  1,  2,  18.  19.  Cf.  a  citation  in 
Nirukta,  iii.  20. 

2  Loc.  tit.,  and  cf.  St.  Petersburg 
Dictionary,  s.v, 

3  i.  5,  2,  5. 

4  Kuhn's  Zeitschrift,  8,  71,  72.  So 
Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  12, 
288,  n.  2. 

5  Naxatra,  2,  268. 

6  Macdonell,  Vedic  Grammar,  p.  74, 
line  8. 

7  See  i.  50,  2  ;  vii.  86,  1  ;  x.  68,  11  ; 
in,  7  ;  used  of  the  sun  itself,  vi.  67,  6 
(as  masculine);  vii.  81,  2;  x.  88,  13. 
The  sun  is  allied  with  them,  iii.  54,  19. 
Naksatra- savas,  '  equalling  the  multitude 
of  the  stars,'  is  used  as  an  epithet  in 
x.  21,  10.  Even  in  x.  85,  2,  where 
Soma,  on  the  lap  of  the  Naksatras,  is 


mentioned,  '  stars '  would  do  ;  but,  as 
this  hymn  refers  to  two  of  the  later 
Naksatras,  '  lunar  mansions  '  may  well 
be  meant. 

8  Av.  vi.  10,  3  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xxiii.  43 ;  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  x.  1, 1 ; 
Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  iv.  10,  12. 

9  Av.  vi.  128,  3  ;  xv.  6,  2  ;  Taittiriya 
Samhita,  i.  8,  13,  3 ;  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 
hita, xxii.  29,  etc. 

10  Av.  v.  24,  10 ;  vi.  86,  2 ;  Taittiriya 
Samhita,  iii.  4,  5,  1 ;  Kathaka  Samhita, 
xxxv.  15  ;  xxx vii.  12  ;  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 
hita, xxx.  21  ;  xxxix.  2,  etc. 

11  Taittiriya  Samhita,  i.  2,  2,  2  ;  ii  6, 
2,  6,  etc  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  21 
etc.  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  Asvamedha, 
v.  5,  and  very  often  elsewhere. 


4io 


LUNAR  MANSIONS  IN  THE  RIG  VEDA     [  Nak§atra 


but  there  is  no  necessity  to  attribute  to  the  word  the  sense  of 
'  lunar  mansion  '  in  these  passages. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  names  of  at  least  three  of  the 
Naksatras  in  the  later  sense  occur  in  the  Rigveda.  Tisya,12 
however,  does  not  seem  to  be  mentioned  as  a  lunar  mansion. 
With  Agfhas  (plur.)  and  Arjuni  (dual)13  the  case  is  different: 
it  seems  probable  that  they  are  the  later  lunar  mansions  called 
Maghas  (plur.)  and  Phalguni  (dual).  The  names  appear  to 
have  been  deliberately  changed  in  the  Rigveda,  and  it  must  be 
remembered  that  the  hymn  in  which  they  occur,  the  wedding 
hymn  of  Surya,  has  no  claim  to  great  age.14  Ludwig15  and 
Zimmer16  have  seen  other  references  to  the  Naksatras  as 
27  in  the  Rigveda,17  but  these  seem  most  improbable.  Nor 
do  the  adjectives  revati  ('  rich ')  and  punarvasil  ('  bringing 
wealth  again ')  in  another  hymn w  appear  to  refer  to  the 
Naksatras. 

The  Naksatras  as  Lunar  Mansions. — In  several  passages  of  the 
later  Samhitas  the  connexion  of  the  moon  and  the  Naksatras 
is  conceived  of  as  a  marriage  union.  Thus  in  the  Kathaka19 
and  Taittiriya  Samhitas20  it  is  expressly  stated  that  Soma  was 
wedded  to  the  mansions,  but  dwelt  only  with  Rohini;  the 
others  being  angry,  he  had  ultimately  to  undertake  to  live  with 
them  all  equally.  Weber21  hence  deduced  that  the  Naksatras 
were  regarded  as  of  equal  extent,  but  this  is  to  press  the  texts 
unduly,  except  in  the  sense  of  approximate  equality.  The 
number  of  the  mansions  is  not  stated  as  27  in  the  story  told  in 
the  two  Samhitas :  the  Taittiriya  has  33,  and  the  Kathaka  no 


12  Rv.  v.  59,  13 ;  x.  64,  8  ;  Weber, 
2,  290. 

13  x.  85,  13;  Weber,  364-367,  and 
see  references  under  Agha  and  Arjuni. 

14  Cf.  Arnold,  Vedic  Metre,  322. 

15  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3, 
184  et  seq. 

16  Altindisches  Leben,  354.  Cf.  Tilak, 
Orion,  158. 

17  i.  162,  18  (the  34  ribs  of  the  horse 
=  moon,  sun,  5  planets,  27  Naksatras)  ; 
x.  55,  3  (34  ^ghts). 


18 


x.  19,  I. 


19  xi.  3  (Indische  Studien,  3,  467). 


20  ii-  3,  5,  1-3-  Cf.  also  iii.  4,  7,  1 ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xviii.  14  ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xviii.  40 ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, ix.  4,  1,9;  Sadvimsa  Brahmana, 
iii.  12.  The  dwelling  of  the  moon  in 
a  Naksatra  is  mentioned,  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  x.  5,  4,  17 ;  Nirukta,  v.  21  ; 
a  Mantra  in  Kausika  Sutra,  135  ; 
Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  i.  11,  6;  v.  12, 
I,  etc. 

21  Op.  cit.,  277.  Cf.  the  later  system 
of  the  Siddhantas,  Whitney,  Oriental 
and  Linguistic  Studies,  2,  372,  and  see 
Tilak,  Orion,  33  et  seq. 


Naksatra  ]     NUMBER  OF  THE  LUNAR  MANSIONS 


411 


number ;  but  27  appears  as  their  number  in  the  list  which  is 
found  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita22  and  elsewhere.23  The 
number  28  is  much  less  well  attested :  in  one  passage  of  the 
Taittiriya  Brahmana24  Abhijit  is  practically  marked  as  a  new 
comer,  though  in  a  later  book,25  in  the  Maitrayani  Samhita,26 
and  in  the  Atharvaveda  list,27  it  has  found  acceptance.  It  is 
perfectly  possible  that  28  is  the  earlier  number,  and  that  Abhijit 
dropped  out  because  it  was  faint,  or  too  far  north,  or  because 
27  was  a  more  mystic  (3x3x3)  number :  it  is  significant  that 
the  Chinese  Sieou  and  the  Arabic  Manazil  are  28  in  number.28 
Weber,29  however,  believes  that  27  is  the  older  number  in 
India. 

The  meaning  of  the  number  is  easily  explained  when  it  is 
remembered  that  a  periodic  month  occupies  something  between 

27  and  28  days,  more  nearly  the  former  number.  Such  a  month 
is  in  fact  recognized  in  the  Latyayana30  and  Nidana  Sutras31 
as  consisting  of  27  days,  12  months  making  a  year  of  324  days, 
a  Naksatra  year,  or  with  an  intercalary  month,  a  year  of 
351  days.  The  Nidana  Sutra32  makes  an  attempt  to  introduce 
the  Naksatra  reckoning  into  the  civil  or  solar  (sdvana)  year 
of  360  days,  for  it  holds  that  the  sun  spends  13J  days  in 
each   Naksatra   (13^x27  =  360).      But    the    month   of   27   or 

28  days  plays  no  part  in  the  chronological  calculations  of  the 
Veda.33 

The  Names  of  the  Naksatras. — In  addition  to  the  two  men- 
tioned  in   the    Rigveda,  the   earlier   Atharvaveda34  gives   the 


•"  iv.  4,  10,  1-3. 

23  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxxix.  13,  but 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  13,  20,  has  28 ; 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  5,  1,  1-5,  in 
lists  of  Naksatras.  See  also  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  ix.  7  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
x.  5,  4,  5 ;  Paiicavimsa  Brahmana, 
xxiii.  23 ;  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  v.  1 ; 
Sankhayana  Aranyaka,  ii.  16 ;  Tait- 
tiriya Samhita,  vii.  i,  2,  2;  Jyotisa, 
18.  20  (verse  34  has  28,  but  it  is  inter- 
polated) ;  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
xiv.  78,  etc. 

24  i.  5,  2,  3.     Cf.  Weber,  1,  360,  n. 

25  iii.  1,  2,  6. 


M  11.  13,  20. 

27  xix.  7,  1 ;  8,  1  =  Naksatrakalpa, 
10.  26.  So  in  Sankhayana  Grhya 
Sutra,  i.  26. 

28  Whitney,  op.  cit.,  409-411  ;  Journal 
of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  8,  390. 

29  Op.  cit.,  2,  280;  Indische  Studien, 
9,  446;  10,  223,  224,  226,  227. 

30  iv.  8,  1  et  seq. 

31  v.  11.  12.  See  Weber,  2,  281- 
288. 

32  Thibaut,  A stronomie,  Astrologie  und 
Maihematik,  7. 

33  See  Masa. 

34  I.e.,  books  i-xvi. 


412 


NAMES  OF  THE  LUNAR  MANSIONS       [  Naksati 


names  of  Jyesthaghni35  (the  later  Jyestha)  and  Vicrtau,36  which 
are  mentioned  as  in  close  connexion,  and  of  Revatls  (plural 
and  Kyttikas.37  With  reference  to  possible  times  for  the 
ceremony  of  the  Agnyadhana,  or  Maying  of  the  sacred  fires/ 
the  Kathaka  Samhita,38  the  Maitrayani  Samhita,39  and  the 
Taittiriya  Brahmana40  mention  the  Naksatras  called  Krttikas, 
Rohini,  Phalgunyas,  Hasta ;  the  latter  Brahmana  adds  Punar- 
vasu,  and  in  an  additional  remark41  excludes  Purve  Phalguni 
in  favour  of  Uttare  Phalguni.  The  Satapatha  Brahmana42 
adds  Mrgaslrsa  and  Citra  as  possibilities.  On  the  other  hand, 
Punarvasu  is  recommended  by  all  authorities43  as  suitable  for 
the  Punaradheya,  '  relaying  of  the  sacred  fires,'  which  takes 
place  if  the  first  fire  has  failed  to  effect  the  aim  of  its  existence, 
the  prosperity  of  the  sacrificer.44  The  Kathaka  Samhita,4 
however,  allows  Anuradhas  also. 

In  the  ceremony  of  the  Agnicayana,  or  *  piling  of  the  fire- 
altar,'  the  bricks  are  assumed  to  be  equal  in  number  to  the 
Naksatras.  The  bricks  number  756,  and  they  are  equated  t< 
27  Naksatras  multiplied  by  27  secondary  Naksatras,  reckoned 
as  720  (instead  of  729),  with  the  addition  of  36  days,  the  length 
of  an  intercalary  month.  Nothing  can  be  usefully  derived 
from  this  piece  of  priestly  nonsense.46  But  in  connexion  with 
this  ceremony  the   Yajurveda   Samhitas47  enumerate   the   27 


35  vi.  no,  2.  This  constellation, 
•the  slayer  of  the  oldest,'  was  ap- 
parently of  evil  omen.  Cf.  Taittiriya 
Brahmana,  i.  5,  2,  8.  Whitney,  Trans- 
lation of  the  Atharvaveda,  361,  equates 
it  with  Antares  or  Cor  Scorpionis,  with 
or  without  <r,  r  Scorpionis  (Jyaisthaghni 
is  a  misreading  in  the  edition  of  Whitney 
and  Roth). 

36  vi.  no,  2.  It  is  also  mentioned 
in  ii.  8,  i  ;  iii.  7,  4;  vi.  121,  3.  It  is 
identified  by  the  commentators  with 
Mula,  '  the  root,'  the  two  stars,  X  and 
v  Scorpionis,  which  form  the  sting  of 
the  Scorpion's  tail ;  Whitney,  op.  cit.,48. 

37  ix.  7,  3. 

38  viii.  1. 

39  i.  6,  9. 

40  i.  1,  2,  1-6. 


41  i.  1,  2,  8. 

42  ii.  1,  2,  1. 

43  Taittiriya  Samhita,  i.  5,  1,  4  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  7,  2 ;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  viii.  15 ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, ii.  1,  2, 10  ;  Kausitaki  Brahmana, 

i-  3- 

44  Hillebrandt,  Rituallitteratur,  109. 

45  viii.  15 ;  Maitrayani  Samhita, 
i.  7,  2. 

46  Satapatha  Brahmana,  x.  5,  4,  5. 
See  Weber,  2,  298,  with  whom  Eggel- 
ing,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  43,  383, 
n.  1,  concurs.  For  a  wild  speculation, 
see  Shamasastry,  Gavam  ayana,  122 
et  seq. 

47  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  4,  10,  1-3; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  13,  20 ;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  xxxix.  13. 


tfaksatra  ]     YAJURVEDA  LISTS  OF  THE  ASTERISMS 


413 


Naksatras,    and    these    lists48   may   be    given    in    extenso    as 
follows : 


Taittirlya  Samhita. 

Maitrayarii  Samhita. 

Kathaka  Samhita. 

1.  Krttikas  (fem.  plur.) 

..     Krttikas        

. .     Krttikas 

2.  RohinI 

..     RohinI 

..     RohinI 

3.  Mrgasirsa  (neut.) 

..     Invaga.         

. .     Invaka. 

4.  Ardra 

..     Bahu            

..     Bahu 

5.  Punarvasu  (dual) 

..     Punarvasu  (sing.)  ... 

..     Punarvasu 

6.  Tisya 

..     Tisya 

..     Tisya 

7.  Asresas  (fem.  plur.) 

. .     Aslesas  (plur. ;  Pada  Aslesa)    Aslesas  (or  ASlesas) 

8.  Maghas  (fem.  plur.) 

..     Maghas       

..     Maghas 

9.  Phalguni  (fern,  dual) 

..     Phalgunis  (plur.)  ... 

..     Phalgunis 

10.  Phalguni  (fem.  dual) 

..     Phalgunis  (plur.)  ... 

..     Uttarah  Phalgunis 

11.  Hasta       

..     Hasta           

..     Hastau  (dual) 

12.  Citra.         

..     Citra 

. .     Citra. 

13.  Svati         

..     Nistya  (neut.) 

..     Nistya 

14.  Visakhe  (fem.  dual) 

..     ViSakha  (neut.  sing.) 

..     Visakha  (fem.  sing.) 

15.  Anuradhas  (plur.) 

..     Anuradha.      (Pada      Anu-    Anuradhas  (masc. 

radha) 

plur.) 

16.  RohinI      

..     Jyestha         

..     Jyestha 

17.  Vicrtau      

..     Mula  (neut.) 

..     Mula 

18.  Asadhas  (fem.  plur.) 

..     Asadhas 

..     Asadhas 

19.  Asadhas  (fem.  plur.) 

..     Asadhas       

..     Uttara,  Asadhas 

20. 

Abhijit         

21.  Srona        

..     Srona. 

..     Asvattha 

22.  Sravisthas  (plur.) 

..     Sravisthas 

. .     Sravisthas 

23.  Satabhisaj 

..     Satabhisaj 

. .     Satabhisaj 

24 .  Prosthapadas  ( masc.  plu 

r.)     Prosthapadas 

. .     Prosthapadas 

25.  Prosthapadas  (masc.  plu 

r.)    Prosthapadas 

..     Uttare  Prosthapadas 

26.  Revati 

..     Revati 

. .     Revati 

27.  Asvayujau  (dual) 

..     ASvayujau    ... 

. .     Asvayujau 

28.  Apabharanis  (fem.  plu 

r.)     Bharanis 

. .     Apabharanis 

The  Taittirlya  Brahmana49  has  a  list  of  the  Naksatras 
which  agrees  generally  with  the  list  of  the  Samhitas.  It  runs 
as  follows :  Krttikas,  RohinI,  Invakas,  Bahu  (dual),  Tisya, 
Aslesas,  Maghas,  Purve  Phalguni,  Uttare  Phalguni,  Hasta, 
Citra,  Nistya,  Visakhe,  Anuradhas,  RohinI,  MulabarhanI, 
Purva  Asadhas,  Uttara  Asadhas,  Srona,  Sravisthas,  Satabhisaj, 
Purve  Prosthapadas,  Uttare  Prosthapadas,  Revati,  Asvayujau, 
Apabharanis.     In  a  later  book,50  however,  the  list  grows  to  28, 


48  The  forms  and  genders  are  given 
as  accepted  by  Weber,  2,  300.  The 
latter  depend  on  references  to  the  names 
of  the  Naksatras  in  other  passages 
in   some   cases  —  e.g.,   Anuradhesu,   in 


Kathaka,  viii.  15,  shows  that  the  name 
is  a  masculine  in  that  Samhita. 

49  i-  5,  1. 

50  iii.  1,  4,  1  et  seq.     Cf.  iii.  1,  1-2. 


4i4  BRAHMAN  A  AND  ATHARVAVEDA  LISTS     [  Naksatra 

and  the  full  moon  is  inserted  after  number  14,  and  the  new 
moon  after  number  28,  as  an  attempt  to  bring  the  Naksatra 
(lunar)  month  into  accordance  with  the  Savana  (solar)  month 
of  30  days.  The  names  in  this  second  list  are  as  in  the 
Samhitas  with  the  following  exceptions.  The  seven  stars  of 
the  Krttikas  are  named  as  Amba,  Dula,  Nitatnl,  Abhrayanti, 
Meghayanti,  Varsayanti,  Cupunika,  names  found  also  in  the 
Taittiriya51  and  Kathaka  Samhitas.52  Beside  Mrgasirsa,  Invakas 
are  also  mentioned.53  Then  come  Ardra,  Punarvasu,  Tisya, 
Asresas,  Maghas  (beside  which  Anaghas,  Agadas,  and  Arun- 
dhatis  are  also  mentioned),  Phalgunyas  (but  elsewhere  in  the 
dual,  Phalgunyau),54  Phalgunyas,  Hasta,  Citra,  Nistya,  Visakhe, 
Anuradhas,  Jyestha,  Mula,  Asadhas,  Asadhas,  Abhijit,  Srona, 
Sravisthas,  Satabhisaj,  Prosthapadas,  Prosthapadas,  Revati, 
Asvayujau,  Bharanyas,  but  also  Apabharanis.55  Abhijit,  which 
occurs  also  in  an  earlier  part  of  the  Brahmana,56  is  perhaps 
interpolated.  But  Weber's57  argument  that  Abhijit  is  out  of 
place  in  this  list  because  Brahmana  is  here  mentioned  as  the 
28th  Naksatra,  loses  some  force  from  the  fact  (of  course  unknown 
to  him)  that  the  list  in  the  MaitrayanI  Samhita58  contains 
28  Naksatras,  including  Abhijit,  and  adds  Brahmana  at  the  end 
as  another. 

In  another  passage59  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana  divides  th 
Naksatras  into  two  sets,  the  Deva  Naksatras  and  the  Yama 
Naksatras,  being  1-14  and  15-27  (with  the  omission  of  Abhijit) 
respectively.  This  division  corresponds  with  one  in  the  third 
book  of  the  Brahmana60  where  the  days  of  the  light  half  of 
the  month  and  those  of  the  dark  half  are  equated  with  the 
Naksatras.  The  Brahmana  treats  the  former  series  as  south, 
the  latter  as  north;  but  this  has  no  relation  to  facts,  an 
can  only  be  regarded  as  a  ritual  absurdity. 

The  late   nineteenth   book  of  the  Atharvaveda   contains  a 
list61  of  the  Naksatras,  including  Abhijit.     The  names  her 

60  iii.  1,  2.  Cf.  Kausitaki  Brahmana, 
iv.  12,  with  Vinayaka's  note. 

61  xix.  7,  1  et  seq.  The  number  is 
given  as  28  in  xix.  7,  1  (as  emended) 
and  8,  2.  Cf.  Lanman's  introductory- 
note  to  the  former  hymn  in  Whitney's 
Translation,  906,  907. 


51  iv.  4,  5,  1.  52  xj.  4. 

«3  iii.  1,  4,  3-  54  iii-  I,  4,  9. 

55  Hi.  i,  5,  i4.  56  i,  5>  2,  3. 

57  Op.  cit.,  305,  306. 

58  ii.  13,  20. 

59  i.   5,   2,  7.     Cf.   Tilak,  Orion,  41 
et  seq. 


Nak§atra  ]      POSITION  OF  THE  LUNAR  MANSIONS 


415 


given  are  :  Krttikas,  Rohini,  Mrgasiras,  Ardra,  Punarvasu, 
Pusya,  Aslesas,  Maghas,  Purva  Phalgunyau  (sic),62  Hasta, 
Citra,  Svati  (masc.),63  Visakhe,  Anuradha,64  Jyestha,  Mula, 
Purva  Asadhas,65  Uttara  Asadhas,  Abhijit,  Sravana,  Sravisthas, 
Satabhisaj,  Dvaya  Prosthapada,  RevatI,  Asvayujau,  Bharanyas. 
The  Position  of  the  Naksatras. — There  is  nothing  definite  in 
Vedic  literature  regarding  the  position  of  most  of  the  Naksatras, 
but  the  later  astronomy  precisely  locates  all  of  them,  and  its 
statements  agree  on  the  whole  satisfactorily  with  what  is  said 
in  the  earlier  texts,  though  Weber66  was  inclined  to  doubt  this. 
The  determinations  adopted  below  are  due  to  Whitney67  in  his 
notes  on  the  Surya  Siddhanta. 

1.  Krttikas  are  unquestionably  rj  Tauri,  etc.,  the  Pleiades. 
The  names  of  the  seven  stars  forming  this  constellation,  and 
given  above  from  Yajurveda  texts,68  include  three — abhrayantl, 
'  forming  clouds  ';    tneghayanti,    l  making  cloudy  ';    varsayantl, 

*  causing  rain  ' — which  clearly  refer  to  the  rainy  Pleiades.    The 
word  krttika  possibly  means  '  web,'  from  the  root  krt,  *  spin.' 

2.  Rohini,  '  ruddy,'  is  the  name  of  the  conspicuously  reddish 
star,  a  Tauri  or  Aldebaran,  and  denotes  the  group  of  the 
Hyades,  a  8  y  8  €  Tauri.  Its  identification  seems  absolutely 
assured  by  the  legend  of  Prajapati  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana.69 
He  is  there  represented  as  pursuing  his  daughter  with  incestuous 
intention,  and  as  having  been  shot  with  an  arrow  (Isu  Trikanda, 
1  the  belt    of    Orion  ')    by    the    *  huntsman  '    (Mrg-avyadha, 

*  Sirius ').      Prajapati   is   clearly   Orion    (Mrgasiras   being   the 
name  of  the  little  group  of  stars  in  Orion's  head). 

3.  Mrgaslrsa  or  MrgaSiras,  also  called  Invaka  or  Invaga, 


62  The  reading  Purva,  Phalgunyau 
must  be  wrong  ;  perhaps  Dvaye  (cf. 
verse  5)  or  Purve  should  be  read.  See 
Lanman  in  Whitney,  Translation  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  908.  The  Uttare 
Phalgunyau  are  omitted. 

63  Svati  should,  no  doubt,  be  read  ; 
but  for  the  Svati  {sic)  of  all  the  manu- 
scripts (Samhita  and  Pada),  cf.  the 
navasrakti  of  the  Aitareya  Aranyaka, 
ii.  3,  6,  with  Keith's  note. 

64  See  Lanman  in  Whitney,  908. 

65  Lanman,  ibid.,  909,  reads  Purva 


Asadha  and  Uttara  Asadha  ;  Whitney 
reads  Purva.  and  Uttara  Asadhas.  The 
manuscripts  have  Purva  and  Uttare, 
which  cannot  stand. 

66  Op.  cit.,  2,  367  et  seq. 

67  Oriental  and  Linguistic  Essays,  2, 
350  ft  seq. 

68  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  4,  5,  1  ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xl.  4 ;  Taittiriya 
Brahmana,  iii.  1,  4,  1. 

69  iii.  33.  Cf.  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
ii.  1,  2,  8 ;  Tilak,  Orion,  98  et  seq. 


4i6 


POSITION  OF  THE  LUNAR  MANSIONS     [  Nak§atra 


seems  to  be  the  faint  stars  X,  (/j,1  4>2  Ononis.  They  are  called 
Andhaka,  '  blind,'  in  the  Santikalpa  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
probably  because  of  their  dimness.70 

4.  Ardra, '  moist,'  is  the  name  of  the  brilliant  star,  a  Orionis. 
But  the  names  by  which  it  is  styled,  in  the  plural  as  Ardras  in 
the  Sahkhayana  Grhya  Sutra71  and  the  Naksatrakalpa,72  and 
in  the  dual  as  Bahu,  in  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana,73  point  to  a 
constellation  of  two  or  more  stars,  and  it  may  be  noted 74  that 
the  corresponding  Chinese  Sieou  includes  the  seven  brilliant 
stars  composing  the  shoulders,  the  belt,  and  the  knees  of 
Orion. 

5.  Punarvasu,  '  the  two  that  give  wealth  again,'  denotes  the 
two  stars,  a  and  /3  Geminorum,  on  the  heads  of  Castor  and 
Pollux.  The  name  is  no  doubt  connected  with  the  beneficent 
character  of  the  Asvins,  who  correspond  to  the  Dioscuri.75 

6.  Tisya  or  Pusya  includes  the  somewhat  faint  group  in  the 
body  of  the  Crab,  7,  B,  and  0  Cancri.  The  singular  is  rather 
curious,  as  primarily  one  star  would  seem  to  have  been  meant, 
and  none  of  the  group  is  at  all  prominent.76 

7.  ASresas  or  ASlesas,  which  in  some  texts77  is  certainly  to 
be  read  Asresas  or  Aslesas,  denotes  S,  e,  77,  p,  <r,  and  perhaps 
also  f,  Hydrge.  The  word  means  '  embracer,'  a  name  which 
admirably  fits  the  constellation. 

8.  Maghas,  the  '  bounties,'  are  the  Sickle,  or  a,  77,  7,  £,  /x,  e 
Leonis.  The  variants  Anagfha,  the  '  sinless  one,'  etc.,  clearly 
refer  to  the  auspicious  influence  of  the  constellation. 

9.  10.  Phalguni,  Phalgrunyau,  Phalg-u,78  Phalg-unis,  Phal- 
gunyas,  is  really  a  double  constellation,  divided  into  Purve, 
1  former,'  and  Uttare,  'latter.'  The  former  is  &  and  6  Leonis, 
the  latter  ft  and  93  Leonis.  According  to  Weber,  the  word 
denotes,  like  Arjuni,  the  variant  of  the  Rigveda,79  a  '  bright- 
coloured  '  constellation. 

76  Whitney,  op.  cit.,  403,  n.  1 

77  Asresas,  £ankhayana  Grhya  Sutra, 
i.  26  ;  Santikalpa  ;  Naksatrakalpa  ; 
Aslesas,  Santikalpa,  2  ;  Naksatrakalpa, 
4.  48. 

78  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  v.  1. 


™  Whitney,  op.  cit.,  401.     Cf.  Tilak, 
102  et  seq. 
7i  i.  26. 
«  10. 

73  i.  5.  I. 

7*  Whitney,  op.  cit.,  352,  401,  n.  1. 
75  Oldenberg,  Religion  des  Veda,  212 ; 
Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  53. 


85.  13. 


Naksatra  ]  LIST  OF  THE  ASTERISMS  417 

11.  Hasta,  'hand,'  is  made  up  of  the  five  conspicuous  stars 
(8,  7,  e,  a,  /3)  in  Corvus,  a  number  which  the  word  itself 
suggests.  According  to  Geldner,80  the  ■  five  bulls '  of  the 
Rigveda  are  this  constellation. 

12.  Citra,  '  bright,'  is  the  beautiful  star,  a  Virginis.  It  is 
mentioned  in  a  legend  of  Indra  in  the  Taittirlya  Brahmana,81 
and  in  that  of  the  '  two  divine  dogs  '  (divyau  svdnau)  in  the  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana.82 

13.  Svati  or  Nistya  is  later  clearly  the  brilliant  star  Arcturus 
or  a  Bootis,  its  place  in  the  north  being  assured  by  the  notice 
in  the  Santikalpa,83  where  it  is  said  to  be  '  ever  traversing  the 
northern  way  '  (nityam  uttara-margagam).  The  Taittirlya 
Brahmana,84  however,  constructs  an  asterismal  Prajapati, 
giving  him  Citra  {a  Virginis)  for  head,  Hasta  (Corvus)  for 
hand,  the  Visakhe  (a  and  /9  Librae)  for  thighs,  and  the 
Anuradhas  (/?,  8,  and  ir  Scorpionis)  for  standing  place,  with 
Nistya  for  heart.  But  Arcturus,  being  300  out,  spoils  this 
figure,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Arabic  and  Chinese 
systems  have  respectively,  instead  of  Arcturus,  1,  *,  and  X 
Virginis  and  k  Virginis,  which  would  well  fit  into  the  Prajapati 
figure.  But  in  spite  of  the  force  of  this  argument  of  Weber's,85 
Whitney86  is  not  certain  that  Nistya  here  must  mean  a  star  in 
Virgo,  pointing  out  that  the  name  Nistya,  '  outcast,'  suggests 
the  separation  of  this  Naksatra  from  the  others  in  question. 

14.  Visakhe  is  the  couple  of  stars  a  and  fi  Libras.  This 
mansion  is  later  called  Radha  according  to  the  Amarakosa,  and 
it  is  curious  that  in  the  Atharvaveda87  the  expression  rddho 
Visakhe,  *  the  Visakhe  are  prosperity,'  should  occur.  But 
probably  Radha  is  merely  an  invention  due  to  the  name  of  the 
next  Naksatra,  Anuradha,  wrongly  conceived  as  meaning  '  that 
which  is  after  or  follows  Radha.'88 

15.  Anuradhas  or  Anuradha,  '  propitious,'  is  /?,  S,  and  ir 
(perhaps  also  p)  Scorpionis. 


80  Vedische  Studien,  3,  177  ;  Rv.  i.  105, 
10.     Cf.  below,  p.  427,  n.  156. 

81  Taittirlya  Brahmana,  i.  1,2,  4-6. 

82  ii.  1,  2,  13-17.  83  3. 


84  i.  5,  2.     Cf.  Tilak,  Orion,  204. 
«5  Op.  cit.,  2,  307,  308. 

VOL.  I.  27 


86  Op.  cit.,  409. 

87  xix.  7. 

88  Lanman  in  Whitney's  Translation 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  908.  Cf.  Thibaut, 
Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal, 
63,  156. 


4i8 


LIST  OF  THE  ASTERISMS 


[  Nak§atra 


16.  RohinI,  « ruddy  ';  Jyesthagrhni,  '  slaying  the  eldest ';  or 
Jyestha,  '  eldest,'  is  the  name  of  the  constellation  a,  a,  and  r 
Scorpionis,  of  which  the  central  star,  or,  is  the  brilliant  reddisl 
Antares  (or  Cor  Scorpionis). 

17.  Viertau,  '  the  two  releasers ';  Mula,  *  root ';  or  Mula- 
barhani,  '  uprooting,'  denote  primarily  X  and  v  at  the  extremity 
of  the  tail  of  the  Scorpion,  but  including  also  the  nine  01 
eleven  stars  from  e  to  v. 

18.  19.  Asadhas  ('  unconquered '),  distinguished  as  Purvas, 
'  former,'  and  Uttaras,  '  latter,'  are  really  two  constellations,  oi 
which  the  former  is  composed  of  y,  8,  e,  and  tj  Sagittarii,  or  oi 
8  and  e  only,  and  the  latter  of  0,  a,  t,  and  f  Sagittarii,  or  of  two, 
a  and  f,  only.  It  is  probable  that  originally  only  four  stars 
forming  a  square  were  meant  as  included  in  the  whole  con- 
stellation89— viz.,  a  and  f,  with  8  and  e. 

20.  Abhijit  is  the  brilliant  star  a  Lyrse  with  its  two  com- 
panions €  and  f.  Its  location  in  6o°  north  latitude  is  completely 
discordant  with  the  position  of  the  corresponding  Arabian  am 
Chinese  asterisms.  This  fact  is  considered  by  Oldenberg90  t( 
support  the  view  that  it  was  a  later  addition  to  the  system  ;  its 
occurrence,  however,  as  early  as  the  Maitrayani  Samhita,91 
which  he  does  not  note,  somewhat  invalidates92  that  view.  Ii 
the  Taittirlya  Brahmana93  Abhijit  is  said  to  be  *  over  Asadhas, 
under  &rona,'  which  Weber94  held  to  refer  to  its  position  ii 
space,  inferring  thence  that  its  Vedic  position  corresponded  t( 
that  of  the  Arab  Manazil  and  the  Chinese  Sieou — viz.,  a 
Capricorni.  But  Whitney95  argues  effectively  that  the  words 
1  over  '  and  '  under '  really  refer  to  the  place  of  Abhijit  in  the 
list,  '  after  '  Asadhas  and  '  before  '  Srona. 

21.  Srona,  'lame,'  or  Sravana,  '  ear,'  denotes  the  bright  stai 
a  Aquilae  with  &  below  and  7  above  it.     Weber96  very  need- 


89  Cf.  Thibaut,  Journal  of  the  Asiatic 
Society  of  Bengal,  63,  156. 

90  Nachrichten  der  konigl.  Gesellschaft 
der   Wissenschaften   zu   Gbttingen,    1909, 

55i»  552. 

91  ii.  13,  20. 

92  It  is  at  the  same  time  to  be  noted 
that  Abhijit  is  wanting  both  in   the 


Taittirlya  Samhita  and  in  the  Kathaka 
Samhita  lists. 

93  i-  5,  2,  3. 

9i  Op.    cit.,    1,    320,    321;    2,    307 
Indische  Studien,  10,  224  et  seq. 

95  Journal   of   the   American    Orientc 
Society,  8,  393. 

98  Op.  cit.  ,2, 382;  but  see  Whitney,  40^ 


Naksatra  ]     THE  NAKSATRA S  AND  THE  MONTHS  419 

lessly  thinks  that  the  name  Sravana  suggested  two  ears  and  the 
head  between.  It  is  quite  out  of  correspondence  with  the 
Manazil  and  the  Sieou,  and  is  clearly  an  Indian  invention.07 

22.  Sravisthas,  '  most  famous,'  or  later  Dhanisthas,"  'most 
wealthy,'  is  the  diamond-shaped  group,  a,  /3,  S,  and  7,  in  the 
Dolphin,  perhaps  also  ?  in  the  same  constellation.  Like  the 
preceding  Naksatra,  it  is  out  of  harmony  with  the  Manazil  and 
Sieou. 

23.  Satabhisaj  or  Satabhisa,"  '  having  a  hundred  physicians,' 
seems  to  be  A,  Aquarii  with  the  others  around  it  vaguely 
conceived  as  numbering  a  hundred. 

24.  25.  Prostha-padas  (fern,  plur.),  'feet  of  a  stool,'  or  later 
Bhadra-padas,100  'auspicious  feet,'  a  double  asterism  forming 
a  square,  the  former  (pHrva)  consisting  of  a  and  ft  Pegasi,  the 
latter  (uttara)  of  7  Pegasi  and  a  Andromedae. 

26.  Revati,  '  wealthy,'  denotes  a  large  number  of  stars 
(later  32),  of  which  f  Piscium,  close  upon  the  ecliptic  where 
it  was  crossed  by  the  equator  of  about  570  A.D.,  is  given  as  the 
southernmost. 

27.  ASva-yujau,  '  the  two  horse-harnessers,'  denotes  the  stars 
ft  and  f  Arietis.     Asvinyau101  and  AsvinI102  are  later  names. 

28.  Apabharanls,  Bharanis,  or  Bharanyas,  '  the  bearers,'  is 
the  name  of  the  small  triangle  in  the  northern  part  of  the  Ram 
known  as  Musca  or  35,  39,  and  41  Arietis. 

The  Naksatras  and  the  Months. — In  the  Brahmanas  the 
Naksatra  names  are  regularly  used  to  denote  dates.  This  is 
done  in  two  ways.  The  name,  if  not  already  a  feminine,  may 
be  turned  into  a  feminine  and  compounded  with  purna-nidsa, 
'  the  full  moon,'  as  in  Tisyd-purnamasa,  '  the  full  moon  in  the 
Naksatra  Tisya.'103  Much  more  often,  however,  it  is  turned 
into   a   derivative   adjective,  used   with  paurnamasi,   '  the  full 


97  Oldenberg,  loc.  at. 

98  Jaankhayana  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  26 
£antikalpa,  13;  Dhanistha,  ibid.,  5. 


100  Santikalpa,  5,  etc. 

101  Sankhayana  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  26 ; 
Naksatrakalpa,  9.  30. 


99  So  probably  in  Maitrayani  Sam-  1  102  Naksatrakalpa,    4.     45  ;     Santi- 

hita,     ii.     13,     20,     where     see     von  j  kalpa,  5.  11. 

Schroeder's  critical  note.     The  Santi-  I  103  Taittirlya  Samhita,   ii.  2,   10,   1. 

kalpa,  5,  and  Naksatrakalpa,  2,  have  j  Cf.  vii.  4,  8,  1.  2;  PaiicavimSa  Brah- 

Satabhisa,  and  the  latter,  1,  has  Sata-  I  mana,  v.  9,  1. 
bhisa  (masculine). 

27 — 2 


20 


THE  NAKSATRAS  AND  CHRONOLOGY     [  Nak§atra 


moon  (night),'  or  with  amavdsyd,  'the  new  moon  (night),'  as  in 
Phalguni  paurnamdsi,  'the  full-moon  night  in  the  Naksatra 
Phalguni';104  or,  as  is  usual  in  the  Sutras,  the  Naksatra  adjec- 
tive alone  is  used  to  denote  the  full-moon  night.  The  month 
itself  is  called  by  a  name  derived105  from  that  of  a  Naksatra, 
but  only  Phalguna,106  Caitra,107  Vaisakha,108  Taisya,109  Magna110 
occur  in  the  Brahmanas,  the  complete  list  later  being  Phalguna, 
Caitra,  Vaisakha,  Jyaistha,  Asadha,  Sravana,  Prausthapada, 
Asvayuja,  Karttika,  Margasirsa,  Taisya,  Magna.  Strictly 
speaking,  these  should  be  lunar  months,  but  the  use  of  a  lunar 
year  was  clearly  very  restricted :  we  have  seen  that  as  early  as 
the  Taittiriya  Brahmana  there  was  a  tendency  to  equate  lunar 
months  with  the  twelve  months  of  thirty  days  which  made  up 
the  solar  year  (see  Masa). 

The  Naksatras  and  Chronology. — (i)  An  endeavour  has  been 
made  to  ascertain  from  the  names  of  the  months  the  period  at 
which  the  systematic  employment  of  those  names  was  intro- 
duced. Sir  William  Jones111  refers  to  this  possibility,  and 
Bentley,  by  the  gratuitous  assumption  that  Sravana  always 
marked  the  summer  solstice,  concluded  that  the  names  of  the 
months  did  not  date  before  b.c.  1181.  Weber112  considered 
that  there  was  a  possibility  of  fixing  a  date  by  this  means,  but 
Whitney113  has  convincingly  shown  that  it  is  an  impossible 
feat,  and  Thibaut114  concurs  in  this  view.  Twelve  became 
fixed  as  the  number  of  the  months  because  of  the  desire, 
evident  in  the  Brahmanas,  somehow  or  other  to  harmonize 
lunar  with  solar  time  ;  but  the  selection  of  twelve  Naksatras 
out  of  twenty-seven  as  connected  with  the  night  of  full  moon 
can  have  no  chronological  significance,  because  full  moon  at 

104  Satapatha    Brahmana,    ii.    6, 


u.   o.   3. 

11  et  seq.  ;  vi.  2,  2,  18;  xiii.  4,  1,  4  ; 
Kausitaki  Brahmana,  i.  3  ;  iv.  4;  v.  I. 
See  also  Caland,  Uber  das  rituelle  Sutra 
des  Baudhayana,  36,  37,  and  Masa. 

105  primarily  an  adjective,  with  masa 
to  be  supplied  —  e.g.,  Phalguna,  '(the 
month)  connected  with  the  Naksatra 
Phalguni.' 

106  Paiicavimsa  Brahmana,  v.  9,  8. 

107  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xix.  3. 

108  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  1,  1,  7. 


109  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xix.  2.  3. 

110  Ibid.  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana. 
xiii.  8,  i,  4.  For  the  later  list,  see 
Weber,  Naxatva,  2,  327,  328. 

111  Asiatic  Researches,  2,  296. 

'12  Op.  cit.,  2,  347,  348 ;  Indischt 
Studien,  9,  455 ;  10,  230,  231. 

113  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  6,  413  ;  8,  85  et  seq. 

114  Astronomie,  Astrologie  und  Mathc- 
matik,  16. 


Nakgatra  ]     THE  NAKSATRAS  AND  CHRONOLOGY  421 

no  period  occurred  in  those  twelve  only,  but  has  at  all  periods 
occurred  in  every  one  of  the  twenty-seven  at  regularly  re- 
current intervals. 

(2)  All  the  lists  of  the  Naksatras  begin  with  Krttikas.     It  is 

only  fair  to  suppose  that  there  was  some  special  reason  for  this 

fact.     Now  the  later  list  of  the  Naksatras  begins  with  Asvini, 

and  it  was  unquestionably  rearranged  because  at  the  time  of  its 

adoption  the  vernal  equinox  coincided  with  the  star  f  Piscium 

on  the  border  of  Revati  and  Asvini,115  say  in  the  course  of  the 

sixth  century  a.d.     Weber116  has  therefore  accepted  the  view 

that  the  Krttikas  were  chosen  for  a  similar  reason,  and  the 

date  at  which  that  Naksatra  coincided  with  the  vernal  equinox 

has  been  estimated  at  some  period  in  the  third  millennium  B.C.117 

A  very  grave  objection  to  this  view  is  its  assumption  that  the 

sun,  and  not  the  moon,  was  then  regarded  as  connected  with 

the  Naksatras;   and  both  Thibaut118  and    Oldenberg119  have 

pronounced   decidedly   against    the    idea    of    connecting    the 

equinox  with  the  Krttikas.     Jacobi120  has  contended  that  in 

the  Rigveda121  the  commencement  of  the  rains  and  the  summer 

solstice  mark  the  beginning  of  the  new  year  and  the  end  of  the 

old,  and  that  further  the  new  year  began  with  the  summer 

solstice  in  Phalgunl.121     He  has  also  referred  to  the  distinction 

of  the  two  sets  of  Deva  and  Yama  Naksatras  in  the  Taittiriya 

Brahmana122  as  supporting  his  view  of  the  connexion  of  the 

sun  and  the  Naksatras.     But  this  view  is  far  from  satisfactory : 

the  Rigveda  passages  cannot  yield  the  sense  required  except 

by  translating  the  word  dvddasa123  as  '  the  twelfth  (month)  ' 

instead  of '  consisting  of  twelve  parts,'  that  is,  'year,'  the  accepted 


115  Cf.  Colebrooke,  Essays,  2,  264  ; 
Weber,  Indische  Studie?i,  10,  234. 

116  Naxatra,  2,  362  -  364  ;  Indische 
Studien,  10,  234 ;  Indian  Literature,  2, 
n.  2,  etc. 

117  See  Weber,  loc.  cit.  ;  Buhler, 
Indian  Antiquary,  23,  245,  n.  20  ; 
Tilak,  Orion,  40  et  seq. 

118  Indian  Antiquary,  24,  96. 

lis  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  48,  631  ;  49,  473  ; 
50,  451,  452  ;  Nachrichten  der  hbnigl. 
Gesellschaft  der  Wissenschaften  zu  Gottingen,   I 


1909,  564 ;   Keith,  Journal  of  the  Royal 
A  siatic  Society ,  1909,  1 1 03 . 

i20  Festgruss  an  Roth,  68  et  seq.= 
Indian  Antiquary,  23,  154  et  seq.  ;  Zeit- 
schrift der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen 
Gesellschaft,  49,  218  et  seq.  ;  50,  8^  ; 
Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1910, 

463. 

i21  vii.  103  (the  '  frog  '  hymn) ;  x.  85 
(the  'marriage  '  hymn). 

122  i.  5,  2,  8. 

123  Rv    vii     10^f  g# 


422  THE  NAKSATRAS  AND  CHRONOLOGY     [  Naksjatra 

interpretation ;  and  the  division  of  the  Naksatras  is  not  at  all 
satisfactorily  explained  by  a  supposed  connexion  with  the  sun.  It 
may  further  be  mentioned  that  even  if  the  Naksatra  of  Krttikas 
be  deemed  to  have  been  chosen  because  of  its  coincidence  with 
the  vernal  equinox,  both  Whitney124  and  Thibaut125  are  pre- 
pared to  regard  it  as  no  more  than  a  careless  variant  of  the  date 
given  by  the  Jyotisa,  which  puts  the  winter  solstice  in  Magna. 

(3)  The  winter  solstice  in  Magna  is  assured  by  a  Brahmana 
text,  for  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana120  expressly  places  it  in  the 
new  moon  of  Magna  (mdghasydmdvdsydydm).  It  is  not  very 
important  whether  we  take  this  with  the  commentators127  as 
the  new  moon  in  the  middle  of  a  month  commencing  with  the 
day  after  full  moon  in  Taisa,  or,  which  is  much  more  likely,  as 
the  new  moon  beginning  the  month  and  preceding  full  moon  in 
Magna.  The  datum  gives  a  certain  possibility  of  fixing  an  epoch 
in  the  following  way.  If  the  end  of  Revati  marked  the  vernal 
equinox  at  one  period,  then  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  would 
enable  us  to  calculate  at  what  point  of  time  the  vernal  equinox 
was  in  a  position  corresponding  to  the  winter  solstice  in  Magna, 
when  the  solstitial  colure  cut  the  ecliptic  at  the  beginning  of 
Sravisthas.  This  would  be,  on  the  strict  theory,  in  the  third 
quarter  of  Bharani,  6|  asterisms  removed  from  Sravisthas,  and 
the  difference   between  that   and   the   beginning  of  Asvini  = 

124  Oriental  and  Linguistic  Essays,  2,  though  the  text  is  corrupt).  The  passage 
383.  is  apparently  not   in   Caland's  manu- 

125  Indian  Antiquary,  24,  97.  Cf.  scripts,  or  he  would  have  mentioned 
Keith,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  it  in  his  paper,  Ubcr  das  rituelle  Sutra 
Society,  1910,  464,  n.  4.  des  Baudhayana,  36,   37.     Its  date  and 


126  xix.  3.  This  was  first  noticed  by 
Weber,  Naxatra,  2,  345  et  seq.,  who 
pointed  out  its  relation  to  the  datum 


value  are  therefore  not  quite  certain. 

127   Vinayaka    on    Kausitaki    Brah- 
mana,  loc.    cit.  ;    Anartiya   on    Sankh- 


of  the  Jyotisa.     The  same  date  as  that  ayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xiii.  19,  1  ;  Weber, 

of  the  Jyotisa  is  found  in  a  passage  of  '   Naxatra,   2,   345.     The  assumption  of 

the  Baudhayana  Srauta  Sutra  cited  by  the  scholiasts  seems  to  be  due  to  the 

Shamasastry,  Gavam  Ayana,  T37  (mdghe  fact  that  to  their  minds  a  month  must 

mase  dhanisthdbhir  uttarenaiti  bhdnumdn,  ;   end  with  a  new  moon  (amdnta)  or  with 

ardhaslesasya    sidvanasya    daksinenopani-  full  moon  {purnimdnta).     But  there  is 

vartate,  '  in  the  month  of  Magha  the  no  reason  to  say  that  in  Vedic  times 

sun    goes    north    with    the    asterism  the  month  may  not  have  commenced 

Dhanisthas,  in  the  month  of  Sravana  with    the   new  moon ;    the    Kausitaki 

he  returns  south  in  the  middle  of  the  passage  would  thus  be  quite  satisfac- 

asterism  A3!esa  ' ;   the  sense  is  clear,  torily  explained. 


Nak§atra  ]      THE  NAKSATRAS  AND  CHRONOLOGY  423 

if  asterisms  =  23  J°  (27  asterisms  being  =  360°).  Taking .  the 
starting-point  at  499  A.D.,  the  assured  period  of  Varaha  Mihira, 
Jones128  arrived  at  the  date  B.C.  1181  for  the  vernal  equinox 
corresponding  to  the  winter  solstice  in  Magna — that  is,  on  the 
basis  of  i°  =  72  years  as  the  precession.  Pratt129  arrived  at 
precisely  the  same  date,  taking  the  same  rate  of  precession  and 
adopting  as  his  basis  the  ascertained  position  in  the  Siddhantas 
of  the  junction  star130  of  Magna,  a  Leonis  or  Regulus.  Davis131 
and  Colebrooke132  arrived  at  a  different  date,  B.C.  1391,  by 
taking  as  the  basis  of  their  calculation  the  junction  star  of  Citra, 
which  happens  to  be  of  uncertain  position,  varying  as  much  as 
30  in  the  different  textbooks.  But  though  the  twelfth  century 
has  received  a  certain  currency  as  the  epoch  of  the  observation 
in  the  Jyotisa,133  it  is  of  very  doubtful  value.  As  Whitney 
points  out,  it  is  impossible  to  say  that  the  earlier  asterisms 
coincided  in  position  with  the  later  asterisms  of  13J0  extent 
each.  They  were  not  chosen  as  equal  divisions,  but  as  groups 
of  stars  which  stood  in  conjunction  with  the  moon  ;  and  the 
result  of  subsequently  making  them  strictly  equal  divisions 
was  to  throw  the  principal  stars  of  the  later  groups  altogether 
out  of  their  asterisms.134  Nor  can  we  say  that  the  star  £  Piscium 
early  formed  the  eastern  boundary  of  Revati ;  it  may  possibly 
not  even  have  been  in  that  asterism  at  all,  for  it  is  far  remote 
from  the  Chinese  and  Arabic  asterisms  corresponding  to  Revati. 
Added  to  all  this,  and  to  the  uncertainty  of  the  starting-point — 
582  A.D.,  560  a.d.,  or  491  a.d.  being  variants135 — is  the  fact  that 
the  place  of  the  equinox  is  not  a  matter  accurately  determin- 
able by  mere  observation,  and  that  the  Hindu  astronomers  of 
the  Vedic  period  cannot  be  deemed  to  have  been  very  accurate 
observers,  since  they  made   no  precise  determination  of  the 

i28  Asiatic  Researches,  2,  393.  133  E.g.,  Lassen,  Indische  Alterthums- 

129  Journal  of   the  Asiatic  Society   of      hunde,  i2,  606,  607,  976,  and  cf.  Thibaut, 


Bengal,  31,  49. 

130  Cf.  Whitney,  Oriental  and  Linguistic 
Essays,  2,  373. 

131  Asiatic  Researches,  2,  268;  5,  288. 

132  Essays,  I,  109,  no.  See  Sir  T. 
Colebrooke,  Journal  of  the  Royal  A  siatic 
Society,  1,  335  et  seq.  ;  Whitney,  op.  cit., 
2,  381,  382. 


Astronomie,  Astrologie   und  Mathematik, 
17,  18  ;  Tilak,  Orion,  38,  39. 

134  Whitney,  op.  cit.,  2,  375. 

135  Cf.  Whitney,  op.  cit.,  377,  379; 
Weber,  op.  cit.,  2,  363,  364,  where  he 
prefers  a.d.  582. 


424 


THE  NAKSATRAS  AND  CHRONOLOGY     [  Naksatra 


number  of  days  of  the  year,  which  even  in  the  Jyotisa  they  do 
not  determine  more  precisely  than  as  366  days,  and  even 
the  Surya  Siddhanta136  does  not  know  the  precession  of  the 
equinoxes.  It  is  therefore  only  fair  to  allow  a  thousand  years 
for  possible  errors,137  and  the  only  probable  conclusion  to  be 
drawn  from  the  datum  of  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana  is  that  it 
was  recording  an  observation  which  must  have  been  made  some 
centuries  B.C.,  in  itself  a  result  quite  in  harmony  with  the 
probable  date  of  the  Brahmana  literature,138  say  B.C.  800-600. 

(4)  Another  chronological  argument  has  been  derived  from 
the  fact  that  there  is  a  considerable  amount  of  evidence  for 
Phalguna  having  been  regarded  as  the  beginning  of  the  year, 
since  the  full  moon  in  Phalguni  is  often  described  as  the 
'  mouth  (mukham)  of  the  year.'139    Jacobi140  considers  that  this 


136  See  Whitney's  note  on  Surya 
Siddhanta,  iii.  12  ;  op.  cit.,  2,  369,  n.  1 ; 
374,  n.  1.     Cf.  Tilak,  Orion,  18. 

137  Whitney,  384,  followed  by  Thibaut, 
Indian  Antiquary,  24,  98 ;  Astronomie, 
Astrologie  und  Mathematik,  18.  See  also 
Weber,  Indische  Studien,  io,  236 ;  Indian 
Literature,  2,  n.  2  ;  Whitney,  Journal  of 
the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1,  313  et  seq.  ; 
in  Colebrooke's  Essays,  i2,  120  et  seq.  ; 
Max  Muller,  in  his  edition  of  the  Rig- 
veda,  iv2,  xxx  et  seq.,  was  also  inclined 
to  regard  the  date  as  very  uncertain ; 
only  in  his  popular  works  (Chips,  1, 
113,  etc.)  did  he  accept  1181  B.C.,  or 
rather  1 186  B.C.,  as  recalculated  by  Main 
from  Pratt's  calculation.  Shamasastry's 
defence,  Gavam  Ayana,  122  et  seq.,  of 
the  Jyotisa  shows  a  misunderstanding 

the  criticisms  made.  See  Keith, 
ournal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1910, 
66,  n.  5. 

138  Cf.  Macdonell,  Sanskrit  Literature, 
12,  202  ;  Keith,  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  20 
et  seq.  It  has  been  put  earlier  :  see 
Thibaut,  Astronomie,  etc.,  18;  Biihler, 
Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  M orgenldndischen 
Gesellschaft,  55,  544,  and  cf.  Biihler, 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  2,  xl  et  seq. ; 
Indian  Antiquary,  23, 247 ;  von  Schroeder, 
Indiens  Literatur  und  Cultur,  45  et  seq. 
See  also  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  3  ;  Hille- 


brandt,  Rituallitteratur,  31,  who  are  in- 
clined to  accept  an  early  date,  fourth 
or  fifth  century  B.C.,  for  the  Apastamba 
Sutras,  from  which  a  still  earlier  date 
for  the  Brahmanas  must  be  conceded. 
But  Eggeling  is  more  probably  correct 
when  he  assigns  the  Apastamba  Sutras 
to  the  third  century,  B.C.  See  Sacred 
Books  of  the  East,  12,  xl,  and  it  seems 
unwise  unduly  to  press  back  the  date 
of  Vedic  literature.  It  is  noteworthy 
that  in  the  Epic  the  solstice  is  still  in 
Magha  (Mahabharata,  xiii.  168,  6.  28). 
Reference  is,  however,  made  (ibid.,  i.  71, 
34)  to  the  Naksatras  commencing  with 
Sravana.  and  the  first  month  is  Marga- 
slrsa  (see  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the 
American  Oriental  Society,  24,  21  et  seq.). 
Cf.  also  Tilak,  Orion,  37,  216. 

139  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  4,  8,  1.  2  ; 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  v.  9,  9.  Cf. 
Kausitaki  Brahmana,  iv.  4 ;  v.  1  ;  Tait- 
tiriya Brahmana,  i.  1,  2,  8  ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  vi.  2,  2,  18 ;  Asvalayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  v.  3.  16.  According  to 
the  Taittiriya  and  the  Kausitaki  Brah- 
manas, the  beginning  falls  at  the  middle 
of  the  joint  asterism. 

140  Indian  Antiquary,  23,  156  et  seq.  ; 
Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  M orgenldndischen 
Gesellschaft,  49,  223  et  seq.;  50,  72-81. 
See  Tilak,  Orion,  53  et  seq.  ;  198  et  seq. 


Nak§atra  ]     THE  NAKSATRAS  AND  CHRONOLOGY 


425 


was  due  to  the  fact  that  the  year  was  reckoned  from  the  winter 
solstice,  which  would  coincide  with  the  month  of  Phalguna 
about  B.C.  4000.  Oldenberg141  and  Thibaut,142  on  the  other 
hand,  maintain  that  the  choice  of  Phalguna  as  the  '  mouth  '  of 
the  year  was  due  to  its  being  the  first  month  of  spring.  This 
view  is  favoured  by  the  fact  that  there  is  distinct  evidence143 
of  the  correspondence  of  Phalguna  and  the  beginning  of  spring  : 
as  we  have  seen  above  in  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  the  new 
moon  in  Magna  is  placed  at  the  winter  solstice,144  which  puts 
the  full  moon  of  Phalguni  at  a  month  and  a  half  after  the 
winter  solstice,  or  in  the  first  week  of  February,  a  date  not  in 
itself  improbable  for  about  B.C.  800,  and  corresponding  with 
the  February  7  of  the  veris  initium  in  the  Roman  Calendar. 
This  fact  accords  with  the  only  natural  division  of  the  year 
into  three  periods  of  four  months,  as  the  rainy  season  lasts  from 
June  7-10  to  October  7-10,  and  it  is  certain  that  the  second  set 
of  four  months  dates  from  the  beginning  of  the  rains  (see 
Caturmasya).  Tilak,145  on  the  other  hand,  holds  that  the 
winter  solstice  coincided  with  Maghi  full  moon  at  the  time  of  the 
Taittiriya  Samhita  (b.c.  2350),  and  had  coincided  with  Phalguni 
and  Caitri  in  early  periods — viz.,  B.C.  4000-2500,  and  B.C.  6000- 
4000. 

(5)  The  passages  of  the  Taittiriya  Samhita146  and  the  Panca- 
vimsa  Brahmana,147  which  treat  the  full  moon  in  Phalguna  as 
the  beginning  of  the  year,  give  as  an  alternative  the  full  moon 
in  Caitra.  Probably  the  latter  month  was  chosen  so  as  to 
secure  that  the  initial  day  should  fall  well  within  the  season  of 
spring,148  and  was  not,  as  Jacobi  believes,  a  relic  of  a  period 


141  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  48,  630  et  seq. ; 
49,  475.  476  ;  50, 453-457-  Cf.  Whitney, 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
16,  lxxxvii. 

142  Indian  Antiquary,  24,  86  et  seq. 

143  See  Weber,  Naxatra,  2,  329  et  seq. , 
and  cf.  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  6,  3, 
36  ;  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  v.  1  ;  a  Sruti 
passage  in  the  commentary  on  Katya- 
yana  Srauta  Sutra,  i.  2,  13  ;  Baudha- 
yana  Dharma  Sutra,  ii.  2,  4,  23,  and 
especially  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  4, 


1,  2.  4.  So  the  Phalguna  full  moon 
is  called  the  *  month  of  the  seasons  ' 
(rtundm  mukham)  in  Kathaka  Samhita, 
viii.  1  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  6,  9. 

144  xix.  2.  3. 

145  Orion,  53  et  seq. ;  198  et  seq. 

146  vii.  4,  8,  1. 

147  v.  9.  See  Weber,  op.  cit.,  2,  341- 
344;  Thibaut,  Indian  Antiquary,  24,  85 
et  seq. ,  for  a  full  discussion  of  the  points 
raised  by  Tilak,  Orion,  43  et  seq. 

148  Thibaut,  Indian  Antiquary,  24,  93. 
On  the  other  side,  Tilak,  198  et  seq. 


426 


THE  NAKSATRAS  AND  CHRONOLOGY     [  Nak§atra 


when  the  winter  solstice  corresponded  with  Caitra.  Another 
alternative  is  the  Ekastaka,  interpreted  by  the  commentators  as 
the  eighth  day  after  the  full  moon  in  Maghas,  a  time  which 
might,  as  being  the  last  quarter  of  the  waning  half  of  the  old 
year,  well  be  considered  as  representing  the  end  of  the  year. 
A  fourth  alternative  is  the  fourth  day  before  full  moon ;  the  full 
moon  meant  must  be  that  of  Caitra,  as  Alekhana  quoted  by 
Apastamba  held,  not  of  Magna,  as  Asmarathya,  Laugaksi  and 
the  Mlmamsists  believed,  and  as  Tilak  believes.149 

(6)  Others,  again,  according  to  the  Grhya  ritual,  began  the 
year  with  the  month  Margasirsa,  as  is  shown  by  its  other  name 
Agrahayana150  ('  belonging  to  the  commencement  of  the  year '). 
Jacobi  and  Tilak151  think  that  this  one  denoted  the  autumn 
equinox  in  Mrgasiras,  corresponding  to  the  winter  solstice  in 
Phalguni.  But,  as  Thibaut162  shows  clearly,  it  was  selected  as 
the  beginning  of  a  year  that  was  taken  to  commence  with 
autumn,  just  as  some  took  the  spring  to  commence  with  Caitra 
instead  of  Phalguna.153 

(7)  Jacobi  has  also  argued,  with  the  support  of  Biihler,154 
from  the  terms  given  for  the  beginning  of  Vedic  study  in  the 
Grhya  Sutras,  on  the  principle  that  study  commenced  with  the 
rains  (as  in  the  Buddhist  vassa)  which  mark  the  summer 
solstice.  He  concludes  that  if  Bhadrapada  appears  as  the 
date  of  commencing  study  in  some  texts,  it  was  fixed  thus 
because  at  one  time  Prosthapadas  (the  early  name  of  Bhadra- 
padas)  coincided  with  the  summer  solstice,  this  having  been  the 
case  when  the  winter  solstice  was  in  Phalguna.  But  Whitney165 
has  pointed  out  that  this  argument  is  utterly  illegitimate ;  we 
cannot  say  that  there  was  any  necessary  connexion  between  the 
rains  and  learning — a  month  like  Sravana  might  be  preferred 


149  Thibaut,  op.  cit.,  94  ;  Tilak,  51 
et  seq.  Cf.  also  Katyayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  xiii.  1.  8-10;  Weber,  2,  343, 
n.  2,  344. 

iso  Thibaut,  op.  cit.,  94,  95.  Cf. 
Weber,  2,  332-334. 

151  Tilak's  view  is  given  in  Orion, 
62  et  seq.  It  is  based  mainly  on  Amara's 
(i.  2,  23)  agra-hayani  as  a  synonym  of 
MrgaSiras,  and  on  certain  myths  (chaps. 


v.-vii.);  he  equates  (221  et  seq.)  Agra- 
yana  and  Orion  (!). 

152  Op.  cit.,  94,  95. 

153  A  corresponding  Karttika  year  is 
not  early,  Thibaut,  op.  cit.,  96.  Cf. 
Weber,  op.  cit.,  2,  334. 

154  Indian  Antiquary,  23,  242  et  seq. 

155  journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  16,  lxxxiv  et  seq. 


Nak?atra  ] 


ORIGIN  OF  THE  NAKSATRAS 


427 


because  of  its  connexion  with  the  word  Sravana,  '  ear ' — and 
in  view  of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  we  must  assume  that 
Bhadrapada  was  kept  because  of  its  traditional  coincidence 
with  the  beginning  of  the  rains  after  it  had  ceased  actually  so 
to  coincide.150 

The  Origin  of  the  Naksatras. — As  we  have  seen,  there  is  no 

by  which  the   Naksatras    may 


evidence  showing  the  process 

156  Mention  should  here  be  made  of 
the  following  points:  (1)  Jacobi's  argu- 
ment from  the  word  Dhruva,  the  name 
of  the  star  pointed  out  to  the  bride  in 
the  marriage  ritual.  The  word  does 
not  occur  in  the  literature  anterior  to 
the  Grhya  Sutras,  and  it  must  remain 
an  undecided  question  whether  the 
practice  was  or  was  not  old.  Jacobi 
urges  that  Dhruva,  means  'fixed,'  and 
that  it  must  originally  have  referred  to 
a  real  fixed  pole  star,  and  he  thinks 
that  such  a  star  could  only  be  found 
in  the  third  millennium  b.c.  Whitney 
and  Oldenberg  definitely  reject  this 
view  on  the  ground  that  too  much 
must  not  be  made  out  of  a  piece  of 
folk-lore,  and  that  the  marriage  ritual 
requirements  would  be  satisfied  by  any 
star  of  some  magnitude  which  was 
approximately  polar.  This  conclusion 
seems  convincing.  Cf.  Keith,  Journal 
of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1909,  1102  ; 
1910,  465  ;  contra,  Jacobi,  ibid.,  1909, 
726  et  seq.  ;  1910,  464.  (2)  The  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,  ii.  1,  2,  3,  asserts 
that  the  Krttikas  do  not  move  from 
the  eastern  quarter,  which  the  others 
do  ;  and  stress  has  been  laid  (by  Jacobi, 
Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1910, 
463,  464)  upon  this  assertion  as  giving 
a  date  of  the  third  millennium  b.c.  for 
the  Satapatha  observation.  But  this 
notice  is  quite  inadequate  to  support 
any  such  result,  and  its  lack  of  trust- 
worthiness as  a  chronological  guide  is 
increased  by  the  fact  that  the  Baudha- 
yana  Srauta  Sutra,  xviii  5,  has  a  similar 
notice,  coupled  with  another  notice, 
which,  according  to  Barth,  would  only 
be  true  somewhere  in  or  after  the  sixth 


century  a.d.,  the  equatorial  point  being 
placed  between  Citra.  and  Svati,  which 
in  the  early  period  were  both  very 
much  north  of  the  equator  (see  Caland, 
Uber  das  rituclle  Sutra  des  Baudhdyana, 
37-39)  -  The  same  passage  of  the  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  ii.  1,  2,  2,  in  the 
Madhyamdina  recension,  states  that 
the  number  of  the  Krttikas  is  greater 
than  that  of  the  stars  in  any  of  the 
other  Naksatras,  which  consist  of  one, 
two,  three,  or  four  stars,  or  which, 
according  to  the  Kanva  recension  (see 
Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  12, 
282,  n.  2),  have  four  stars.  It  is  not 
possible  to  put  much  faith  in  this  asser- 
tion, for  Hasta  later  has  five  stars,  and 
its  name  (with  reference  to  the  fingers) 
suggests  five  (cf.  Weber,  Naxatra,  2, 
368,  381),  and  that  number  is  possibly 
referred  to  in  the  Rigveda  (i.  105,  10). 
See  Geldner,  Vedische  Studien,  3,  177. 
(3)  Attempts  have  been  made  to  regard 
the  names  of  the  Naksatras  as  signifi- 
cant of  their  position  in  the  list.  Thus 
Bentley,  Historical  Vieiv,  2,  thought 
Visakha,  was  so  called  because  the 
equinoctial  colure  divided  the  equator 
about  1426  b.c  ;  this  is  refuted  by 
Tilak,  Orion,  57  et  seq.  Jyesthaghni 
has  been  interpreted  as  '  slaying  the 
eldest ' — i.e.,  as  marking  the  new  year 
by  putting  an  end  to  the  old  year. 
Tilak,  90,  suggests  that  Mula  was  so 
called  because  its  acronycal  rising 
marked  the  beginning  of  the  year  when 
the  vernal  equinox  was  near  Mrgasiras. 
More  probable  is  Whitney's  view,  Suvya 
Siddhdnta,  194,  that  it  was  the  most 
southern,  and  so,  as  it  were,  the  basis 
of  the  asterisms. 


428 


ORIGIN  OF  THE  NAKSATRAS 


[  Nak§atra 


have  originated  in  India.  They  are  mentioned  only  as  stars  in 
the  earlier  parts  of  the  Rigveda,  then  the  names  of  three  of 
them  are  found  in  the  latest  parts  of  that  Samhita,  and  finally 
in  the  later  Atharvaveda  and  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas  the 
full  list  appears.  It  may  also  be  noted  that  the  Vedic  Indians 
show  (see  Graha)  a  remarkably  small  knowledge  of  the  other 
astronomical  phenomena ;  the  discovery  of  a  series  of  27  lunar 
mansions  by  them  would  therefore  be  rather  surprising.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  nature  of  such  an  operation  is  not  ver 
complicated  ;  it  consists  merely  in  selecting  a  star  or  a  stai 
group  with  wmich  the  moon  is  in  conjunction.  It  is  thus 
impossible  a  priori  to  deny  that  the  Vedic  Indians  could  have 
invented  for  themselves  a  lunar  Zodiac.157 

But  the  question  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  there  exist 
two  similar  sets  of  28  stars  or  star  groups  in  Arabia  and  in 
China,  the  Manazil  and  the  Sieou.  The  use  of  the  Manazil  in 
Arabia  is  consistent  and  effective  ;  the  calendar  is  regulated  by 
them,  and  the  position  of  the  asterisms  corresponds  best  with 
the  positions  required  for  a  lunar  Zodiac.  The  Indians  might 
therefore  have  borrowed  the  system  from  Arabia,  but  that  is  a 
mere  possibility,  because  the  evidence  for  the  existence  of  the 
Manazil  is  long  posterior  to  that  for  the  existence  of  the 
Naksatras,  while  again  the  Mazzaroth  or  Mazzaloth  of  the  Old 
Testament158  may  really  be  the  lunar  mansions.159  That  the 
Arabian  system  is  borrowed  from  India,  as  Burgess160  held,  is, 
on  the  other  hand,  not  at  all  probable. 

Biot,  the  eminent  Chinese  scholar,  in  a  series  of  papers 
published  by  him  between.  1839  and  1861,161  attempted  to  prove 


157  Max  Muller,  Rigveda,  4*,  xliv 
et  seq.,  maintains  the  Indian  origin  of  the 
system.  Thibaut,  Astronomic,  Astrologie 
und  Mathematik,  14,  15,  admits  it  to  be 
possible,  as  does  Whitney,  Oriental  and 
Linguistic  Essays,  2,  418. 

158  2  Kings  xxiii.  5 ;  Job  xxxviii.  32. 

159  Weber,  Naxatra,  1,  317,  318  ; 
Whitney,  op,  cit.,  359. 

160  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  8,  309-334.  This  was  Weber's 
view  also,  according  to  Whitney,  413 


et  seq.  ;  but  Weber  himself  disclaimed 
it  (see  Indische  Studien,  9,  425,  426;  10, 
246,  247).  On  the  other  hand,  Sedillot, 
Matcriaux  pour  servir  a  I'histoire  corn- 
par  ee  des  Sciences  M ' athematiques  par  les 
Grecs  et  les  Orientaux  (Paris,  1845-1849), 
favoured  influence  from  Arabia  on 
India. 

161  Summed  up  in  his  two  works, 
Recherches  sur  I'ancienne  astronomic 
Chinoise,  and  Etudes  sur  I' astronomic 
Indienne  et  I'astronomie  Chinoise. 


Nak§atra  ] 


ORIGIN  OF  THE  NAKSATRAS 


429 


the  derivation  of  the  Naksatra  from  the  Chinese  Sieou.  The 
latter  he  did  not  regard  as  being  in  origin  lunar  mansions  at  all. 
He  thought  that  they  were  equatorial  stars  used,  as  in  modern 
astronomy,  as  a  standard  to  which  planets  or  other  stars 
observed  in  the  neighbourhood  can  be  referred ;  they  were,  as 
regards  twenty-four  of  them,  selected  about  B.C.  2357  on 
account  of  their  proximity  to  the  equator,  and  of  their  having 
the  same  right  ascension  as  certain  circumpolar  stars  which  had 
attracted  the  attention  of  Chinese  observers.  Four  more  were 
added  in  B.C.  1100  in  order  to  mark  the  equinoxes  and  solstices 
of  the  period.  He  held  that  the  list  of  stars  commenced  with 
Mao  (=Krttikas),  which  was  at  the  vernal  equinox  in  B.C.  2357. 
Weber,162  in  an  elaborate  essay  of  i860,  disputed  this  theory, 
and  endeavoured  to  show  that  the  Chinese  literary  evidence  for 
the  Sieou  was  late,  dating  not  even  from  before  the  third 
century  B.C.  The  last  point  does  not  appear163  to  be  correct, 
but  his  objections  against  the  basis  of  Biot's  theory  were  rein- 
forced by  Whitney,164  who  insisted  that  Biot's  supposition  of 
the  Sieou's  not  having  been  ultimately  derived  from  a  system  of 
lunar  mansions,  was  untenable.  This  is  admitted  by  the  latest 
defender  of  the  hypothesis  of  borrowing  from  China,  Leopold 
de  Saussure,165,  but  his  arguments  in  favour  of  a  Chinese  origin 
for  the  Indian  lunar  mansions  have  been  refuted  by  Oldenberg,160 
who  has  also  pointed  out167  that  the  series  does  not  begin  with 
Mao  (  =  Krttikas). 

There  remains  only  the  possibility  that  a  common  source  for 
all  the  three  sets — Naksatra,  Manazil,  and  Sieou — may  be 
found  in  Babylonia.  Hommel168  has  endeavoured  to  show 
that  recent  research  has  established  in  Babylonia  the  existence 
of  a   lunar   zodiac   of    twenty-four   members   headed   by   the 


162  Naxatra,  1,  284  et  seq.  (i860). 

163  See  Chavannes,  cited  by  Olden- 
berg,  Nachrichten  der  konigl.  Gesellschaft 
der  Wissenschaften  zic  Gottingen,  1909, 
566,  567. 

164  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  8,  1  et  seq.;  Oriental  and  Lin- 
guistic Essays,  2,  385  et  seq.  For  his 
controversy  with  Weber,  see  Weber, 


Indische  Studien,  9,  424  et  seq.  ;  10,  213 
et  seq. ;  Whitney,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  8,  384  et  seq. 

165  T'oung  Pao,    1909,    121   et  seq.  ; 
255  et  seq. 

166  Nachrichten,  1909,  544-572. 
lfi7  Ibid.,  548,  n.  9. 

!68  Zeitschrift   der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  45,  592  et  seq. 


43° 


ORIGIN  OF  THE  NAKSATRAS 


[  Nak§atra 


Pleiades  ( =  Krttikas) ;  but  Thibaut's  researches169  are  not 
favourable  to  this  claim.  On  the  other  hand,  Weber,170 
Whitney,171  Zimmer,172  and  Oldenberg173  all  incline  to  the 
view  that  in  Babylonia  is  to  be  found  the  origin  of  the  system, 
and  this  must  for  the  present  be  regarded  as  the  most  probable 
view,  for  there  are  other  traces  of  Babylonian  influence  in 
Vedic  literature,  such  as  the  legend  of  the  flood,  perhaps  the 
Adityas,174  and  possibly  the  word  Mana. 


169  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of 
Bengal,  63,  144-163.  Cf.  Astronomic, 
etc.,  15  ;  Oldenberg,  op.  cit.,  572. 

170  Naxatra,  1,  316  et  seq.  ;  Indische 
Studien,  10,  246,  and  elsewhere.  Weber, 
Naksatra,  2,  362,  400,  laid  great  stress 
on  the  fact  that  the  Jyotisa,  8,  referred 
to  the  difference  of  the  longest  and 
shortest  day  as  being  six  muhurtas, 
which  makes  the  longest  day  fourteen 
hours  twenty  -  four  minutes  ;  and  he 
compared  the  Babylonian  day  of  four- 
teen hours  twenty-five  minutes,  and  a 
Chinese  day  of  fourteen  hours  twenty- 
four  minutes.  But  Whitney,  Oriental 
and  Linguistic  Essays,  2,  417,  418,  shows 
that  no  stress  can  be  laid  on  this  argu- 
ment, since  the  correspondence  is  only 
approximate,  and  the  latitudes  of  the 
Babylonian  and  Chinese  observations 
are  approximately  the  same. 

171  See  op.  cit.,  2,  418-420. 

172  Altindisches  Leben,  356,  357,  where 
he  is  quite  confident  of  the  Semitic 
origin  of  the  Naksatras. 

173  Op.  cit.,  572'. 

174  For  the  flood,  see  Zimmer,  op.  cit., 
101,  357,  who  is  opposed  to  Weber's 
view  (Indische  Studien,  1,  160;  Indische 
Streifen,  1,  11)  that  the  story  preserves 
an  old  Aryan  tradition,  and  a  reminis- 
cence of  the  home  of  the  Indians 
beyond  the  Himalaya  [cf.  Muir,  Sanskrit 
Texts,  i2,  190;  22,  323,  n.  96;  Lassen, 
Indische  Alterthwnskunde ,  i2,  638,  and 
cf.  Oldenberg,  Religion  dcs  Veda,  276, 
n.  3).  For  the  Adityas,  see  Oldenberg, 
Religion  des  Veda,  185  et  seq. ;  Zeitschrift 
der    Deutschen    Morgenldndischen    Gesell- 


schaft,  50,  43  et  seq.  His  view  is  not 
accepted  by  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology, 
p.  44 ;  Bloomfield,  Religion  of  the  Veda, 
133.  Still  more  doubtful  is  Zimmer's 
view  (Altindisches  Leben,  363,  364)  of  the 
division  of  day  and  night  into  thirty 
parts,  which  he  sees  in  Rv.  i.  123,  8, 
and  which  he  thinks  is  based  on  the 
Babylonian  division  of  the  same  period 
of  time  into  sixtieths.  Cf.  also  V.  Smith, 
Indian  Antiquary,  34,  230,  who  argues, 
but  inconclusively,  that  the  use  of  iron 
was  introduced  from  Babylonia. 

The  facts  about  the  Naksatras  are 
(with  the  exception  of  the  data  from  the 
Maitrayani  Samhita  and  the  Baudha- 
yana  Srauta  Sutra)  collected  in  Weber's 
second  essay,  Die  vedischen  Nachrichten 
von  den  Naxatra,  1861.  The  first  essay, 
i860,  deals  with  the  problem  of  origins. 
See  also  his  discussions  in  Indische 
Studien,  9,  424  et  seq.  ;  10,  213  et  seq. 
Whitney's  work  lies  partly  in  his 
scientific  determination  (in  many  places 
correcting  Colebrooke's  discoveries)  of 
the  later  Naxatras  in  his  edition  and 
version  of  the  Siirya  Siddhanta  (Journal 
of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  6),  and 
partly  in  his  discussions  of  the  question 
of  origin  (Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  8),  Oriental  and  Linguistic  Essays, 
2,  341-421  (with  a  stellar  chart),  and 
of  the  question  of  date  as  against 
Jacobi  and  Tilak's  Orion  (Journal  of 
the  American  Oriental  Society,  16,  lxxxii 
et  seq.).  The  views  of  Max  Muller  are 
found  in  his  Rigveda,  42,  xxxiv  et  seq. 
The  modern  discussion  of  the  dates 
inferable  from   the  Naksatra  was  in- 


Nakha  ] 


A  STROLOGER—A  STRONOMER—NA IL 


43 1 


augurated  by  Jacobi  (1893)  in  the 
Festgruss  an  Roth,  68-74  (translated  in 
the  Indian  Antiquary,  23).  See  also  his 
articles  in  the  Nachnchten  der  konigl. 
Gesellschaft  der  Wissenschaften  zu  Got- 
tingen,  1894,  no  et  seq.  ;  Zeitschrift  der 
Detitschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft, 
49,  218  et  seq. ;  50,  70  et  seq.  ;  Journal 
of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1909,  721- 
727.  Independently  Tilak,  in  his  Orion, 
developed  similar  views  ;  but  most  of 
his  special  points  are  disposed  of  by 
Whitney  in  his  review  cited  above. 
Oldenberg  has  discussed  and  refuted 
Jacobi's  arguments  in  the  Zeitschrift, 
48,  629  et  seq.  ;  49,  470  et  seq.  ;  50,  450 
et   seq.  ;   Journal   of   the    Royal   Asiatic 


Society,  1909,  1090  et  seq.  Thibaut  has 
also  rejected  Jacobi's  views  in  an  article 
in  the  Indian  Antiquary,  24,  85  et  seq. 
See  also  his  Astronomic,  Astrologie  und 
Mathematik,  17-19.  The  recent  litera- 
ture on  the  origin  of  the  Naksatras 
consists  of  articles  by  Thibaut,  Journa 
of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  63,  144 
et  seq.  ;  Saussure,  T'oung  Pao,  1909, 
121  et  seq.  ;  255  et  seq.  ;  Oldenberg, 
Nachrichten  der  konigl.  Gesellschaft  der 
Wissenschaften  zu  Gbttingen,  1909.  544 
et  seq.  The  Naksatras  in  the  Epic  are 
dealt  with  by  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the 
American  Oriental  Society,  24,  29-36. 
Ludwig's  views  are  given  in  his  Trans- 
lation of  the  Rigveda,  3,  183  et  seq. 


Naksatra-dar6a  ('  gazer  at  the  lunar  mansions '),  an  '  astro- 
loger,' is  mentioned  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the  Purusamedha, 
or  '  human  sacrifice,'  in  the  Yajurveda.1  A  notice  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana2  indicates  that  that  work  regarded  the 
practice  of  choosing  a  particular  Naksatra  under  which  to  set 
up  the  sacrificial  fires  as  an  idle  one,  because  it  decides  in 
favour  of  choosing  the  sun  as  one's  Naksatra. 

1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  10 ;  Tait-  in  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 
tiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  4,  1.  xii,  288,  n.  3. 

2  ii.  1,  2,  19,  and  cf.  the  Kanva  text 


Naksatra- vidya,  the  '  science  of  the  lunar  mansions,' 
*  astronomy,'  is  mentioned  with  other  sciences  in  the  Chandogya 
Upanisad  (vii.  1,  2.  4 ;  2,  1 ;  7,  1). 


Nakha  denotes  either  the  *  nail '  of  a  man,1  or  the  *  claw '  of 
a  wild  beast,  such  as  a  tiger.2  The  trimming  (nikrntana)3  of 
the  nails  was  a  regular  part  of  the  toilet  of  the  Vedic  Indian, 
especially  on  occasions  of  special  sanctity,  when  it  accompanied 
the  cleansing  of  the  teeth.4 


1  Rv.  i.  162,  9 
6,  etc. 

2  Rv.  iv.  3,  3. 

eagle's  talon. 


x.  163,  5;  Av.  ii.  33, 
Cf.  x.  28,  10,  of  the 


3  Chandogya  Upanisad,  vi.  1,  6. 

4  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  1,  7 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  6,  2,  etc. 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  1,  3,  4. 


432 


MO  UNTA  IN— TO  WN—NA  MES 


[  Naga 


Na-gra  ('  not  moving '),  '  mountain,'  is  a  word  occurring  only 
in  a  late  book  of  the  Atharvaveda  (xix.  8,  i),  and  then  in  the 
Sutras. 

Nagfara  is  in  early  Vedic  literature  found  only  in  the  deriva- 
tive adjective,  used  as  a  proper  name,  Nagarin,  but  it  appears 
in  the  sense  of  'town'  in  the  Taittiriya  Aranyaka  (i.  1 1,  18 ; 
31,  4),  and  frequently  in  the  later  language. 

Nagrarin  Jana-sruteya  ('  descendant  of  Janasruti ')  is  men- 
tioned as  a  priest  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana  (v.  30),  and  as 
Nagarin  Janasruteya  Kandviya  in  the  Jaimimya  Upanisad 
Brahmana  (iii.  40,  2). 

Nagna-jit,  King  of  Gandhara,  is  mentioned  in  the  Aitareya 
Brahmana1  as  having  been  consecrated  by  Parvata  and 
Narada.  The  same  king  is  mentioned  with  his  son  Svarjit 
in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,2  where  a  remark  attributed  to  one 
of  them  on  a  ritual  topic  is  treated  with  contempt. 

1  vii.  34.  I   Literature,    132,    134 ;    Muir,    Sanskrit 

■  viii.   1,  4,   10.     Cf.  Weber,  Indian  \   Texts,  i2,  515. 

Nag-na,     See  Dharma. 

Nag-ha-mara  and  Nag*ha-risa.     See  1.  Kustha. 


Na-ciketas  occurs  in  the  well-known  legend  of  the  Taitti- 
riya Brahmana1  (where  he  is  a  Gotama,  the  son  of  Vaja- 
gravasa),  and  in  the  Katha  Upanisad.2  His  historical  reality 
is  extremely  doubtful :  in  the  Upanisad  he  is  called  son  of 
Aruni  Auddalaki  or  Vajasravasa,  an  impossible  attribution,  and 
one  due  only  to  a  desire  to  give  Naciketas  a  connexion  with 
the  famous  Aruni. 


1  iii.  11,  8. 

2  i.    1,    etc.      Cf.    Geldner,    Vedische 
Studien,  3,   154,  n.    1  ;    Weber,  Indian 


Literature,  157  ;  Macdonell,  Vedic  Myth- 
ology, p.  168. 


Nada  ] 


REED— A  SOUTHERN  KING 


433 


i.  Nada,  'reed,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1  as  growing  in 
lakes,  and  in  the  Atharvaveda2  is  described  as  varsika,  *  pro- 
duced in  the  rains.'  Reeds  were  used,  after  being  split,  for 
making  mats,  a  work  carried  out  by  women.3  They  are 
frequently  mentioned  elsewhere.4     See  also  Nada. 

1  viii.  i,  33.  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxv.  7;   Satapatha 

2  iv.  19,  1.  Brahmana,    i.    1,     4,    19  ;    Taittiriya 

3  Av.  vi.  138,  5.  Aranyaka,  vi.  7,  10. 

4  Av.  vi.  137,  2  ;  xii.  2,  1.  19.  50.  54  ;           Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  71. 


2.  Nada  Naisadha  is  mentioned  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,1 
where  he  seems  to  be2  a  human  king  who  is  compared  with 
Yama,  the  god  of  death,  because  of  his  conquests.  Being 
there  identified  with  the  southern  sacrificial  fire,  he  was  pre- 
sumably a  king  of  the  south,  just  as  Yama  is  connected  with 
the  south. 


1  n.  2,  2,  1.  2. 

2  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  225-227, 
followed  by  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of 


the  East,  12,  338,  notes  4  and  5.    The 
printed  text  has  Naisidha  by  error. 


Nadvala,    a   '  reed   bed,'    is    mentioned    in    the   Vajasaneyi 
Samhita  (xxx.  16)  and  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana  (iii.  4,  12,  1). 


Nada  is  found  in  several  passages  of  the  Rigveda,1  but  its 
sense  is  still  obscure.  It  is  identified  by  Pischel2  with  Nada, 
being  explained  by  him  in  one  passage3  as  a  reed  boat,  which 
is  split,  and  over  which  the  waters  go;  in  another4  as  a  reed 
whip,  of  which  the  sharp  points  (karna)  are  used  to  urge  horses 
on ;  and  in  others5  again  as  figuratively  designating  the  penis. 
Roth6  takes  the  sense  to  be  '  bull '  (either  literally  or  meta- 


1  i.  32,  8  ;  179,  4  ;  ii.  34,  3  ;  viii.  69,  2  ; 
x.  11,  2  ;  105,  4.     Cf  Nirukta,  v.  2. 

2  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  35,  717  ei  seq.  ; 
Vedische  Studien,  1,  183  et  seq. 

3  i.  32,  8.  Here  Caland  and  Henry, 
L'Agnistoma,  312,  n.,  would  read  nalam. 
See  also  Wackernagel,  A  Uindische  Gram- 
matik,  1,  173. 

4  ii-  34>  35  followed  by  Max  Miiller, 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32,  301  (who, 
however,    does   not   construe   asubliih, 

VOL.  I. 


'  sharp,'  with  karnaih  as  Pischel  does 
in  Vedische  Studien,  1,  190).  He  sees 
'  reed '  also  in  x.  11,  2,  but  'horse '  in 
x.  105,  4. 

5  i.  179,  4 ;  viii.  69,  2. 

6  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  The 
sense  of  *  bull '  seems  imperative  in 
viii.  89,  2 ;  it  is  admissible  in  i.  179,  4, 
where  '  bull '  may  denote  a  man,  and 
in  x.  11,  2,  and  possibly  in  i.  32,  8, 
but  '  reed '  there  seems  far  more  likely. 

28 


434 


RIVER— MOTHER— HUSBAND'S  SISTER 


[  NadI 


phorically)  in  all  passages.  Once  at  least7  the  *  neigher '  (from 
the  root  nad,  'sound')  seems  to  be  meant  with  reference  to 
Indra's  horse.  In  the  phrase  nadasya  karnaih8  the  sense  is, 
perhaps,  '  through  the  ears  of  the  (side)  horse '  (that  is,  by  their 
being  ready  to  hear  the  word  of  command)  of  their  chariot, 
the  Maruts  '  hasten  on  with  their  swift  steeds '  (turayanta 
asubhih). 


7  x.  105,  4,  and  in  x.  n,  2.  The 
latter  passage  suggests  that  '  river ' 
may,  after  all,  be  the  sense  there. 


Cf.  Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten,  i, 
178,  215. 


3A 


NadI,  'stream,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later.2 
Reference  is  made  to  shallows  (gddha)3  in  the  river's  bed,  to 
the  opposite  bank  (para),4  and  to  the  bathing  of  horses  in 
streams.5  Rivers  are  also  mentioned  in  close  connexion  with 
mountains.6  The  title  Nadi-pati,  'lord  of  rivers,'7  is  once 
used  to  express  '  ocean  '  or  '  sea-water.' 


1  i.  158,  5 ;  ii.  35,  3 ;  iii.  33,  4 ;  v.  46, 
6,  etc. 

2  Av.  iii.  13,  1  ;  xiv.  1,  43. 

3  Rv.  vii.  60,  7. 


4  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  1,  6,  6. 
6  Rv.  viii.  2,  2. 

6  Rv.  v.  55,  7;  x.  64,  8. 

7  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  3,  4,  10. 


Nana  is  a  familiar  name  for  mother,  parallel  with  Tata,  foi 
father,  with  which  it  is  found  in  a  verse  of  the  Rigveda 
describing  the  occupations  of  the  parents  of  the  poet. 

1  ix.  112,  3.     Cf.  Nirukta,  vi.  6,  and  see  Upala-praksini. 


Nanandr  is  a  word  occurring  only  once  in  the  Rigveda, ] 
where  it  denotes,  according  to  Sayana,  the  '  husband's  sister, 
over  whom  the  wife  is  to  rule.  This  interpretation  is  confirmed 
by  the  fact  that  the  same  position  is  ascribed  to  the  husband's 
sister — no  doubt  while  unmarried  and  living  in  her  brother's 
care — by  the  Aitareya  Brahmana.2 


1  x.  85,  46. 

2  iii.  22. 

Cf.  Delbruck,  Die  indogermanischen 
Verwandtschaftsnamen,  516.  The  native 
lexicographers    recognize    the    word, 


though  its  occurrence  in  the  later 
literature  is  very  rare  (it  has  been 
noted  in  the  Uttararamacarita).  See 
the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Nabhaka  ] 


GRANDSON— A  SEER 


435 


Napat  in  Vedic  literature  apparently  has  both  the  wider 
sense  of  '  descendant,'1  and  the  narrower  one  of  '  grandson  '  in 
the  Samhitas.2  In  the  Brahmanas  the  word  seems  hardly  to 
have  the  sense  of  *  descendant '  at  all,  while  it  denotes  not 
only  'grandson,'3  but  also  'great-grandson'  in  the  sequence 
1  sons,  grandsons,  great-grandsons '  (putran,  pautrdn,  naptfn).4 
'Grandson'  is  also  expressed  by  Pautra  ('son's  son')  in  the 
Atharvaveda  and  later,5  while  the  sense  of  '  great-grandson '  is 
accurately  conveyed  as  early  as  the  Rigveda6  by  Pra-napat, 
used  beside  Napat,  'grandson.'  Napti,  the  feminine,  is  practi- 
cally limited  to  the  Samhitas,7  and  denotes  '  daughter.'  The 
use  in  the  Veda  throws  no  light  on  the  original  use  of  the 
word.8 


1  It  is  equivalent  to  '  son  '  in  a 
number  of  mythological  epithets  such 
as  apam  napat,  '  son  of  waters.' 

2  Rv.  x.  io,  i,  clearly  'son  ';  vi.  20, 
1 1,  may  be  '  grandson. '  Most  passages, 
vi.  50,  15 ;  vii.  18,  22 ;  viii.  65,  12  ; 
102,  7  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxi.  61  ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxii.  2,  require  '  de- 
scendant.' 

3  As  in  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iii.  48 : 
putva-naptarah,  'sons  and  grandsons.' 
Cf.  Nirukta,  viii.  5. 


4  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  10,  3  ; 
Apastamba  Srauta  Sutra,  x.  n,  5. 

5  Av.  ix.  5,  30;  xi.  7,  16;  Aitarey 
Brahmana,  vii.  10,  3  ;  Taittiriya  Brah- 
mana, ii.  1,  8,  3. 

6  Rv.  viii.  17,  13,  with  napat. 

7  Rv.  iii.  31,  1  (Nirukta,  iii.  4)  ; 
viii.  2,  42.  Cf.  i.  50,  9  ;  ix.  9,  1  ;  14,  5  ; 
69,  3  ;  Av.  i.  28,  4  ;  ii.  14,  1  ;  vii.  82,  6. 

8  Delbriick,  Die  indogermanischen  Ver- 
wandtschaftsnamen,  403-405  ;  Lanmann, 
Festgruss  an  Bohtlingk,  77. 


Naptri,  as  feminine  of  Napat,  is  found  in  the  Samaveda, 
Aranya  (v.  13). 


Nabha(s),  Nabhasya.     See  Masa. 


Nabhaka  is  the  name  of  a  Ksi  who  is  referred  to  in  the 
Rigveda1  and  the  Aitareya  Brahmana.2  The  Anukramani 
(Index)  attributes  to  Nabhaka  the  composition  of  several  hymns 
of  the  Rigveda  (viii.  39"42)- 


1  viii.  40,  4.  5. 

2  vi.  24. 


Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  107. 

28—2 


436 


NAVE— A  KING— MAN 


[  Nabh3 


Nabhya,   the   '  nave '   of  the  wheel,   is   mentioned    in   th< 
Atharvaveda1  and  later.2     See  also  Nabhi. 


1  vi.  70,  3  ;  xii.  1,  12. 

2  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iv.  15  ;  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,  iii.  5,  3,  20 ;  Kausl- 


taki  Brahmana,  ix.  4 ;  Brhadaranys 
Upanisad,  i.  3,  23,  etc. 


Nam!  Sapya  is  the  name  of  a  man  in  the  Rigveda.1  Weber2 
thinks  that  he  is  mentioned  as  a  priest,  but  the  passages  suit 
a  king  better,  and  in  the  Paficavimsa  Brahmana3  he  appears 
as  NamI  Sapya,  Vaideho  raja,  '  King  of  Videha.'  In  one 
passage4  he  is  represented  as  engaged  in  the  contest  against 
Namuci. 


1  vi.  20,  6 ;  x.  48,  9.     Simply  Nami 
in  i.  53,  7. 

2  Indische  Studien,  1,  231,  232. 

3  xxv.  10,  17. 

4  Rv.  i.  53,  7. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  149 ;  Macdonell,   Vedic  Myth- 


ology, p.  161 ;  Hopkins,  Transactions  0) 
the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and 
Sciences,  15,  49.  Sapya  may  be  read 
Sayya,  but  Sayana  recognizes  the  p  ; 
Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft,  55,  328. 


Nara,  Nr. — The  general  name  for  *  man '  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  later2  is  Nr,  while  Nara3  is  found  occasionally  in  the  later 
Samhitas  and  the  Brahmanas.4 


1  i.  25,  5;  167,  20;  178,  3;  ii.  34,  6; 
iii.  16,  4,  etc. 

2  Av.  ii.  9,  2;  ix.  1,  3  ;  xiv.  2,  9; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  iii.  34 ;  vi.  27.  32, 
etc. 

3  This  form  of  the  word,  common  in 
the  post- Vedic  language,  is  secondary, 
having  originated  from  cases  like  nar- 


am,  understood  as  nara-m ;  but  its  origin 
goes  back  to  the  Indo-Iranian  period. 
See  Brugmann,  Grundriss,  2,  106.  Cf. 
Macdonell,  Vedic  Grammar,  318,  a  5. 

4  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  1,  12,  1 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  ix.  3,  I,  3 
Nirukta,  v.  i,  etc. 


Naraci  occurs  once  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  perhaps  meaning 
a  poisonous  plant. 

1  v.  31,  4.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  18,  286. 


Narya  ('  manly ')  is  in  two  passages  of  the  Rigveda  (i.  54,  6  ; 
112,  9)  understood  by  the  commentator  Sayana  as  the  proper 
name  of  a  man.     See  also  Narya. 


Navanlta  ]        NA  RD—THE  NA  VA  G  VA  S—B  UTTER 


437 


Nalada,  '  nard '  (Nardastachys  Jatamansi)  is  a  plant  mentioned 
in  the  Atharvaveda,1  in  the  Aitareya2  and  the  Sankhayana3 
Aranyakas  (where  it  is  mentioned  as  used  for  a  garland),  as  well  as 
in  the  Sutras.  In  the  Atharvaveda4  the  feminine  form  of  the  word, 
Naladi,  occurs  as  the  name  of  an  Apsaras,  or  celestial  nymph. 


1  VI.  102,  3. 

2  iii.  2,  4. 

3  xi.  4. 

4  iv-  37,  3- 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  68, 
69  ;  Grohmann,  Indische  Studien,  9,  420  ; 
Caland,  Altindisches  Zattberritual,  177, 
n.  4. 


Navaka  is  mentioned  as  having  wished  for  a  wife  at  the 
Sattra  of  the  Vibhindukiyas  in  the  Jaiminlya  Brahmana.1 

1  ii.  233  (Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  18,  38). 


Nava-gra  occurs  in  several  passages  of  the  Rigveda1  as  a 
man,  an  Angiras  in  the  highest  degree  {A  ngirastama),2  appar- 
ently being  the  type  of  the  Navagvas,3  who  appear  as  a  mystic 
race  of  olden  times,  coupled  with,  and  conceived  probably  as 
related  to,  the  Angirases.  They  are  often  associated  with  the 
Dasag-vas.4 


1  iv.  51,  4  ;  ix.  108,  4 ;  x.  62,  6. 

2  x.  62,  6. 

3  Rv.  i.  62,  4  ;  iii.  39,  5  ;  v.  29,  12  ; 
45,  7.  11;  vi.  22,  2;  x.  14,  6;  6i,  10; 
108,  8  ;  Av.  xiv.  1,  56 ;  xviii.  3,  20, 
etc. 


4  Rv.  i.  62,  4  ;  iv.  51,  4  ;  v.  29,  12  ; 
x.  62,  6,  etc. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  165;  Macdonell,  Vedic  Myth- 
ology, pp.  144  (B),  170. 


Nava-nita,  '  fresh  butter,'  is  mentioned  frequently  in  the 
later  Samhitas1  and  the  Brahmanas.2  According  to  the 
Aitareya  Brahmana3  this  is  the  kind  of  butter  which  is  fitted 
for  anointing  an  embryo  (garbha),  while  the  gods  receive 
Ajya,  men  fragrant  ghee  (Ghrta),  and  the  fathers  Ayuta. 
Elsewhere4  it  is  contrasted  with  Ghrta  and  Sarpis. 


1  Taittirlya  Samhita.  ii.  3,  10,  1  ; 
vi.  1,  1,  5;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xi.  7; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  3,  4,  etc. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii.  1,  3,  7.  8  ; 


v.  3,  2,  6 ;  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brah- 
mana, iii.  5,  3. 

3'i.  3. 

4  Taittirlya  Samhita,  ii.  3,  10,  1,  etc 


438 


GRANDSON— NEIGHBOUR 


[  Navavastva 


Nava-vastva  appears  in  three  passages  of  the  Rigveda.  In 
one1  he  seems  to  be  a  protege  of  Agni;  in  another2  as  perhaps 
a  son  of  USanas  and  favourite  of  Indra,  but  in  the  last  he 
seems  to  be  defeated,  or  even  slain,  by  Indra.3  But  he  may  be 
a  mythic  figure  altogether.     Cf.  also  Brhadratha. 


1  i.  36,  18. 

2  vi.  20,  11. 

3  x.  49,  6. 

Cf.  Bergaigne,  Religion  Vedique,  2, 
223  ;  Griffith,  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  i, 
581  ;  Pischel,   Vedische  Studien,  2,  128, 


129 ;  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  147 ;  ijber  die  nenesten  Arbeit  en 
auf  dem  Gebiete  der  Rgvedaforschung,  160  ; 
Perry,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  11,  202 ;  Macdonell,  Vedic 
Mythology,  p.  158. 


Nah  has  been  taken  by  Roth1  and  Grassmann2  to  be  the 
stem,  meaning  'bond,'  of  the  dative  form  nadbhyas,  which 
occurs  once  in  the  Rigveda,3  and  which  Sieg4  thinks  means 
'  sister's  sons.'  But  the  sense  of  this  dative  is  probably  rather 
'to  the  grandsons.'5 


1  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

2  Worterbuch,  s.v. 

3  x.  60,  6. 


3*. 


4  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  129. 

5  Macdonell,   Vedic  Grammar,  p.  56, 


Nahus  occurs  several  times  in  the  Rigveda,  but  the  exact 
sense  is  not  certain.  Ludwig1  sees  in  the  Nahus  a  tribe  on 
the  Sindhu  (Indus)2  or  Sarasvati,3  rich  in  horses,4  allied  with 
the  Bharatas  and  Simyus,5  connected  with  Kaksivant  and  the 
Varsagiras,6  and  having  as  kings  MagarSara  and  Ayavasa.7 
Roth,8  on  the  other  hand,  sees  in  Nahus  the  general  sense  of 
'  neighbour  '  as  opposed  to  a  member  of  one's  own  people  (Vi6) ; 
this  interpretation  is  supported  by  the  occurrence  of  the  phrase 
nahuso  nahustara,9  '  closer  than  a  neighbour.'  Nahusa  has  the 
same  sense  as  Nahus  in  two  passages  of  the  Rigveda,10  but  in 


1  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  206. 

2  Rv.  i.  31,  11;  vi.  22,   10;  46,  7; 
x.  80,  6. 

3  Rv.  vii.  95,  2.    Cf.  ix.  88,  2 ;  91,  2, 

4  Rv.  viii.  6,  24. 

5  Rv.  i.  100,  18;  vii.  18,  5. 

6  Rv.  i.  100,  16.  17. 


7  Rv.  i.  122,  15.  Cf.  also  naiiitso 
visah,  Rv.  vii.  6,  5  ;  x.  49,  8 ;  99,  7, 
etc. 

8  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

9  Rv.  x.  49,  8.     Cf.  also  viii.  8,  3. 
10  i.  31,  11 ;  v.  12,  6. 


Naka  J 


FIRMAMENT— A  TEACHER 


439 


one  it  seems  to  be  intended  for  the  proper  name  of  a  man.11 
Possibly  Nahus  was  originally  a  man  like  Manu.12 


11  Rv.  viii.  46,  27. 

12  Oldenberg,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 
46,  28  ;  Bergaigne,  Religion  Vedique,  2, 
324.  But  Nahus,  if  it  was  originally 
the  name  of  a  mythic  forefather,  cannot 
have  been  that  of  a  forefather  recog- 
nized by  all  the  tribes,  for  there  is  no 


passage  in  which  it  applies  to  all  men. 
Geldner,  Rgveda,  Glossar,  92,  regards 
Nahus  as  a  tribe,  Nahusa  as  a  king. 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  128,  leaves 
the  question  open.  Cf.  Muir,  Sanskrit 
Texts,  i2,  165,  n.  7;  179  et  seq.;  307 
et  seq. 


i.  Naka  denotes  the  *  firmament '  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later.2 
It  is  often  used  with  the  epithet  '  highest '  (uttama)3  or  '  third  ' 
(trtlya)*  referring  to  the  threefold  division  of  heaven,  parallel 
to  the  threefold  division  of  earth,  atmosphere,  and  sky  (Div). 
The  Naka  is  said  to  be  on  the  third  ridge  (prstha),  above  the 
luminous  space  (rocana)  of  the  sky.5  Elsewhere6  the  series 
earth,  atmosphere,  sky,  and  the  firmament  {naka),  heaven 
(svar),  the  celestial  light  (Jyotis),  occurs.  The  word  naka 
is  explained  in  the  Brahmanas7  as  derived  from  na,  'not,' 
and  oka,  'pain,'  because  those  who  go  there  are  free  from 
sorrow. 


1  i.  60,  10;  125,  5;  iii.  2,  12;  iv.  13, 
5 ;  vii.  86,  1  ;  99,  2 ;  viii.  103,  2  ; 
ix.  73,  4,  etc. 

2  Av.  vii.  i8,  1 ;  xviii.  2,  47 ;  xiii.  1,7; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xv.  10 ;  Panca- 
vimsa  Brahmana,  xviii.  7,  10 ;  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,  viii.  5,  3,  4,  etc. 

3  Av.  iv.  14,  6 ;  xi.  1,  4  ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  ix.  10  ;  xii.  63. 

4  Av.  vi.  122,  4  ;  ix.  5,  1.  4  ;  xviii.  4,  3. 

5  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xv.  50. 


6  Av.  iv.  14,  3  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xvii.  67.  In  Rv.  x.  121,  5,  the  earth 
and  sky  (dyauh),  and  heaven  (svar),  and 
the  firmament  (naka),  are  all  mentioned. 

7  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  x.  1,  18 ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  viii.  4,  1,  24; 
Nirukta,  ii.  14 ;  and  cf.  Chandogya 
Upanisad,  ii.  10,  5. 

Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  9 ; 
Max  Miiller,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 
32,  50,  56,  57- 


2.  Naka  is  the  name  of  a  teacher  in  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad 
Brahmana.1  Presumably  he  is  identical  with  Naka  Maudgalya 
('  descendant  of  Mudgala '),  who  is  mentioned  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana,2  the  Byhadaranyaka  Upanisad,3  and  the  Taittiriya 
Upanisad.4 


m.  13,  5. 

xii.  5,  2,  I. 


vi.  4,  4. 
i.  9.  1. 


44o 


CROCODILE— ELEPHA  NT—NA  MES 


[  Nakra 


Nakra  is  the  name  of  an  aquatic  animal  included  among  the 
victims  at  the  Asvamedha,  or  ■  horse  sacrifice,'  in  the  Yajurveda 
Samhitas.1  Perhaps  the  animal  meant  is  the  crocodile,  which 
later  is  called  Nakra.2 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  13,  1  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  2  ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  35. 

2  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  96,  fol- 


lowing one  version  given  by  Mahi- 
dhara  on  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  loc.  cit.  \ 
Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  3,  21, 
n.  4. 


Nag*a  appears  once  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  in  the  form 
niahdndga,  where  •  great  snake '  or  '  great  elephant '  may  be 
meant.  In  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,2  and  in  a  citation 
found  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana3  the  sense  of  'elephant'  is 
clearly  intended.  In  the  Sutras4  the  mythic  Naga  already 
occurs. 


1  xi.  2,  7,  12. 

2  i.  3-  24. 

3  viii.  22. 


4  AsValayana  Grhya  Sutra,  iii.  4,  1. 
Cf.  Winternitz,  Sarpabali,  43  ;  Mac- 
donell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  153. 


Nagrna-jita,  '  descendant  of  Nagnajit,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
Svarjit  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (viii.  1,  4,  10). 


Naciketa,  'connected  with  Naciketas,'  is  the  title  of  a 
narrative  (updkhydna)  in  the  Kathaka  Upanisad.1  The  word 
is  also  applied  as  an  epithet  to  a  special  fire  in  that  Upanisad2 
and  in  the  Taittiriya  Upanisad.3 


in.  16. 

i.  18;  ii.  10. 
i.  22,  11 ;  26,  3. 


Cf.  Weber,  Indische 


Studien,  3,  386.  The  native  lexicog- 
raphers give  Nachiketa  and  Naciketu 
as  synonyms  of  fire  generally. 


Nada-pit  occurs  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  as  the  birth- 
place of  Bharata.  The  word  may,  however,  be  read  as 
Nada-piti,  the  name  of  Bharata's  mother,2  but  this  is  less 
probable. 


1  xin.  5,  4,  13. 

2  Weber,  Episches  im  vedischen  Ritual, 
6,  n.  3. 


Cf.  Leumann,  Zeitschri/t  der  Deutschcn 
Morgenldndischen  Gesellscha/t,  48,  81. 


Napita  ]        VEIN-FLUTE— PROTECTION— BARBER 


441 


1.  Nadi  denotes  a  '  vein '  or  *  artery '  in  the  human  body  in 
the  Atharvaveda1  and  later,2  a  natural  extension  of  the  literal 
sense  of '  reed.' 


1  vi.  138,  4  ;  x.  7,  15.  16. 

2  Kathaka  Samhita,   xii.    10  ;   Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,  x.  4,  5,  2;   Brhad- 


aranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  1,  21  ;  iv.  2, 
3,  etc. ;  Chandogya  Upanisad,  viii.  6, 1 ; 
Kausitaki  Upanisad,  iv.  19. 


2.  Nadi  means  a  musical  instrument,  a  'reed  flute,'  in  the 
Rigveda1  as  well  as  the  Kathaka  Samhita,2  where  in  one 
passage  it  is  mentioned  along  with  the  Tunava.3 


x.  135.  7- 

xxiii.  4  ;  xxxiv.  5. 

xxxiv.  5. 


Cf.  Hopkins,  Journal  of 
Oriental  Society,  13,  329. 


American 


3.  Nadi  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas1  seems  to  mean  the  box 
of  the  chariot  wheel. 

1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  4,  8,  3  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxxvii.  12. 


Nadika  occurs  once  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  where  the  sense 
seems  clearly  to  be  'wind-pipe,'  with  a  reference  also  to  the 
1  shaft  of  an  arrow '  made  of  reed. 


1  v.     18,     8.      Cf.    Weber,    Indische 
Siudien,  18,  229  ;  Whitney,  Translation 


of  the  Atharvaveda,  251 ;  Bloomfield, 
Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  432. 


Natha  in  Vedic  literature1  appears  only  as  a  neuter  meaning 
1  protection,'  and  is  of  rare  occurrence.2  Generally,  too,  very 
little  appears  in  Vedic  literature  of  practices  such  as  those 
which  produced  Anglo-Saxon  society  or  the  Roman  patronatus. 


1  Av.  iv.  20,  9;  ix.  2,  17;  xviii.  1, 
13 ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  6,  4,  1. 
Also  in  Av.  xiii.  2,  37,  natha-hama, 
'seeking  help';  xi.  1,  15,  natha-vid, 
'  finding  help  ' ;  Paficavimsa  Brahmana, 
xiv.    11,    23,    ndtha-vindu,    'procuring 


protection,'  as  the  name  of  a  Saman, 
or  chant. 

2  In  the  post- Vedic  literature,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  word  is  a  masculine, 
meaning  'protector,'  and  is  very  com- 
mon. 


Napita,  *  barber,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1 
and   later.2     But   the   older  word   is   Vaptr,3  a  derivative   of 

1  iii.  i,  2,  2.  I   13  ;   ASvalayana  Grhya   Sutra,   i.    17, 

'2  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  vii.  2,  8.   I  etc. 

3  Rv.  x.  142,  4. 


442 


A  SEER— A  FAMOUS  SON  OF  MAN U        [  Nabhaka 


vap,  '  shave,'  with  forms  of  which  verb  shaving  is  referred  to 
as  early  as  the  Rigveda.4  The  dead  were  shaved  before 
burial.5 


4  x.  142,  4.     Cf.  i.  65,  4  ;  Av.  vi.  68 ; 
v      2,  17,  etc. 

5  Av.  v.  19,  4. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  266; 
Max  Muller,  Sacred  Boohs  of  the  East, 
32,  265. 


Nabhaka,  '  descendant  of  Nabhaka,'  is  the  name  of  a  Rsi, 
or  seer,  in  the  Rigveda.1  The  Anukramani  (Index)  ascribes 
three  or  four  hymns  of  the  Rigveda2  to  him.  According  to 
Ludwig,3  the  man  was  an  Angirasa,4  not  a  Kanva. 


1  viii.  41,  2  ;  Nirukta,  x.  5. 

2  viii.  39-41,  and  doubtfully  42. 


3  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  107. 
*  viii.  40,  12. 


Nabha-nedistha  ('  nearest  in  descent ')  Manava  ('  descendant 
of  Manu ')  is  famous  in  the  later  Samhitas  and  the  Brahmanas1 
for  the  way  in  which  he  was  treated  when  his  father  Manu 
divided  his  property  among  his  sons,  or  they  divided  it : 
Nabhanedistha  was  left  out,  but  was  solaced  by  obtaining, 
through  his  father's  advice,  cows  from  the  Ahgirases,  a  feat 
which  is  regarded  in  the  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra2  as  on  a 
level  with  the  exploits  of  other  seers  who  celebrated  their 
patrons  in  hymns,  and  as  giving  rise  to  the  hymn,  Rigveda  x.  62. 
Nabhanedistha's  hymn  is  repeatedly  mentioned  in  the  Brah- 
manas,3 but  beyond  its  authorship  nothing  is  recorded  of  him. 
In  the  Samhita4  itself  he  seems  to  be  spoken  of  as  a  poet  in 
one  passage,  which  is,  however,  of  quite  uncertain  meaning. 

Nabhanedistha  is  etymologically  connected  in  all  probability 
with  Nabanazdista  in  the  Avesta,  which  refers  to  the  Fravasi 
of  the  paoiryo-tkaesha  and  the  Fravasi  of  the  Nabanazdista. 
Lassen5  saw  in  the  legend  a  reminiscence  of  an  Indo-Iranian 
split;  but  Roth6  showed  conclusively  that  this  was  impossible, 
and  that  Nabhanedistha  meant  simply  '  nearest  in  birth,'  and 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  1.  9.  4-6; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  v.  14.  Cf.  Muir, 
Sanskrit  Texts,  i2  191  et  seq. 

2  xvi.  11.  28-30. 

3  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xxviii.  4, 
merely  refers  to  him  as  connected  with 
the  Angirases.     See  also  ibid.,  xxx.  4; 


Aitareya  Brahmana,  vi.  30.  31  ;  Panca- 
vimSa  Brahmana,  xx.  9,  4. 

4  x.  61,  18. 

5  Jndische  Alterthumshunde,  i,  520,  and 
Addenda,  p.  lxxvii. 

6  Zeitschrift    der    Deutschen    Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  6,  243  et  seq. 


Naman  ] 


NA  VEL—NA  VE—NAME 


443 


Weber7  admits  that  the  connexion  of  the  words  is  not  one  of 
borrowing  on  either  side,  but  that  in  the  Avesta  it  has  kept  its 
original  sense  of  '  nearest  relation/  while  in  the  Rigveda  it  has 
become  a  proper  name. 

7  Episches  im  vedischen  Ritual,  40-50.     Cf.  also  Daya. 


i.  Nabhi   develops   from   the   literal   sense   of  'navel'   the 
figurative  meaning  of  *  relationship,'1  or,  concretely,  *  relation.'2 


1  *•  105,  9;  164,  33;  ii.  3,  9;  40,  4, 
etc.  ;  Av.  xii.  1,  40 ;  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 
hita, x.  8  ;  xi.  12  ;  xx.  1,  etc. 


2  Rv.  i.  163,  12  ;  vi.  47,  28  ;   Vaja- 
saneyi Samhita,  xiii.  42.  44.  50,  etc. 


2.  Nabhi,   *  nave '  of  a  chariot  wheel,  is  mentioned  in  the 
Rigveda1  and  later.2     See  also  Ratha,  and  cf.  Nabhya. 


1  v.  43,  8  ;  vi.  39,  4  ;  viii.  41,  6. 

2  Av.  iii.  30,  6 ;  x.  8,  34 ;  xi.  7,  4 ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xi.  4;  Brhadaranyaka 


Upanisad,  ii.  5,  11 ;  Chandogya  Upani- 
sad, vii.  15,  1  ;  Aitareya  Aranyaka, 
iii.  2,  4 ;  Kausitaki  Upanisad,  iii.  8. 


Nama-dheya,  '  name,'  is  found  in  the  Rigveda,1  and  often  in 
the  later  language.2     See  Naman. 


1  x.  71,  I. 

2  Av.  vii.  109,  6;  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
ii.  4,  9,  3 ;  iii.  3,  4,  1  ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  xiii.  1,  6,  1  ;  Brhadaranyaka 


Upanisad,  ii.  3,11;  vi.  4, 25 ;  Chandogya 
Upanisad,  vi.  1,  4  ;  Aitareya  Upanisad, 
v.  2,  etc. 


Naman,  '  name,'  is  a  common  word  from  the  Rigveda 
onwards.  The  Grhya  Sutras1  give  elaborate  rules  for  the 
formation  of  the  names  of  children,  but  more  important  is 
the  distinction  between  the  secret  (guhya)  and  the  ordinary 
name,  though  the  rules  as  to  the  secret  name  are  not  at  all 
consistent.  The  secret  name  is  already  recognized  in  the 
Rigveda,2  and  is  referred  to  in  the  Brahmanas,3  one  secret 
name,  that  of  Arjuna  for  Indra,  being  given  in  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana.4     It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  rule  as  to  giving  the 


1  Weber,  Naxatra,  2,  316  et  seq.  ; 
Hillebrandt,  Rituallitteratur,  46,  47 ; 
Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  152. 

2  Cf.  x.  55,  2  ;  71,  1,  as  explained  in 
Aitareya  Aranyaka,  i.  3,  3. 


3  Satapatha  Brahmana,  vi.  1,  3,  9 
(the  name  is  given  to  a  child  at  birth) ; 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  4,  25. 


11.  1,  2,  11  ;  v.  4,  3,  7 


Weber,  2, 


3i7,  n.  3. 


444 


SECOND  AND  THIRD  NAMES 


[  Namba 


designation  of  a  Naksatra  (lunar  asterism)  as  the  secret  name 
or  otherwise  is  not  illustrated  by  a  single  recorded  name  of  a 
teacher  in  the  Brahmanas.5 

The  Satapatha  Brahmana6  several  times  mentions  the 
adoption  of  a  second  name  with  a  view  to  securing  success, 
and  also  refers  to  the  adoption  of  another  name  for  purposes 
of  distinction.7 

In  actual  practice  two  names  are  usually  found  in  the 
Brahmanas,  the  second  being  a  patronymic  or  a  metronymic, 
as  in  Kaksivant  Au&ja8  (if  the  story  of  the  slave  woman  Usij 
as  his  mother  is  correct),  or  Brhaduktha  Vamneya,9  '  son  of 
Vamni,'  though  the  relationship  may,  of  course,  be  not  direct 
parentage,  but  more  remote  descent.10  Three  names  are  less 
common— for  example,  KuSamba  Svayava  Latavya,11  'son  of 
Svayu,  of  the  Latavya  (son  of  Latu)  family,'  or  Devataras 
Syavasayana  Kasyapa,12  where  the  patronymic  and  the  Gotra 
name  are  both  found.  In  other  cases  the  names  probably 
have  a  local  reference — e.g.,  Kaugambeya  and  Gangya.  Fre- 
quently the  patronymic  only  is  given,  as  Bhargava,  Maudgalya, 
etc.,  or  two  patronymics  are  used.  The  simple  name  is  often 
used  for  the  patronymic — e.g.,  Trasadasyu.13  In  a  few  cases 
the  name  of  the  wife  is  formed  from  the  husband's  name,14  as 
Uginarani,  Purukutsani,  Mudgalanl. 


5  Weber,  2,  318,  319.  See  Asadha, 
Rauhina,  Rauhinayana. 

6  iii.  6,  2,  24 ;  v.  3,  3,  14 ;  ix.  4,  3,  3, 
which  directs  that  the  name  should  be 
derived  from  a  feast  performed  by  the 
person  in  question.  See  also  Katbaka 
Samhita,  xxvi.  4;  Taittiriya  Brahmana, 
ii.  7,  17. 

7  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  4,  4,  4. 
Cf.  vi.  1,  3,  9. 

8  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xiv.  11,  17. 

9  Ibid.,  xiv.  9,  38. 

10  Pargiter,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 


Society,  1910,  14  ;  Hopkins,  Transactions 
of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and 
Sciences,  15,  55,  n.  2. 

11  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  viii.  6,  8. 

12  Jaiminiya    Upanisad    Brahmana, 
iii.  40,  2. 

13  Satapatha  Brahmana,  vi.  1,  2,  13 ; 
Hopkins,  Religions  of  India,  201,  n.  2. 

14  Cf.    Macdonell,     Vedic    Grammar, 

P-  135. 

Cf.    Weber,    op.    cit.,    2,    316-320; 
Hopkins,  loc.  cit. 


Namba  is  the  name  of  a  kind  of  grain  mentioned  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana.1  Amba  is  the  form  of  the  word  in  the 
Taittiriya  Samhita2  and  the  Kathaka  Samhita.3 


v.  3,  3.  8. 


5, 10,  1. 


xv.  15. 


NaraSamsI  ]     THE  SEER  NARAD  A— LAUDATORY  VERSES     445 


Naya  in  two  passages  of  the  Rigveda1  is,  according  to  the 
St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  probably  a  proper  name.  Sayana 
takes  the  word  to  mean  *  leader,'  while  Pischel2  considers  it 
a  gerund  with  passive  sense. 

1  vi.  24,  10;  46,  11.  I  explanations,    see   Oldenberg,   Rgveda- 

2  Vedische  Studien,  i,  41.     For  other  |  Noten,  1,  123,  370. 


Narada  is  the  name  of  a  mythical  seer  mentioned  several 
times  in  the  Atharvaveda.1  In  the  Aitareya  Brahmana  he 
appears  in  conjunction  with  Parvata  as  priest  of  Hartecandra.2 
as  teaching  Somaka  Sahadevya,3  and  as  anointing  Ambasthya 
and  Yudhamsrausti.4  In  the  Maitrayani  Samhita5  he  is 
mentioned  as  a  teacher,  and  in  the  Samavidhana  Brahmana6 
as  a  pupil  of  Brhaspati.  In  the  Chandogya  Upanisad7  he  is 
coupled  with  Sanatkumara. 


1  v.  19,  g  ;  xii.  4,  16.  24.  41. 

2  vii.    13.     Cf.   Sankhayana   Srauta 
Sutra,  xv.  17. 

3  vii.  34. 

4  viii.  21. 


5  i.  5,  8. 

6  iii.    9    (the    Vamsa,    or    '  list    of 
teachers, '  at  the  end) . 

7  vii.  1,  1. 

Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  204,  n. 


Naraiamsl  (scil.  Kc),  '  (verse)  celebrating  men,'  is  mentioned 
as  early  as  the  Rigveda,1  and  is  distinguished  from  Gatha  in 
a  number  of  passages  in  the  later  literature.2  The  Kathaka 
Samhita,3  while  distinguishing  the  two,  asserts  that  both  are 
false  (anrtam).  It  is  hardly  probable  that  the  two  were  abso- 
lutely distinct,  for  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana4  has  the  phrase 
*a  Gatha.  celebrating  men'  (ndmsamsT) .  What  such  verses 
were  may  be  seen  from  the  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,5  which 
enumerates  the  Ndrdsamsdni  at  the  Purusamedha,  or  '  human 


1  x.  85,  6. 

2  Av.  xv.  6,  4 ;  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
vii.  5,  11,  2 ;  Aitareya  Brahmana, 
vi.  32 ;  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xxx.  5  ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  v.  5,  2 ;  Taittiriya 
Aranyaka,  ii.  10,  etc. ;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  5,  78.  The  passage,  Satapatha 
Brahmana,   xi.    5,  6,  8,  is  uncertain. 


See  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 
44,  98,  n.  5. 

3  xiv.  5 ;  Weber,  Indische  Streifen,  1, 
98. 

4  i-  3,  2,  6. 

5  xvi.  11,  1  et  seq.  ;  Weber,  Episches 
im  vedischen  Ritual,  10  et  seq. 


446 


ATH ARYAN  TRIPLET— WOMAN 


[  Nari 


sacrifice.'     They  may  legitimately  be  reckoned  as  a  source  of 
the  epic.6 

The  term  Narasamsi  is  restricted  in  some  passages7  to  a 
particular  group  of  three  verses  of  the  Atharvaveda,8  but 
Oldenberg9  must  be  right  in  holding  that  the  restricted  sense 
is  not  to  be  read  into  the  Rigveda.10  Not  even  in  the  Taittiriya 
Samhita11  is  the  technical  sense  certain,  and  the  Brhaddevata 12 
gives  the  word  a  general  application. 


6  Hopkins,  Journal   of  the  American   \ 
Oriental  Society,  15,  264,  n.    Bloomfield, 
A  tharvaveda,  100  {cf.  Hymns  of  the  A  thar- 
vaveda,  688,  689),  lays  stress  rather  on   ! 
their  character  as    mere    eulogies  of 
donors,  and  that,  no  doubt,  was  one 
of  their  sides ;  but  the  other  elements 
may   have    been    more   prominent    in 
reality    than     the     priestly     tradition   j 
shows. 

7  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vi.  32;  Kausi-  j 
taki  Brahmana,  xxx.  5.  Possibly,  in  I 
the  other  passages  mentioned  in  note  2,    ' 


the  reference  may  be  to  the  Atharva- 
veda verses,  but  this  is  not  at  all 
likely. 

8  xx.  127,  1-3  =  Sankhayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  xii.  14,  1-3.  Cf.  Scheftelowitz, 
Die  Apokryphen  des  Rgveda,  155. 

9  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  42,  238. 

10  x.  85,  6. 

11  vii.  5,  11,  2. 

12  hi-  154. 

Cf.  Weber,  Epischcs  im  Vedischen 
Ritual,  4  et  seq. 


Nari,  '  woman,'  occurs  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later.2  The 
word  seems  in  the  Rigveda3  to  have  a  distinct  reference  to  a 
woman  as  a  wife,  because  it  occurs  in  several  passages  with 
distinct  reference  to  matrimonial  relations,3  and  in  the  later 
Vedic  literature,  where  it  is  not  common,  it  sometimes4  has 
that  sense.  Delbruck,5  however,  thinks  that  it  does  not  indi- 
cate marital  relations,  but  merely  the  woman  as  the  sexual 
complement  of  the  man. 


1  vii.    20,    5 ;    55,    8 ;    viii.    77,    8 ; 
x.  18,  7 ;  86,  10.  11. 

2  Av.  xiv.2,  13;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xxiii.  36  ;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iii.  34. 

3  i-  73>   3   (pati-justa,    '  dear  to   her 
husband ') ;  vii.  20.  5 ;  x.  18,  7  [avidhavah 


supatnih,   'not    widowed,    with    noble 
husbands'),  etc. 

4  Gautama  Dharma  Sutra,  ix.  28. 

5  Die  indogermanischen  Verwandtschafts- 
namen,  417,  439. 


Narmara  occurs  once  in  a  corrupt  verse  of  the  Rigveda.1 
Ludwig2  regards  the  word  as  the  proper  name  of  the  prince 
of  a  fort,  Urjayanti,  but  Roth3  as  that  of  a  demon. 

1  ii.  13,  8.  2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  152. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Navaprabhram&ma  ]    PATRONYMICS— DELUGE  MOUNTAIN    447 


Narmini  is  found  in  the  Rigveda1  as  an  epithet  of  Pup,  '  fort ' : 
it  must  apparently  either  be  a  proper  name  of  the  fort,2  or 
mean  '  belonging  to  Narmin  or  Narmina,'  some  prince.3 


1  1.  149.  3- 

2  Ludwig,  Translation   of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  204. 

3  Roth,   St.  Petersburg   Dictionary, 
s.v.     Possibly  the  expression  may  con- 


sist of  two  words — na,  '  not '  or  '  like,' 
and  arminl,  whatever  that  may  mean. 
See  Oldenberg,  Rgveda-N  oten,  1,  148  ; 
Sacred  Boohs  of  the  East,  46,  177. 


Narya,  '  descendant  of  Narya,'  is  the  name  of  a  generous 
donor  in  the  Rigveda.1 

1  viii.  24,  29.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  161,  162. 


Narsada,  '  descendant  of  Nysad,'  is  the  patronymic  of  Kanva 
(i.e.,  a  descendant  of  Kanva)  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  and  in  one 
passage  of  the  Rigveda,2  where  probably  the  same  man  is 
referred  to  in  another  passage3  as  a  protege  of  the  Asvins,  and 
perhaps  as  the  husband  of  Rusati.  But  in  a  third  passage  of 
the  Rigveda4  the  name  seems  applied  to  a  demon,  though  this 
is  not  certain. 


1  iv.  19,  2. 

2  x.  31,  II. 

3  i.  117,  8. 
*  x.  61,  13. 


Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 3,  108,  150 ;  Bloomfield,  Hymns 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  397. 


Nava-prabhram§ana,  the  '  sliding  down  of  the  ship,'  is  read 
in  Whitney  and  Roth's  text  of  the  Atharvaveda,1  and  has  been 
connected  by  Weber2  and  others3  with  Manor  Avasarpana,  the 
name  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana4  of  the  northern  mountain 
on  which  Manu's  ship  settled  on  the  subsidence  of  the  deluge. 
But  both  Bloomfield5  and  Whitney6  point  out  that  this  inter- 
pretation is  highly  improbable,  and  this  view  is  accepted  by 


1  xix.  39,  8,  where  the  reading  nava- 
prabhrdmiana  is  a  conjectural  emenda- 
tion, the  manuscripts  of  the  Samhita 
text  all  having  two  accents,  nayapra- 
bhrdmsana  (one  of  them  reading  navaly). 

2  Indische  Streifen,  x,  II. 

3  Cf.    Ludwig,    Translation    of   the 


Rigveda,  3, 198;  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books 
of  the  East,  12,  218,  n. ;  Zimmer,  Altin- 
disches  Leben,  30. 

4  i.  8,  1,  6. 

5  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  679. 

6  Translation   of   the   Atharvaveda, 
961. 


448 


SHIP— BOA  TMA  N—STREA  M—NA  MES 


[  Nava 


Macdonell.7  The  expression  is  analyzed  as  na  ava-prabhramSana 
by  the  Pada  text  and  the  commentator  alike,  and  is  never  found 
elsewhere  with  reference  to  the  descent  of  a  boat  or  ship.8 

7  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,   i   as  the  first  member  of  a  compound  in 
1907,   1 107,   where  his  acceptance  of      the  form  of   nava,   while  pra-bhrams, 


Weber's  interpretation  in  his  Sanskrit 
Literature,  144,  is  withdrawn. 


'  fall    down,'    is    never    used    of    the 
gliding  down  of  a  boat,  and  would  be 


The  word  nau,  ship,  never  occurs  |  inappropriately  applied  in  that  sense. 


Nava,  'ship,'  occurs  once  in  the  Rigveda  (i.  97,  8).     See 
Nau. 


Navaja  ('ship-propeller'),  a  'boatman,'  is  mentioned  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana  (ii.  3,  3,  5). 


Navya  is  found  several  times  in  the  Rigveda1  and  the  later 
literature2  in  the  sense  of  a  •  navigable  stream.' 

1  i.  33,  11  ;  80,  8;  121,  13.  I  xxiii.  6;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  x.  5,  4, 

2  Av.  viii.  5,  9  ;   Kathaka  Samhita,   I   14,  etc. 


Nahusa,  like  Nahus,  means,  according  to  the  St.  Petersburg 
Dictionary,  in  some  passages  of  the  Rigveda1  'neighbouring' 
as  an  adjective,  and  once2  as  a  substantive  'neighbour.'  If, 
on  the  other  hand,  Nahus  is  taken  as  a  proper  name,  then 
Nahusa  no  doubt  denotes  '  belonging  to  the  Nahus  people,' 
and,  as  a  substantive,  '  King  of  the  Nahus.' 


1  i.  ioo,  16;  v.  73,  3  ;  vi.  22,  10;  viii.  6,  24. 


vm.  95,  2. 


Nikothaka    Bhaya-jatya   ('descendant    of   Bhayajata')   is 
mentioned  in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana1  as  a  pupil  of  Pratithi. 

1  Indische  Studien,  4,  373.     Cf.  Max  Miiller,  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  444. 


Nigada  Parna-valki  ('descendant  of  Parnavalka')  is  men- 
tioned in  the  Vamsa  Brahmana1  as  a  pupil  of  Girisarman. 

*  Indische  Studien,  4,  372.     Cf.  Max  Miiller,  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  443. 


Nidana  ]      A  PLANT— A  STAR— SUMMER— A  SUTRA 


449 


Ni-gfut  occurs  in  two  passages  of  the  Rigveda,1  where  Sayana 
takes  it  to  mean  'enemy,'  a  possible  interpretation.  Ludwig2 
suggests  that  non-Aryan  foes  are  meant. 


1  ix-  97,  53,  54  I  x.  128,  6. 


2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  164. 


NigTistha  is  a  term  of  unknown  meaning  applied  in  the 
Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra  (xvi.  29,  6)  to  the  peoples  of  Kasi, 
Videha,  and  Kosala. 


1.  Ni-tatni, '  striking  downwards,'  occurs  in  the  Atharvaveda1 
as  the  name  of  an  unknown  plant  which  was  used  as  a  means 
of  restoring  the  hair. 


1  vi.  136 ;  probably  137  also  refers 
to  this  plant.  Cf.  Kausitaki  Sutra, 
xxxi.  28,  with  Caland's  note  in  his 
translation  ;    Bloorafield,   Atharvaveda, 


61 ;  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  536,  537 ; 
Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, 383. 


2.  Ni-tatni  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  seven  Kpttikas  in  the 
Taittiriya  Brahmana  (iii.  1,  4,  1).     See  Nak§atra. 

Ni-tana  Maruta  is  the   name  of  a  man   in   the   Kathaka 
Samhita  (xxv.  10). 


Ni-dagfha  ('  burning  down '),  •  summer,'  is  the  name  of  one 
of  the  seasons  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (xiii.  8,  1,  4).  See 
Naidagha. 


Ni-dana  is  the  name  of  a  Sutra,  which  is  referred  to  in  the 
Brhaddevata1  apparently  as  containing  a  quotation  from  the 
Bhallavi  Brahmana.  The  quotation  cannot  be  verified  in 
the  existing  text  of  the  Sutra.2 


65. 


1  v.  23,  with  Macdonell's  note. 

2  Sieg,    Die    Sagenstoffe    des    Rgveda, 

VOL.  I. 


Cf.  Weber,  Jndische  Studien,  1,  44; 
Max  Miiller,  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature, 
in,  etc. 

29 


45o    NET— TREASURE— CISTERN— VALLEY— SUNSET    [  Nidha 
Ni-dha,  'net,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later.2 

1  ix.  83,  4;  x.  73,  11 ;  Nirukta,  iv.  2.  2  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iii.  19. 


Ni-dhi  means  primarily  [  (place  of)  deposit,'  '  store,'1  and  then 
'treasure'  generally.2  In  the  Chandogya  Upanisad3  Nidhi 
denotes  some  sort  of  science. 


1  Rv.  i.  183,  4;  v.  43,  8  ;  vii.  67,  7; 
69,  3,  etc. 

2  Rv.  ii.  24,  6  ;  viii.  29,  6 ;  x.  68,  6 ; 
Av.  x.  7,  23,  etc. 

3  vii.  1,  2.  4 ;  2,  1  ;  7,  1.  The 
St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.,  and 
Bohtlingk    in    his  edition,    take  daivo 


nidhih  as  one  expression.  See  Daiva. 
Sayana  takes  each  as  a  separate  entity, 
and  renders  Nidhi  as  mahakaladinidhi- 
sastram,  presumably  meaning  some  sort 
of  chronology. 

Cf.   for  Nidhi   as  'treasure,'  Jolly, 
Recht  und  Sitte,  103,  104. 


Ni-nahya  denotes  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (iii.  9,  2,  8) 
a  '  water  jar,'  so  called,  according  to  the  commentator,  because 
it  was  buried  in  the  ground.1  Eggeling2  explains  it  as  'a 
vessel  or  cistern  dug  into  the  ground  for  keeping  water  cool.' 

1  As  meaning  etymologically  '  to  be  I  2  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  26,  223, 
fastened  or  fixed  down.'  |   n.  4. 

Ninditaiva  ('possessing  contemptible  steeds')  is  the  name  of 
a  patron  in  the  Rigveda.1  The  name  may  suggest  connexion 
with  Iran,  but  such  a  reference  is  not  at  all  necessary.2 
Sayana  ingeniously  turns  the  name — probably  a  nickname — 
into  a  compliment  by  rendering  it  '  one  who  puts  to  shame  the 
horses  of  his  rivals.' 

1  viii.  1,  30.  I   Oriental  Society,   17,  90.     Cf.   Ludwig, 

2  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American  |   Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  159. 

Ni-pada  in  the  Rigveda  (v.  83,  7)  denotes  'low  ground," 
'  valley,'  as  opposed  to  '  hill '  (udvat).     Cf.  Nivat. 


Ni-mruc,  '  sunset,'  is  repeatedly  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  later2  as  a  division  of  time. 


1  i.   151,  5;    161,   10;    viii.   27,    19; 
x.  151,  5- 

2  Av.   xiii.   3,   21  ;    Taittinya   Sam- 


hita,  i.  5,  10,  2  ;  Kathaka  Samhita, 
xxxvii.  10 ;  Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  ii.  5» 
2,  etc. 


Nivat  ] 


ETYMOLOGY— RESIN— VALLEY 


45i 


Nir-asta,  'castrated,'  is  found  in  some  of  the  later  Samhitas1 
as  applied  to  oxen,  and  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana2  to  horses. 

1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  i.  8,  9,  1  ;  17,  1  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xv.  4.  9. 

2  xiii.  4,  2,  5. 


Nir-ala  occurs  once  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  where  Sayana 
regards  it  as  the  name  of  a  disease.  Bloomfield,2  with  the 
Padapatha,  explains  it  as  two  words,  understanding  nir  as  an 
elliptical  imperative,  '  (go)  out,'  with  the  vocative  dla,  a  kind 
of  weed.  Whitney3  at  first  took  dla  to  be  a  verbal  form,  but 
finally  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  expression  is  one  word, 
nivala,  of  unknown  sense. 


1  vi.  16,  3. 

2  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  466. 


3  Translation  of    the  Atharvaveda, 
292. 


Nirukta,  '  explanation '  of  a  word  or  passage,  is  found  in  the 
Chandogya  Upanisad  (viii.  3,  3),  but  does  not  appear  as  the 
name  of  a  work  before  the  later  Upanisads.  It  is,  however, 
probable  that  Yaska's  Nirukta  is  not  later  than  the  rise  of 
Buddhism.    Cf.  Nirvacana. 


Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  13, 
17  ;  3,  260  et  seq. ;  Indian  Literature,  25, 
26,   41,  42,  etc.  ;   Macdonell,  Sanskrit 


Literature,  269,  270;  Keith,  Aitareya 
Aranyaka,  24,  25 ;  Roth,  Nirukta,  xv. 
et  seq. 


Nir-yasa  denotes  the  '  exudation '  of  trees.  In  the  Taittiriya 
Samhita  (ii.  1,  5,  4)  it  is  tabooed  as  food  because  of  its  red 
colour. 


Nir-vacana  in  the  Taittiriya  Aranyaka1  and  the  Nirukta2 
means  '  explanation,'  especially  etymological.     Cf.  Nirukta. 

1  i.  6,  3.  I  serving     as     an    explanation,'     ibid., 

2  ii.     1 .      Cf.     a  -  nirvacanam,     '  not  |  vii.  24. 


Ni-vat  denotes  *  valley '  in  the  Rigveda x  and  later.2 

1  i.  161,  11  ;   iii.  2,   10;  vii.  50,  4  ;    1       2  Av.  vi.  22,  3;  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
x.  127,  2  ;  142,  4.  I  iii.  2,  4,  4,  etc. 

2g — 2 


452 


CO  W—IN  VOCA  TION 


[  Nivanyavatsa 


Nivanya- vatsa  and  Nivanya  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1 
denotes  a  'cow  with  a  calf  to  which  she  has  to  be  won  over,' 
that  is,  with  a  calf  substituted  for  one  of  her  own  which  has  died. 
Nivanya2  is  a  contracted  form  of  the  compound  term.  Similar 
expressions  are  abhivdnya-vatsd,3  abhivdnyd,4  vdnyd,5  and  api- 
vdnya-vatsd.6 

1  xii.  5,  i,  4. 

2  ii.  6,  i,  6. 

3  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  2. 

4  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  6,  8,  4. 


5  Ibid.,  ii.  6,  16,  2. 

6  KauSika  Sutra,  lxxxii.  22. 

Cf.  Lanman  in  Whitney's  Translation 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  880. 


Ni-vid  denotes  a  brief  invocation  of  the  deity  that  is  invited 
in  a  liturgy  in  honour  of  the  god.  The  Brahmanas1  repeatedly 
mention  Nivids  as  inserted  in  the  Sastras  (recitations),  and  the 
Khilas  of  the  Rigveda2  preserve  among  them  a  set  of  Nivids. 
But  it  is  doubtful3  whether  the  habit  of  using  such  brief 
formulas — the  Nivid  is  usually  not  more  than  a  Pada  or 
quarter-verse  in  length — is  known  to  the  Rigveda,  though  it 
has  been  seen  even  there,4  and  the  word  Nivid  is  several  times 
found  in  that  Samhita,5  but  hardly  in  the  technical  sense  of 
the  Brahmanas.     In  the  later  Samhitas6  the  technical  sense  is 


common. 

*  Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  33.  34 ; 
iii.  10.  11 ;  vi.  33.  35  ;  Kausitaki  Brah- 
mana, xiv.  1  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
iii.  g,  3,  28  ;  xiii.  5,  1.  9,  etc.  ;  Aitareya 
Aranyaka,  i.  5,  2  ;  £ankhayana  Aran- 
yaka,  i.  3,  etc. 

2  See  Scheftelowitz,  Die  Apokryphen 
des  Rgveda,  137-143. 

3  The  antiquity  of  the  Nivids  was 
asserted  by  Haug,  Aitareya  Brahmana, 
1,  26  et  seq.,  and  often  since,  e.g.,  by 
Tilak,  Orion,  206 ;  Scheftelowitz,  op.  cit. , 
3.  It  is  shown  to  be  most  improbable 
by  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  9,  265,  355, 
and  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenldndischen    Gesellschaft,    42,    242 


et  seq. ;    Gdttingische  Gelehrte  Anzeigen, 
1907,  232,  233. 

4  i.  86,  4  ;  Bezzenberger's  Beitrdge, 
9,  192.  So  Oldenberg,  Sacred  Books  of 
the  East,  46,  119,  122,  takes  Rv.  i.  96, 
2,  to  refer  to  the  Nivids  in  the  technical 
sense,  but  not  to  the  Nivids  as  pre- 
served. 

5  i-  89,  3;  96,  2;  175,  6;  ii.  36,  6; 
iv.  18,  7  ;  vi.  67,  10. 

6  Av.  v.  26,  4 ;  xi.  7,  19 ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xix.  25,  etc. 

Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Rituallitteratur,  102  ; 
Oldenberg,  Religion  des  Veda,  387,  n.  2  ; 
Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  i2,  241. 


Nivid- dhana,  'containing  a  Nivid,'  is  found  several  times  as 
an  epithet  of  a  hymn  or  verse  in  the  Brahmanas.1 

1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iii.  17  ;  Kausi-   I  patha  Brahmana,  xiii.  5,  i,  12  ;  Aitareya 
taki  Brahmana,  xxi.  6;  xxiv.  4;  £ata-   |  Aranyaka,  i.  2,  2 ;  5,  3. 


Ni§ada  ]    DWELLING— QUIVER— NON-ARYAN  TRIBES  453 


Ni-ve6ana,  '  dwelling/  occurs  in  the  Rigveda1  and  the  Sutras. 
In  the  latter2  the  word  is  sometimes  contrasted  with  Grha  as 
the  resting-place  of  animals. 


iv.  19,  9 ;  vii.  19,  5. 


2  Asvalayana  Grhya  Sutra,  iv.  6,  etc. 


Ni-sahgrathi1  or  Nisanga-dhi2  is  found  in  the  Yajurveda 
Samhitas.  If  the  second  form  of  the  word  is  correct,  the  sense 
may  be  'sheath  of  a  sword'  (nisanga),  as  it  is  taken  by  the 
St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  but  probably  the  first  form  is  the 
correct  one,  the  word  then  having  the  same  meaning  as 
Nisahgin. 

1  Kathaka  Samhita,  xvii.  11  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  9,  2. 

2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  10. 


Ni-sahgin  is  found  three  times  in  the  Rigveda,1  where, 
owing  to  its  following  in  one  passage2  the  words  sudhanvdna 
isumanto,  '  having  good  bows  and  arrows,'  the  sense  of 
nisanginafy  as  '  having  quivers '  seems  quite  certain.  In  the 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita.3  it  is  taken  by  the  commentator  Mahidhara 
to  mean  '  having  a  sword,'  a  sense  which  is  quite  possible  both 
there  and  in  the  other  passages4  where  it  occurs.  But  the 
word  far  more  probably  means  '  having  a  quiver,'  for  the  bow 
was  the  Vedic  weapon,  not  the  sword  (Asi). 


1  iii.  30,  15  ;  v.  57,  2 

2  v.  57,  2. 


x.  103,  3. 


0  xvi.  20.  Cf.  Katyayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  xx.  a,  II,  with  the  commentator. 

4  Samaveda,  ii.  1199  ;  Kathaka  Sam- 
hita, xvii.  12;  xxxvii.  11;  Maitrayani 


Samhita,  ii.  9,  3 ;  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
iy-  5.  3>  1  '•  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
xiii.  4,  2,  5. 

Cf.  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  13,  274. 


Ni-sada  is  found  in  the  later  Samhitas  and  the  Brahmanas.1 
The  word  seems  to  denote  not  so  much  a  particular  tribe,  but 
to  be  the  general  term  for  the  non-Aryan  tribes  who  were  not 
under  Aryan  control,  as  the  Sudras  were,  for  Aupamanyava2 
took  the  five  peoples  (panca  janah)  to  be  the  four  castes  (catvaro 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  5,  4,  2 ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xvii.  13  ;  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  ii.  9,  5  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 


xvi.  27  ;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  11 
PancavimSa  Brahmana,  xvi.  6,  8,  etc. 
2  In  Yaska,  Nirukta,  iii.  8. 


454 


ABORIGINAL  TRIBES— NECKLET 


[  Ni§ka 


varnah)  and  the  Nisadas,  and  the  commentator  Mahidhara 
explains  the  word  where  it  occurs  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita3 
as  meaning  a  Bhilla,  or  Bhil.  A  village  of  Nisadas  is  men- 
tioned in  the  Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,4  and  a  Nisada  Sthapati, 
a  leader  of  some  kind,  is  referred  to  in  the  Katyayana  Srauta 
Sutra5  and  in  a  Brahmana  cited  by  the  scholiast  on  that 
passage.  Weber6  thinks  that  the  Nisadas  were  the  settled 
aborigines  (from  ni%  'down,'  and  sad,  'settle'),  a  view  sup- 
ported by  the  fact  that  the  ritual  of  the  Visvajit  sacrifice7 
requires  a  temporary  residence  with  Nisadas ;  for  the  Nisadas 
who  would  permit  an  Aryan  to  reside  temporarily  amongst 
them  must  have  been  partially  amenable  to  Aryan  influence. 
But  the  name  might  easily  be  applied  to  the  whole  body  of 
aborigines  outside  the  Aryan  organization.  Von  Schroeder8 
thinks  that  the  Nisadas  were  most  probably  identical  with  the 
Nysseans,  who,  according  to  the  Greek  account,  sent  an 
embassy  to  Alexander  when  he  was  in  the  territory  of  the 
Asvakas,  but  this  identification  is  doubtful. 


3  xvi.  27.     Cf.  xxx.  8. 
*  viii.  2,  8. 

5  i.  1,  12;  Weber,  Indische  Studien, 
io,  13. 

6  Indische  Studien,  9,  340.  Cf.  10,  13, 
16. 

7  See  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xxv.  15 ; 
Latyayana,  loc.  cit. ;  PaficavimSa  Brah- 
mana, loc.  cit. 

8  Indiens  Literatur  und  Cultur,  366. 
Cf.   Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,   39, 


119.  In  the  later  system  (Manu,  x.  8) 
the  Nisada  is  the  offspring  of  a  Brah- 
mana and  of  a  Sudra  woman,  while  the 
Brhatsamh'ta  of  Varahamihira (xiv.  10) 
recognizes  a  kingdom  (rastra)  of  Nisadas 
in  the  south-east  of  Madhyadesa.  In  the 
Pali  texts  (Fick,  Die  sociale  Gliederung, 
12,  160,  206  et  seq.)  they  are  wild 
hunters  and  fishers.  Cf.  also  Muir, 
Sanskrit  Texts,  i2,  301,  303,  366,  n.  164, 
403,  481. 


Niska  is  frequently  found  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  denoting 
a  gold  ornament  worn  on  the  neck,  as  is  shown  by  the  two 
epithets  niska-kantha3  and  niska-griva,4  '  having  a  gold  ornament 
on  the  neck.'  A  Niska  of  silver  is  mentioned  in  the  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana.5     As  early  as  the  Rigveda6  traces  are  seen  of  the 


1  ii.  33,  10;  viii.  47,  15,  etc. 

2  Av.  v.  14,  3  ;  vii.  99,  1 ;  xx.  131,  8  ; 
Chandogya  Upanisad,  iv.  2,  1.  2; 
v.  13,  2  ;  Jaiminlya  Upanisad  Brah- 
mana, i.  36,  7.  8  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
xiii.  4,  1,  7.  11,  etc. 


3  Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  22. 

4  Rv.  v.  19,  3  ;  Av.  v.  17,  14. 

5  xvii.  1,  14,  as  worn  by  the  Vratyz 
Cf.  Av.  xv.  3. 

6  i.  126,  2. 


Nicya  ]         A  CONSTELLATION— WESTERN  TRIBES 


455 


use  of  Niskas  as  a  sort  of  currency,  for  a  singer  celebrates  the 
receipt  of  a  hundred  Niskas  and  a  hundred  steeds :  he  could 
hardly  require  the  Niskas  merely  for  purposes  of  personal 
adornment.  Later  the  use  of  Niskas  as  currency  is  quite  clear.7 
Cf.  also  Krsnala. 


7  Av.  xx.  127,  3  ;  Latyayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  ix.  9,  20,  etc.  In  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  xi.  4,  1,  1.  8;  Gopatha 
Brahmana,  i.  3,  6  ;  the  sense  of  '  coin  ' 
is  seen  by  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of 
the  East,  44,  50,  51,  and  by  Geldner, 
Vedische  Studien,  2,  185. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  51, 
259,  263 ;  Geldner,  op.  cit.,  1,  268,  n.  2 ; 
Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlandischen 
Gesellschaft,  40,  127. 


Niskiriya  is  the  name  of  a  school  of  priests  who  are  men- 
tioned in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana1  as  holding  a  Sattra,  or 
'  sacrificial  session.' 

1  xii.  5,  14.  Cf.  Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and 
Sciences,  15,  58. 


Ni§tya  means  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  an  outsider  or 
stranger.  Hence  the  constellation  usually  known  as  Svati 
(see  Naksatra)  is  named  Nistya  in  the  Taittirlya  Brahmana,3 
because  it  occupies  a  position  markedly  away  from  the  ecliptic. 


1  vi.  75,  19 ;  vin.  i,  13 ;  x.  133,  5. 

2  Av.  iii.  3,  6 ;  Vajasaneyi,  v.  23 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  6,  4,  17,  etc. 


3  1.  5,  2,  2.  3;  111.  1,  1,  13. 
Cf.  Max  Muller,  Sacred  Books  of  the 
East,  32,  215. 


Nihaka  in  the  Rigveda1  and  the  Taittirlya  Samhita2  appears 
to  denote  some  phenomenon  of  a  storm,  perhaps  the  '  whirl- 
wind.' 

1  x.  97,  13.  2  vii.  5,  11,  1  (following  nl hara). 

NIksana.    See  Neksana. 


Nicya  ('  living  below ')  is  a  designation  of  certain  nations  of 
the  west.  The  Nicyas  are  mentioned  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana 
(viii.  14)  as  distinguished  from  the  people  of  Madhyade^a,  and 
no  doubt  mean  the  inhabitants  of  the  Indus  and  Panjab 
regions. 


456 


HYMN— GIRDLE— WORM 


[  Nitha 


Nitha  ('leading'),  neut.,  means  musical  'mode'  and  then 
'  hymn  of  praise.' 1  The  feminine  form  Nitha  occurs  once  in 
the  Rigveda2  meaning  'artifice.' 


1  Rv.  iv.  3,  16 ;  vii.  26,  2  ;  x.  92,  3 ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  38.  Cf.  nlthdvid 
of  singers  {jaritr)  in  Rv.  iii.  12,  5. 

2  i.  104,  5.    Cf.  the  epithet  sata-nitha, 


i.  100,  12  ;   179,  3  ;   x.  69,  7  ;  sahasra- 
nltha,  iii.  60,  7  ;  ix.  85,  4  ;  96,  18  (used 
of  the  poet's  art,  padavlh  kavmdm). 
Cf.  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  i2,  241. 


Ninaha,  a  word  occurring  once  in  the  Atharvaveda  (xix.  57,4), 
seems  to  denote  a  'girdle'  or  something  similar,  as  derived 
from  the  verb  nah,  'fasten.' 


Nipatithi  occurs  in  the  Rigveda1  as  the  name  of  a  man  to 
whom  a  hymn2  is  ascribed  by  the  Anukramani  (Index).  A 
Saman,  or  Chant,  of  his  is  mentioned  in  the  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana.3 


1  viii.  49,  9,  where  he  appears  as 
engaged  in  battle;  viii.  51,  i,  where 
he  seems  to  be  a  sacrifices  Either  a 
king  or  a  seer  may  be  meant. 

1  viii.  34.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation 


of  the  Rigveda,  3,  140  ;  Hopkins, 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
17,  90. 

3  xiv.  10,  4. 


Nflangfu  is  the  name  of  a  species  of  '  worm  '  in  the  Yajurveda 
Samhitas1  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the  Asvamedha,  or  'horse 
sacrifice.' 

1  Taittirlya  Samhita,  v.  5,  11,  1;  1  nlldhgu) ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  30. 
MaitrayanI   Samhita,   iii.   14,    11    (v.l.    \  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  98. 


Nila-girsni,  '  black-headed,'  is  the  name  of  an  unknown 
animal  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the  Asvamedha,  or  'horse 
sacrifice,'  in  the  Taittirlya  Samhita.1 

1  v«  5»  J5i  *«     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  99. 

Nilagfalasala,  or,  as  the  Paippalada  version  reads,  Nflakala- 
sala,  is  the  name,  according  to  the  commentator,  of  a  grain- 
creeper  in  the  Atharvaveda.1 

1  vi.   16,  4.     Cf.  Whitney,  Transla-   I  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
tion    of    the   Atharvaveda,   292,    293 ;  |  466. 


Nrtu  ]     WILD  RICE— UNDERGARMENT— MIST— DANCER       457 


Nivara,  'wild  rice,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas1 
and  the  Brahmanas.2 

1  Kathaka  Samhita,  xii.  4;  Maitra-  |   3,  3,  5  ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  3,  6,  7, 
yanl  Samhita,  iii.  4,   10 ;    Vajasaneyi  etc. 
Samhita,  xviii.  12.  Cf. 

2  £atapatha  Brahmana,  v.  1,  4,  14;  240. 


Zimmer,      Altindisches      Leben, 


Nivi  is  the  name  of  the  '  undergarment,'  probably  a  simple 
apron  of  cloth,  worn  by  both  men  and  women,  but  especially 
by  the  latter.     It  is  mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  later.2 


1  viii.  2,  16  ;  xiv.  2,  50.  Cf.  nlvi- 
bharya,  '  to  be  borne  in  the  apron,' 
viii.  6,  20. 

2  Taittiriya    Samhita,   vi.    1,    1,   3; 


Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  iv.  10  ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  i.  3,  3,  6 ;  iii.  2,  1,  15,  etc. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  262  ; 
Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  331. 


Nihara,  '  mist,'  occurs  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later.5 


1  x.  82,  7. 

2  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  5,  11,  1  ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxviii.  4;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxii.  26;  xxv.  9;  Av.  vi.  113, 


2 ;  xviii.  3,  60 ;  Taittiriya  Aranyaka, 
i.  10,  7  ;  vi.  4,  1 ;  Chandogya  Upanisad, 
iii.  19,  2,  etc. 


Nr.     See  Nara. 


Nrti  in  one  passage  of  the  Atharvaveda1  seems  to  mean  a 
bag  of  skin.  But  though  the  Paippalada  recension  has  the 
same  text,  it  is  clear  that  we  must  read  Drti  with  Roth 2  and 
Whitney.3  Ludwig4  renders  the  word  '  dancer,'  which  makes 
no  sense  in  the  context. 


1  vi.  18,  3. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Translation   of    the   Atharvaveda, 
294.     Cf.   Weber,   Indische  Studien,   5, 


235;  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 468. 

4  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  514. 


Nrtu  occurs  once  in  the  Rigveda1  denoting  a  female  *  dancer.' 
In  another  passage2  Nrti  is  found  coupled  with  hdsa,  '  laughter,' 
in  the  description  of  the  funeral  ritual ;  but  though  it  is  clear 
that  a  joyful  celebration  is  meant  (like  the  Irish  '  wake '  or  the 

1  i.  92,  4  (where  Usas,  Goddess  of  Dawn,  is  compared  to  a  dancer). 

2  x.  18,  3.     Cf.  29,  2. 


458 


KING— A  SEER— SPIT 


[Nrpati 


old-fashioned  feasting  in  Scotland  after  a  funeral),  it  is  difficult 
to  be  certain  that  actual  dancing  is  here  meant.  Dancing  is, 
however,  often  referred  to  in  the  Rigveda3  and  later.  Nrtta- 
glta,  '  dance  and  song,'  are  mentioned  in  the  Jaiminiya 
Brahmana4  as  found  in  the  sixth  world.     See  also  Sailusa. 


3  i.  10,  i ;  92,  4,  etc.     See  Weber, 
Indian  Literature,  196  et  seq. 


4  i.  42  {Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  15,  235). 


Nr-pati,  *  lord  of  men,'  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  denotes 
a  'king'  or  a  man  of  the  ruling  class  (Ksatriya). 


1  11.   I,  1.  7  ;  iv.  20,  1 
x.  44,  2.  3. 


vii.  69,  1 


2  Av.  v.  18,  1.  15;  Taittiriya  Aran- 
yaka,  vi.  3,  3  ;  x.  77,  etc. 


Nr-medha,1  Nr-medhas,2  is  the  name  of  a  protege  of  Agni 
in  the  Rigveda,3  where  he  also  appears  with  Sumedhas  in  a 
hymn  that  Griffith4  with  justice  declares  to  be  unintelligible. 
In  the  Taittiriya  Samhita1  he  is  an  unsuccessful  rival  of 
Parucchepa,  and  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana2  he  is  an 
Angirasa  and  a  seer  of  Samans  (Chants). 


1  Rv.  x.   80,   3  ;    132,   7 ;   Taittiriya 
Samhita,  ii.  5,  8,  3. 

2  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  viii.  8,  21 
et  seq. 

•  x.  80,  3. 


4  x.  132 ;  Griffith,  Hymns  of  the 
Rigveda,  2,  578,  n. 

Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologies, 
160 ;  Hopkins,  TransactionsoftheConnecti- 
cut  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,!^  61. 


Nr-sad,  '  sitting  among  men,'  is  the  name  of  the  father  of 
Kanva  in  the  Rigveda  (x.  31,  11).    Cf.  Nar§ada. 


Nek§ana  occurs  once  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  where  a  '  spit ' 
seems  to  be  meant.  In  the  Rigveda2  Niksana  occurs,  and 
must  have  the  same  sense;  Oldenberg3  inclines  to  think  that 
this  word  refers  to  the  'inspection'  of  food,  to  see  if  it  is 
ready  (as  from  ni-tks,  '  look  into '). 


1  ix.  6, 17.  Cf.  KauSika  Sutra,  ii.  n  ; 
lxxxvii.  12 ;  Whitney,  Translation  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  540. 


2  i.  162,  13. 

3  Rgveda-Noten, 


155- 


Naidagha  ]    FELLY-A  PRIEST— A  PLACE— SUMMER  459 

Nemi  denotes  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  the  'felly'  of  a 
chariot  wheel.  It  was  required  to  be  of  good  wood  (su-dru),3 
and  was  bent  into  shape.4    Cf  Ratha. 


"•5.3;  v.  13,6; 
vii.  32,  20 ;  viii.  46,  23  ;  75,  5,  etc. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  4,  2,  15  ; 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  5,  15,  etc. 


3  Rv.  vii.  32,  20. 

4  Rv.  viii.  75,  5. 

Cf.      Zimmer,      Altindisches      Leben, 
248. 


NestP,  the  name  of  one  of  the  chief  priests  at  the  Soma 
sacrifice,  occurs  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later.2     See  Rtvij. 


1  i.  15,  3  ;  ii.  5,  5,  etc. 

2  Taittiriya    Samhita,    i.    8,    18,    1  ; 
vi.    5,    8,    5.   6 ;   Aitareya  Brahmana, 


iii.    8,    2,   1,  etc.  ;    Pancavimsa   Brah- 
mana, xxv.  15,  etc. 

Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie, 


vi.  3,  10,  etc.;   Satapatha  Brahmana,    j    1,  250,  261,  527. 

Naica-gakha  is  found  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda,1  where 
Sayana  renders  it  as  '  of  low  origin,'  but  elsewhere2  he  explains 
it  as  the  name  of  a  place.  The  former  sense  is  accepted  by 
Grassmann  and  Ludwig  in  their  versions,  and  by  Zimmer,3 
but  Hillebrandt4  points  out  that  the  reference  is  rather  to  the 
'  low-branched '  Soma  plant.     Cf  Kikata  and  Pramag-anda. 


1  vii.  53,  4. 

2  See  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Altindisches  Leben,  31. 


4  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  14-18;  2,  241- 
245,  where  he  opposes  Bohtlingk's  view 
that  it  is  a  proper  name. 


Naicu-dara  occurs  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,1  meaning 
'  composed  of  the  wood  of  the  Nicudara.'  What  tree  is  meant 
by  the  latter  name  is  unknown. 

1  xxi.  4,  13.     Cf.  Anupada  Sutra,  vi.  4. 

Naitandhava  is  mentioned  as  a  place  on  the  Sarasvati  in 
the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana1  and  the  Sutras.2 

1  xxv.  13,  1.  I   Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xiii.  29,  31  ; 

2  Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  x.  19,  13  ;    |  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xxiv.  6,  23. 

Nai-dagha  is  the  name  of  the  '  summer '  season  in  the  later 
Samhitas  and  Brahmanas.1     Cf  Rtu  and  Nidagha. 


1  Av.  ix.  5, 31 ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana, 
i.  8,  4,  2  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  4, 
1,  16,  etc.;  naiddghiya,  'belonging  to 


the  summer,'  Pancavimsa  Brahmana, 
xxiii.  16,  8,  etc. 


460  VEDIC  INTERPRETERS—ETYMOLOGISTS      [  Naidana, 

Nai-dana  is  a  term  applied  in  the  Nirukta1  to  a  class  of 
Vedic  interpreters.  Roth2  takes  the  Naidanas  to  be  'etymo- 
logists,' but  Sieg3  thinks  they  are  the  same  as  the  Aitihasikas 
or  'legendarists.'4 


1  vi.  9 ;  vii.  12. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s. v.  But 
cf.  Nirukta,  Erlauterungen,  220,  221  ; 
Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  22,  176. 


3  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  29. 

4  The  word  seems  to  mean  '  one 
concerned  with  the  original  form  " 
(niddna). 


Nai-dhruvi,  '  descendant  of  Nidhruva,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
KaSyapa  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.1 

1  vi.  4,  33  (Madhyandina  =  vi.  5,  3  Kanva). 

NaimiSi  is  the  epithet  of  Sitibahu  Aisakrta  in  the  Jaiminiya 
Brahmana.1  It  is  probably  to  be  taken  as  an  indication  that 
Sitibahu  came  from  the  Naimisa  forest. 

1  !•  363  (Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  26,  192). 

NaimiSIya,1  Naimisiya2  denotes  the  dwellers  in  the  Naimisa 
forest.  They  are  mentioned  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita2  and  the 
Brahmanas,2  being  clearly  of  special  sanctity.  Hence  in  the 
Epic  the  Mahabharata  is  said  to  have  been  recited  to  the  Rsis 
dwelling  in  the  Naimisa  forest.3 

1  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xxv.  6,  4 ;  j  13  ;  Naimisya,  Kathaka  Samhita,  x.  6 
Jaiminiya  Brahmana,  i.  363  (Journal  of  j  (1 ndische  Studien,  3,  469).  The  cerebral  s 
the  American  Oriental  Society,  26,  192).  seems  to  be  universal  later. 

2  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xxvi.  5  ;  j  3  Weber,  Indian  Literature,  34,  45,  54, 
xxviii.  4;   Chandogya  Upanisad,  i.  2,    I  68,  70,  185. 

Nair-ukta1  in  the  Nirukta2  denotes  a  man  who  knows  the 
true  etymology  of  words,  and  explains  their  meaning  accord- 
ingly. Yaska's  Nirukta  is  the  classic  work  of  this  school,  and 
forms  a  commentary  on  an  earlier  Nirukta,  the  so-called 
Naighantuka,  a  glossary  consisting  of  five  collections  of  Vedic 
words. 


1  '  One  concerned  with  etymological 
explanation '  (nir-ukta). 

2  i.  12  ;  vi.  11 ;  xi.  19.  29.  31 ;  xii.  10 ; 
xiii.  9. 


Cf.  Weber,  Indian  Literature,  26,  85  ; 
I  ndische  Studien,  2,  39,  n. ;  Sieg,  Die 
Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  10-13 ;  Muir, 
Sanskrit  Texts,  22,  165  et  seq 


Nau  ] 


A  POET— BOAT 


461 


Nai-sada,  a  *  man  of  Nisada,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Kausltaki 
Brahmana  (xxv.  15)  and  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita  (xxx.  8). 

Naisidha  is  the  reading  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (ii.  3, 
2,  1.  2)  of  the  epithet  of  Nada,  a  king  of  the  south.  The  later 
form  of  the  name  is  Naisadha ;  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary 
suggests  that  its  original  form  was  Naihsidha. 


Nodhas  is  the  name  of  a  poet  who  is  mentioned  in  the 
Rigveda,1  and  to  whom  certain  of  its  hymns  are  ascribed.2 
In  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana3  he  is  called  Kaksivata,  a 
'descendant  of  Kakslvant.'  Ludwig4  regards  him  as  con- 
temporary with  the  defeat  of  Purukutsa.     He  was  a  Gotama.5 


1  i.  61,  14;  62,  13  ;  64,  1,  and  124,  4, 
according  to  Nirukta,  iv.  16. 

2  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vi.  18 ;  Rv. 
i.  58-64  are  ascribed  to  him  in  the 
Anukramani  (Index). 

3  vii.  10,  10 ;  xxi.  9,  12.  Cf.  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  iv.  27  ;  viii.  12.  17 ;  Av. 
xv.  2,  4  ;  4,  4. 


4  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  no. 

5  Rv.  i.  62,  13 ;  Max  Muller,  Sacred 
Books  of  the  East,  32,  125.  For  the 
controversy  as  to  the  meaning  of  Rv. 
i.  124,  4,  see  Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten, 
1,  137.  Cf.  Hopkins,  Transactions  of 
the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts  and 
Sciences,  15,  33. 


Nau  is  the  regular  word  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  for  a 
'  boat '  or  ■  ship.'  In  the  great  majority  of  cases  the  ship  was 
merely  a  boat  for  crossing  rivers,  though  no  doubt  a  large  boat 
was  needed  for  crossing  many  of  the  broad  rivers  of  the  Panjab 
as  well  as  the  Yamuna  and  Gangpa.  Often  no  doubt  the  Nau 
was  a  mere  dug-out  canoe  (ddru).3  It  is  certainly  against  the 
theory4  of  the  existence  in  Vedic  times  of  an  extensive  sea 
trade  that  there  is  no  mention  of  any  of  the  parts  of  a  ship,  such 
as  masts  and  sails,  except  the  oar  (Aritra).  Yet  there  are  some 
allusions  indicating  a  trade  more  extensive  than  that  implied 
by  boats  used  for  crossing  rivers.  The  Atharvaveda5  compares 
the  ruin  of  a  kingdom  where  Brahmins  are  oppressed  to  the 


1  i.  131,  2;  h.  39,  4;  viii.  42,  3; 
83,  3.  etc. 

2  Av.  ii.  36,  5 ;  v.  19,  8  ;  Taittiriya 
Samhita,  v.  3,  10,  1  ;  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 
hita, x.  19 ;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iv.  13  ; 
vi.  6.  21 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  8, 
1,4;  iv.  2,  5,  10,  etc. 


3  Rv.  x.  155,  3. 

4  Wilson,  Rigveda,  1,  xli. 

5  v.  19,  8.  Cf.  Hopkins,  American 
Journal  of  Philology,  19,  139.  So  per- 
haps the  passage,  Rv.  i.  32,  8,  nadam 
na  bhinnam,  refers  to  a  ship.  See 
Nada. 


462 


OCEAN  NAVIGATION— FIG  TREE       [  Nyagrodha 


sinking  of  a  ship  which  is  leaking  {bhinnd) ;  though  the  language 
here  employed  can  be  made  to  fit  the  theory  that  the  ship  was 
only  a  canoe,  it  cannot  naturally  be  so  interpreted.  Moreover, 
there  is  mention  made  in  the  Rigveda6  of  men  who  go  to  the 
ocean  (Samudra)  eager  for  gain  (sanisyavah).  It  is  not  altogether 
satisfactory  to  restrict  such  references  with  Zimmer7  to  the 
broad  stream  of  the  Indus  after  the  union  of  that  river  with 
the  tributaries  of  the  Panjab.  In  the  Rigveda8  too  it  is  said 
that  the  Asvins  rescued  Bhujyu  in  the  ocean  with  a  ship  of 
a  hundred  oars  (satdritra).  It  is  not  easy  to  refuse  to  recognize 
here  the  existence  of  larger  vessels  with  many  oars  used  for 
sea  voyages.  The  Baudhayana  Dharma  Sutra,9  at  any  rate, 
clearly  refers  to  maritime  navigation.     See  also  Samudra. 

But  it  is  not  of 


6  Rv.  i.  56,  2  ;  iv.  55,  6. 

7  Altindisches  Leben,  22,  23. 

8  i.  116,  3  et  seq. 


"  1.  2,  4  ;  11.  2,  2. 
very  early  date. 
Cf.  Zimmer,  op.  cit. 


255-257. 


Nyagf-rodha,  '  growing  downwards,'  is  the  name  of  the 
Ficus  indica,  a  tree  remarkable  for  sending  down  from  its 
branches  fibres  which  take  root  and  form  new  stems.  Though 
the  tree  is  not  mentioned  by  name  in  the  Rigveda,  it  appears 
to  have  been  known,  as  Pischel1  has  shown  from  a  hymn2  in 
which  its  characteristics  may  be  recognized.  It  is  frequently 
mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda3  and  the  later  literature.4  The 
sacrificial  bowls  (Camasa)  were  made  of  its  wood.6  It  was 
doubtless  of  the  greatest  importance,  as  in  modern  times,  to 
the  Vedic  village.  The  sister  tree,  the  Agvattha  (Ficus  religiosa), 
already  occurs  in  the  Rigveda. 


1  Vedische  Studim,  1,  113,  114. 

2  i.  24,  7,  where  stupa  seems  to 
denote  the  crest  or  crown  of  the  tree 
above  the  main  trunk. 

3  iv.  37,  4  J  v.  5,  5. 

4  Aitareya   Brahmana,  vii.   30.    31  ; 


Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  3,  5,  13 ; 
xiii.  2,  7,  3 ;  Chandogya  Upanisad, 
vi.  12,  1,  etc. 

5  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  4,  12,   1 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiii.  13. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  58. 


Ny-anka  in  the  dual  denotes  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita 1  and 
Brahmana2  some  part  of  the  chariot,  parallel  with  Anka.  The 
Paficavimsa  Brahmana3  has  Nyahku,  the  dual  of  Nyahku. 

1  i.  7,  7,  2.  3  i.  7,  5  ;  Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra, 

1  i.  3.  5.  4 ;  "•  7.  8,  1.  I  ii.  8,  9. 


Paktha  ] 


ORNAMENT— CAKE— A  PEOPLE 


463 


Nyahku  is  the  name  of  an  animal  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the 
Asvamedha,  or  '  horse  sacrifice,'  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas.1 
It  seems  clear  that  a  kind  a  *  gazelle '  is  meant,  but  the  com- 
mentary on  the  Taittiriya  Samhita1  suggests  'bear'  (rksa)  as 
a  variant  rendering. 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  17,  1  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  9 ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  27.  32.  Cf. 
Zimmer,   Altindisches  Leben,   83.     The 


metre  nyahhu-sdrinl,  '  with  a  gazelle's 
gait,'  is  already  mentioned  in  the 
Rgveda  Pratisakhya,  xvi.  31 ;  Chandas, 
5  ;  Nidana  Sutra,  i.  2. 


Ny-astika  seems  in  the  Atharvaveda1  to  denote  a  plant  of 
some  kind,  identified  by  the  scholiast  with  the  Sankhapuspika 

(Andropogon  aciculatus). 


1  vi.  139,  1.     Cf.  Whitney,  Transla- 
tion of  the  Atharvaveda,  385  ;  Bloom- 


field,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  539, 
540- 


Ny-ocani  is  found  in  the  marriage  hymn  of  the  Rigveda 
(x.  85,  6),  where  some  kind  of  ornament  worn  by  women  seems 
to  be  meant.  The  commentator  Sayana  interprets  it  as 
1  female  slave.' 


p. 


Pakti  denotes  a  cooked  object,  probably  a  kind  of  '  cake,'  in 
the  Samhitas.1     One  who  cooks  food  is  called  Paktr.2 

1  Rv.  iv.  24,  5.  7 ;  25,  6.  7 ;  vi.  29, 
4  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxi.  59,  etc. 
*  Av.    x.    9,    7.   11.   25  ;    xi.    1,    17  ; 


xii.  3,  17 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii.  3, 
4,  17;  x.  4,  2,  19. 


Paktha  is  the  name  of  a  people  in  the  Rigveda,1  where  they 
appear  as  one  of  the  tribes  that  opposed2  the  Trtsu-Bharatas  in 
the  DaSarajiia,  or  ■  battle  of  the  ten  kings.'     Zimmer3  compares 


1  vii.  18.  7. 

2  Roth,  Zur  Litteratur  und  Geschichte 
des  Weda,  95,  thought  that  the  Pakthas 
were  allies  of  the  Trtsus,  but  this  view 


is  certainly  incorrect.     Cf.   Hopkins, 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
15.  260. 
3  Altindisches  Leben,  430,  431. 


464  A  NORTHERN  TRIBE— COOKED  FOOD— SIDE  POST  [  Pi 


them  with  the  tribe  of  TLatcrves  and  their  country  HatcTVLKr), 
mentioned  as  in  the  north-west  of  India  by  Herodotus,4  and 
with  the  modern  Pakhthun  in  Eastern  Afghanistan,  holding 
that  they  were  a  northern  tribe;  this  is  probable,  since  the 
Bharatas  seem  to  have  occupied  the  Madhyadesa,  or  '  Middle 
Land.'  In  three  passages  of  the  Rigveda5  a  Paktha  is  referred 
to  as  a  protege"  of  the  Asvins.  The  second  connects  him  wifti 
Trasadasyu,  whose  tribe,  the  Purus,  were  aided  by  the  Pakthas 
in  their  unsuccessful  onslaught  on  Sudas.  In  the  third  passage 
he  seems  specified  as  Turvayana,  and  appears  as  an  opponent 
of  Cyavana.6  Probably,  therefore,  Paktha  in  all  cases  denotes 
the  king  of  the  Paktha  people. 


4  vii.  65  (UdKTves) ;  iii.  102  and  iv.  44 

(IICLKTVIKT)) . 


8  viii.  22,  10 ;  49,  10  ;  x.  61,  1. 

6  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  1,  71-77. 


Pakva,  '  cooked,'  is  used  substantively  as  meaning  '  cooked 
food'1  or  *  cooked  milk.'2  The  word  is  also  used  of  *  baked ' 
bricks.3 


1  Rv.  vi.  63,  g ;  Av.  vi.  119,  2  ; 
x".  3,  55 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  5, 
1,  26  ;  ii.  6,  1,  7,  etc. 

3  Satapatha  Brahmana,  vi.  1,  2,  22 ;  vii.  2 


2  Rv.   i.    62,    9  ;    180,   3 ;    ii.   40,   2 ; 
iii.  30,  14 ;  vi.  44,  24,  etc. 


Paksa  is,  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  applied  to  some  part  of 
house,  either  the  '  side  posts,'  according  to  Roth,2  Zimmer,2 
and  Grill,4  or  'sides,'  as  understood  by  Whitney5  and  Bloom- 
field.6  The  description  of  the  roof  (Chadis)  in  the  Atharvaveda7 
as  catus-paksa,  '  four-sided,'  tells  in  favour  of  the  second 
explanation.  In  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana8  Paksa  is  used  oi 
the  sides  of  a  chariot.  For  Paksa  as  the  '  half  of  a  month,  see 
Masa. 


1  ix.  3,  4. 

2  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Altindisches  Leben,  153. 
*  Hundert  Lieder2,  188. 

5  Translation   of   the  Atharvaveda, 
526. 


6  Hymns  0/  the  Atharvaveda,  597. 

7  in-  7.  3- 

8  i.  5.  12,  5. 

Cf.    Weber,     Indische    Studien,     17, 


Pacana  ]        HALF— BIRD— SERIES— COOKED  FOOD 


465 


Paksas  is  found  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  the  Kausitaki 
Brahmana2  meaning  the  *  sides  '3  of  a  chariot.  In  the  Kathaka 
Samhita4  and  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana5  it  is  used  of  the  sides 
of  a  hut  or  chamber  (Sala).  In  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita6  it 
means  the  '  wing  '  of  a  door.  In  the  Kausitaki  Brahmana7  the 
'half  of  an  army  is  so  named,  and  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brah- 
mana8 it  means  the  'half  of  a  month,  or  'fortnight.'  Cf. 
Paksa. 


1  vm.  8,  22. 

2  vii.  7. 

3  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 506 ;  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  117. 


4  xxx.  5. 

5  i-  2,  3,  1. 

6  xxix.  5. 

7  ii.  9. 

8  xxiii.  6,  6. 


Paksin   in   the    Rigveda1   and   later2   denotes   a   'winged' 
creature,  more  particularly  a  '  bird.' 


1  i.  48,  5  ;  182,  5 ;  x.  127,  5,  etc. 

2  Av.  iv.  34,  4  ;  xi.  5,  21  ;  xii.  1,  51  ; 
xiii.  2,  33  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxxiv.  8  ; 


Aitareya   Brahmana,   iv.    23  ;    Brhad- 
aranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  5,  18,  etc. 


Paftkti,  originally  a  'set  of  five,'  denotes  as_ early  as  the 
Rigveda1  a  '  series  '  generally.  In  the  Taittiriya  Aranyaka2  the 
word  is  used  of  the  series  of  a  man's  ancestors  whom  he  purifies 
by  certain  conduct. 

1  x.  117,  8,  as  taken  by  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary.  2  x.  38,  39. 


Pacata,  like  Pakti,  denotes  'cooked  food'  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  later.2 

1  i.  61,  7  ;  x.  116,  8.  I  xxiii.  13  ;  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  viii.  21, 

2  Vajasaneyi     Samhita,      xxi.      60  ;   |  etc. 


Pacana   in   the   Rigveda1   and   the   Satapatha    Brahmana2 
denotes  a  '  vessel  for  cooking  '  food. 


1  i.  162,  6. 


vi.  5.  43.  3.  4 »  X1V-  z>  2>  2i. 


VOL.  I. 


30 


466 


NAMES— THE  FIVE  PEOPLES 


[  Pajra 


Pajpa  is  the  name  of  the  family  from  which  Kaksivant 
sprang  (Pajriya).  It  is  mentioned  several  times  in  the  Rigveda.1 
According  to  Pischel,2  the  epithet  prksa-yama3  applied  to  them 
means  'carrying  out  brilliant  sacrificial  performances,'  which 
won  for  them  Srutaratha's  generosity.  In  two  passages4 
Roth5  sees  a  Pajra  called  Saman.  This  is  uncertain,  but  in 
any  case  a  Pajra  seems  clearly  alluded  to.  Elsewhere6  it  is 
very  doubtful  whether  the  word  is  a  proper  name  at  all.  In 
the  Satyayana7  the  Pajras  are  declared  to  be  Angirases. 


1  i.  117,  10 ;  122,  7.  8 ;  126,  4.  5. 

2  Vedische  Studien,  1,  97,  98. 

3  Rv.  i.  127,  8,  where  Roth  (St. 
Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.)  thinks  this 
compound  is  probably  a  proper  name. 


*  Rv.  viii.  4,  17 ;  6,  47. 

5  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  pajra. 

6  Rv.  i.  190,  5,  where  the  referenc 
is  clearly  hostile  and  contemptuous. 

7  Cited  by  Sayana  on  Rv.  i.  51,  4. 


Pajra  occurs  once  in  the  Rigveda,1  where  Ludwig2  sees  ii 
the  word  the  name  of  the  wife  of  the  sacrificer,  Pajra,  while 
Roth3  takes  it  to  be  an  epithet  ('stout')  of  the  Soma  plant. 
The  sense  is  thus  uncertain. 


1  ix.  82,  14. 

2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  no. 


3  St.     Petersburg    Dictionary,    s.v. 
pajra. 


Pajriya    'descendant    of    Pajra,'    is    the    patronymic1    of 
Kaksivant  in  the  Rigveda.2 


Cf.  Tugrya,  n.  1. 


2  i.  116,  7;  117,  6;  120,  5. 


Panca-janah,  the  'five  peoples,'  are  mentioned  under  various 
names  in  Vedic  literature.1  Who  are  meant  by  the  five  is  very 
uncertain.  The  Aitareya  Brahmana2  explains  the  five  to  be 
gods,  men,  Gandharvas  and  Apsarases,  snakes,  and  the  Fathers. 


1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iii.  31  ;  iv.  27 ; 
Taittirlya  Samhita,  i.  6,  1,  2 ;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  v.  6  ;  xxxii.  6  ;  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad,  iv.  2,  9  {panca-janah  as  a 
compound).  See  also  panca  manusah, 
Rv.  viii.  9,  2  ;  manavah,  Av.  iii.  21,  5 ; 
24,  3 ;  xii.  1,  15  ;  janah,  Rv.  iii.  37,  9  ; 
59,  8 ;  vi.  14,  4  ;  viii.  32,  22  ;  ix.  65, 
23  >  92»  31  x-  45)  6 ;  krstayah,  ii.  2,  10 ; 
iii.  53.  16;  iv.  38,  10;  x.  60,  4;  119,  6; 


Av.  iii.  24,   3 ;    ksitayah,  Rv.  i.  7,  9 
176,  3  ;  v.  35,  2  ;  vi.  46,  7 ;  vii.  75,  4 
79,  1 ;  carsanyah,  Rv.  v.  86,  2 ;  vii.  15,  2 
ix.  101,  9.    See  Ludwig,  Translation  of 
the  Rigveda,  3,  204.     Every  book  of 
the  Rigveda  has  a  mention  of  the  five 
peoples :  one  such  in  ii.  and  iv. ;  two 
in  i.,  v.,  vi.,  vii.,  viii.  ;  three  in  iii.  and 
ix. ;  four  in  x. 
2  iii.  31. 


Pancajanak  ] 


THE  FIVE  PEOPLES 


467 


Aupamanyava3  held  that  the  four  castes  (Varna)  and  the 
Nisadas  made  up  the  five,  and  Sayana4  is  of  the  same  opinion. 
Yaska5  thinks  that  the  five  are  the  Gandharvas,  fathers,  gods, 
Asuras,  and  Raksases.  No  one  of  these  explanations  can  be 
regarded  as  probable.  Roth6  and  Geldner7  think  that  all  the 
peoples  of  the  earth  are  meant :  just  as  there  are  four  quarters 
(Dig),  there  are  peoples  at  the  four  quarters  (N.  E.  S.  W.),  with 
the  Aryan  folk  in  the  middle.  Zimmer8  opposes  this  view  on 
the  ground  that  the  inclusion  of  all  peoples  in  one  expression  is 
not  in  harmony  with  the  distinction  so  often  made  between 
Aryan  and  Dasa  ;  that  neither  janasah,  *  men,'9  nor  mdmisdh, 
'people,'10  could  be  used  of  non-Aryans;  that  the  Soma  is 
referred  to  as  being  among  the  five  tribes ; n  that  the  five  tribes 
are  mentioned  as  on  the  SarasvatI,12  and  that  Indra  is  panca- 
janya,13  *  belonging  to  the  five  peoples.'  He  concludes  that 
Aryans  alone  are  meant,  and  in  particular  the  five  tribes  of  the 
Anus,  Druhyus,  Yadus,  TurvaSas,  and  Purus,  who  are  all 
mentioned  together  in  one  or  perhaps  two  hymns  of  the 
Rigveda,14  and  four  of  whom  occur  in  another  hymn.15  But  he 
admits  that  the  expression  might  easily  be  used  more  generally 
later.  Hopkins16  has  combated  Zimmer's  view,  but  his  own 
opinion  rests  mainly  on  his  theory  that  there  was  no  people 
named  Turvasa,  but  only  a  king  of  the  Yadus  called  Turvasa, 
and  that  theory  is  not  very  probable. 


3  In  Yaska,  Nirukta,  iii.  8. 
*  On  Rv.  i.  7,  9,  etc. 

5  Nirukta,  loc.  cit. 

6  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s. v.  krsti; 
Nirtikta,  Erlduterungen,  28.  For  his 
view,  Av.  iii.  24,  3,  can  be  cited  :  panca 
pradiio  manavih  panca  krstayah,  '  the 
five  directions,  the  five  races  of 
men.' 

7  Siebenzig  Lieder,  18.  See,  however, 
Rgveda,  Glossar,  103,  where  he  recog- 
nizes the  use  of  the  phrase  to  denote 
five  tribes,  as  well  as  all  mankind. 

8  Altindisches  Leben,  119- 123.  His 
view  is  accepted  by  Macdonell,  Sanskrit 
Literature,  153 ;  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts, 
i2,  179.  is  doubtful. 

»  Cf.  its  use  in  Rv.  ii.  12,  sa  janasa 


Indrah,  where  the  address  must  be  to 
Aryan  men. 

10  Cf  Rv.  viii.  9,  2,  and  i.  52,  9, 
with  viii.  70,  11 ;  x.  28,  8. 

11  Rv.  ix.  65,  23. 

12  Rv.  vi.  61,  12  (panca  jata).  Cf 
x.  53.  4- 

13  v.  32,  11.  Agni  is  « of  the  five 
tribes,'  Rv.  ix.  66,  20.  Atri  also  is  so 
described,  Rv.  i.  117,  3. 

14  Rv.  i.  108,  8.  In  vii.  18,  cited  by 
Zimmer,  122,  the  five  tribes  do  net 
occur  eo  nomine,  for  Yaksu  replaces 
Yadu.  But  it  is  probable  that  Yadu  is 
meant  by  Yaksu. 

15  Rv.  viii.  10,  5. 

16  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  15,  260. 

30—2 


468 


FIFTEENTH  DA  Y—PA  NJA  B—PA  NCALA  S     [  Pancada^I 


In  the  Satapatha  Brahmana17  and  the  Aitareya  Brahmana18 
the  five  peoples  are  opposed  to  the  Bharatas,  and  in  the  former 
work19  seven  peoples  are  alluded  to. 


"  xin.  5,  4,  14. 

18  viii.  23. 

19  It   is   a   conjecture   of    Weber's, 
Indische  Studien,    1,  202,   that  the  five 


peoples  are  identical  with  the  Pancalas, 
and  the  seven  mentioned  in  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  xiii.  5,  4,  23,  with  the 
Kuru-Pancalas. 


Pahca-da&i,   '  the   fifteenth  day   of   the   month,'   is   already 
mentioned  in  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana  (i.  5,  10,  5). 


Panca-nada,  *  having  five  streams,'  is  not  found  until  the 
epic  period  as  the  name  of  the  Panjab,  which  has  no  desig- 
nation in  the  earlier  literature.  The  importance  of  the  Panjab 
as  the  home1  of  the  Rigveda  has  been  greatly  diminished  by 
recent  research,  Hopkins,2  Pischel,3  and  Geldner4  having  on 
different  grounds  shown  reason  for  believing  that  the  Rigveda, 
at  least  in  great  part,  was  composed  farther  east,  in  the 
MadhyadeSa,  which  admittedly  was  the  home  of  the  later  Vedic 
culture.  Hillebrandt5  considers  that  the  Rigveda  belongs  in 
part  to  the  Panjab,  or  rather  to  Arachosia,  and  in  part  to  the 
Middle-  Country.     See  also  Kuru,  Trtsu. 


1  See,  e.g. ,  Zimmer,  A  Itindisches  Leben,    \ 
32  et  seq. 

2  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  19,  19  -  28.  Cf.  Macdonell, 
Sanskrit  Literature,  145,  441. 1 


3  Vedische  Studien,  2,  218. 

4  Ibid.,  3,  152. 

5  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  98  et  seq. 
But  see  Divodasa.  Cf.  also  Weber, 
Indische  Studien,  1,  189. 


Pancavim^a  Brahmana.    See  Tandya. 


Pancala  is  the  later  name1  of  the  people  called  Krivi  in  the 
Rigveda.  The  Pancalas  are  rarely  referred  to  except  in  con- 
nexion with  the  Kurus,  and  the  kings  of  the  Kuru-Pancalas 
are  mentioned  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana.2  In  the  Kathaka 
Samhita3  the  Pancalas  appear  as  the  people  of  KeSin  Dalbhya. 


1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  5,  4,  7. 

3  xxx.  2  {Indische  Studien,  3,  471). 


vin.  14. 


Pancaudana  ] 


pa nc Alas— cooked  rice 


469 


In  the  Upanisads  and  later4  the  Brahmins  of  the  Pancalas 
figure  as  taking  part  in  philosophical  and  philological  dis- 
cussions. The  Samhitopanisad  Brahmana5  makes  mention  of 
the  Pracy  a- Pancalas. 

The  Pancalas,  no  doubt,  included  other  tribes  besides  the 
Krivis.  The  name  seems  to  refer  to  five  tribes,  and  it  has 
been  suggested6  that  the  Pancalas  represent  the  five  tribes  of 
the  Rigveda,  but  the  suggestion  is  not  very  probable.  There 
is  no  trace  in  Vedic  literature  of  the  Epic  division  of  the 
Pancalas  into  northern  (uttara)  and  southern  (daksina).  The 
Satapatha  Brahmana7  mentions  their  town  Paricakra;  other 
towns  to  which  allusion  seems  to  be  made  were  Kampila  and 
Kausambl.8  Of  their  kings  and  chiefs,  as  distinguished  from 
kings  of  the  Kuru-Pancalas,  we  hear  of  Kraivya,  Durmukha, 
Pravahana  Jaivali,  and  Sona. 


4  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  1,  1 
(Madhyamdina  =  vi.  2,  1  Kanva)  ; 
Chandogya  Upanisad,  v.  3,  1 ;  Rgveda 
PratiSakhya,  ii.  12,  44 ;  Nidana  Sutra, 
i.  6  ;  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xii.  13, 
6,  etc. 

5  2.  Cf.  Indische  Studien,  4,  375,  n.  ; 
8,  92,  n.  1. 


6  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  202  ; 
Geldner,  Vedische  Studien,  3,  108,  n.  r. 
Cf.  Weber,  op.  cit.,  1,  191  et  seq.; 
Indian  Literature,  10,  90,  114,  115,  125, 
135.  136. 

7  xiii.  5,  4,  7. 

8  See  KauSambeya. 


Paiicala-eanda  is  the  name  of  a  teacher  in  the  Aitareya 
and  the  Sankhayana2  Aranyakas. 


1  iii.  1,  6. 

2  vii.  18. 


Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  391 
Indian  Literature,  50,  315,  326. 


Pancavi  occurs  several  times  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita1  in 
the  sense  of  '  aged  five  lamb-periods '  (of  six  months),  that  is, 
1  thirty  months  old.'2 


1  xviii.  26 ;  xxi.  14 ;  xxiv.  12 ;  xxviii.  26. 


2  Cf.  Tryavi. 


Pancaudana  is  an  adjective  in  the  Atharvaveda1  meaning 
*  prepared  with  five  rice-messes.'  The  cooking  of  five  rice 
dishes  is  referred  to  in  the  same  Samhita.2 


1  iv.  14,  7 ;  ix.  5,  8  et  seq. 


5>  37- 


47o 


BOOK  SECTION— NAMES— FOOT-FETTER       [Patala 


Patala  as  early  as  the  Aitareya  Brahmana1  denotes  '  section  ' 
of  a  work,  a  sense  occurring  in  the  Sutras2  and  later. 

1  i.  21.  22.  I  20;    xiii.    21,    2;    AsValayana    Srauta 

2  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xi.  9,    |   Sutra,  iv.  6.  7. 


Patharvan  appears  to  be  the  name  of  a  man  in  the  Rigveda.1 
According  to  Ludwig,2  however,  the  word  is  Patharu,  and  is 
the  name  of  a  fort  which  was  saved  by  a  rain-storm  from 
being  set  on  fire. 

1  i.  112,  17,  with  Sayana's  note.  1       Cf.  Griffith,  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  1, 

2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  204.    |   147,  148. 


Padgrbhi,  '  seizing  by  the  foot,'1  is  the  name  in  the  Rigveda2 
of  either  a  man3  or  a  demon.     See  also  PadbiSa. 


1  But  it  may  mean  '  seizing  with  a 
cord.'  Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic  Grammar, 
p.  34  (top)  ;  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien, 
I,  236. 


1  x.  49,  5. 

3  Ludwig,   Translation  of  the   Ri| 
veda,  3,  165. 


Pad-biSa,  the  '  foot-fetter '  of  a  horse  in  five  passages,  two 
in  the  Rigveda,1  and  one  each  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,2 
the  Chandogya  Upanisad,3  and  the  Sankhayana  Aranyaka.4 
Elsewhere5  its  uses  are  metaphorical.  According  to  Roth,6  the 
literal  sense  is  'foot-fastening'  {pad  being  =pad,  'foot,'  and 
bisa,  written  visa  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  being  connected 
with  the  Latin  vincire,  'bind').  Pischel7  objects  that  the 
sense  of  '  foot-fastening'  involves  the  absurdity,  in  the  Upanisad 
passages,  of  a  fine  horse  from  the  Sindhu  (Indus)  being  spoken 
of  as  tearing  up  the  peg  to  which  it  is  fastened.  He  suggests 
instead  the  meaning  of  '  hobble,'  which  must  be  right.8 


1  i.  162,  14.  16  =  Taittirlya  Samhita, 
iv.  6,  9,  1 .  2 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xxv.  38.  39. 

2  vi.  2,  13  (Madhyamdina). 

3  v.  1,  12. 

4  ix.  7  ;  Keith,  Sankhayana  Ar  any  aha, 
57-  n.  3- 

5  Rv.  x.  97,  16 ;  Av.  viii.  1,  4 ;  xii.  5, 
15 ;  xvi.  8,  27  ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana, 
i.  6,  10,  3 ;  Mantra  Brahmana,  i.  3,  10. 


6  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

7  Vedische  Studien,  1,  233-236. 

8  He  explains  the  first  part  of  the 
word  as  derived  from  pas,  'tie.'  Cf. 
Macdonell,  Vedic  Grammar,  p.  34  (top). 
But  the  form  pad  may  be  due  to  a 
false  analogy,  and  the  sense  of  '  foot- 
fastener  '  may  express  '  hobble '  quite 
satisfactorily ;  it  is  not  confined  to  a 
rope  tied  to  a  peg  in  the  ground. 


Pani] 


BARGAINING— THE  PANIS 


47i 


Pana,  with  Pratipana,  is  found  in  a  hymn  of  the  Atharva- 
veda1  denoting  the  process  of  bargaining  and  selling.  The 
root  pan,  from  which  the  word  is  derived,  is  employed  in  the 
later  Samhitas  and  the  Brahmanas,2  while  Panana  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana3  denotes  'trafficking.'     Cf.  Vanij. 


1  iii.  15,  4.  6  (in  the  Paippalada 
recension  ;  Whitney,  Translation  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  112). 

2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  viii.  55;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  iii.  3,  3,  1  et  seq.  ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  27.  Cf.  Tait- 
tiriya  Samhita,  vi.  1,  10,  1. 


3  iii.  3,  2,  19.  The  root  does  not 
occur  in  the  Rigveda,  but  its  etymology 
is  vouched  for  by  the  Greek  iripvrifu. 
Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  1, 
84,  n.  3. 


Pani  in  the  Rigveda  appears  to  denote  a  person  who  is 
rich,  but  who  does  not  give  offerings  to  the  gods,  or  bestow 
Daksinas  on  the  priests,  and  who  is  therefore  an  object  of 
intense  dislike  to  the  composers  of  the  Samhita.1  Hence  the 
gods  are  asked  to  attack  the  Panis,  who  are  also  referred  to 
as  being  defeated  with  slaughter.2  The  Pani  is  opposed  to  the 
pious  sacrificer  as  a  niggard,3  and  is  spoken  of  as  a  wolf,4  the 
symbol  of  enmity.  In  some  passages5  the  Panis  definitely 
appear  as  mythological  figures,  demons  who  withhold  the  cows 
or  waters  of  heaven,  and  to  whom  Sarama.  goes  on  a  mission 
from  Indra.6  Among  the  Panis  Brbu  was  apparently  important. 
In  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda7  they  are  described  as  Beka- 
na^as,  or  'usurers' (?).  In  another8  they  are  called  Dasyus, 
and  styled  mrdhra-vdc,  probably  '  of  hostile  speech,'  and  grathin, 
a  word  of  uncertain  meaning.  Hillebrandt9  thinks  that  the 
latter  epithet  refers  to  the  continuous  flow  of  a  speech  which 


1  Rv.  i.  33,  3  ;  83,  2  ;  151, 9;   180,  7 
iv.  28,  7;  v.  34,  5-7;  61,  8;  vi.  13,  3 
53,  3 ;   viii.    64,    2  ;   97,   2 ;    x.    60,   6 
Av.  v.   11,  7;  xx.  128,  4;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxxv.  1. 

2  Rv.  1,  83,  4;  184,  2;  iii.  58,  2;  v. 
34,  7;  61,  8;  vi.  13,  3;  20,  4;  33,  2; 
viii.  64,  11. 

3  Rv.  i.  124,  10  ;  iv.  51,  3  ;  viii.  45, 
14  (where  the  sense  is  doubtful).  Cf. 
i.  93.4;  v.  61,  1. 

4  Rv.  vi.  51,  14. 


5  Rv.  i.  32,  11  ;  ii.  24,  6;  iv.  58,  4; 
vi.  44,  22  ;  vii.  9,  2 ;  x.  67,  6 ;  92,  3  ; 
Av.  iv.  23,  5 ;  xix.  46,  2  ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  xiii.  8,  2,  3.  It  is  im- 
possible definitely  to  decide  in  which 
passages  the  mythical  sense  is  meant. 
Cf.  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  157. 

6  Rv.  x.  108. 

7  Rv.  viii.  66,  10. 

8  Rv.  vii.  6,  3. 

9  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  89. 


472 


rH0  WERE  THE  PANIS  f 


is  not  understood,  and  that  mrdhra-vdc  means  '  speaking  an 
enemy's  speech,'  though  not  necessarily  with  reference  to 
non-Aryans.10  In  two  passages11  the  Panis  appear  as  Dasas, 
and  in  one12  a  Pani  is  mentioned  in  connexion  with  wer- 
geld  (Vaira),  being  apparently  regarded  as  equal  to  a  man 
merely  in  the  price  put  on  his  life,  but  in  other  respects  as 
inferior. 

It  is  difficult  to  be  certain  exactly  who  a  Pani  was.  Roth13 
thinks  that  the  word  is  derived  from  pan,  '  barter,'  and  that 
the  Pani  is  properly  the  man  who  will  give  nothing  without 
return,  hence  the  niggard,  who  neither  worships  the  gods  nor 
rewards  their  priests.  This  view  is  accepted  by  Zimmer14  and 
by  Ludwig.15  The  latter  scholar  thinks  the  apparent  references 
to  rights  with  Panis  are  to  be  explained  by  their  having  been 
aboriginal  traders  who  went  in  caravans — as  in  Arabia  and 
Northern  Africa — prepared  to  fight,  if  need  be,  to  protect  their 
goods  against  attacks  which  the  Aryans  would  naturally  deem 
quite  justified.  He  supports  this  explanation  by  the  references 
to  the  Panis  as  Dasyus  and  Dasas.  It  is,  however,  hardly 
necessary  to  do  more  than  regard  the  Panis  generally  as 
non-worshippers  of  the  gods  favoured  by  the  singers ;  the  term 
is  wide  enough  to  cover  either  the  aborigines  or  hostile  Aryan 
tribes,  as  well  as  demons.  Hillebrandt,16  however,  thinks  that 
a  real  tribe  is  meant,  the  Parnians  of  Strabo,  and  that  they 
were  associated  with  the  Dahae  (Dasa).  Moreover,  he  finds 
them  associated  in  one  passage17  with  the  Paravatas,  whom 


10  See  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii.  2, 
i,  23;  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  22,  114; 
Davidson,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Mor- 
genldndischen  Gesellschaft,  37,  23  ;  Eggel- 
ing,  Sacred  Books  of  the  Easty  26,  31, 
n.  3. 

11  Rv.  v.  34,  5-7  ;  Av.  v.  11,  6. 

12  Rv.  v.  61,  8.  Cf.  Roth,  Zeitschrift 
der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesell- 
schaft, 41,  673  ;  Max  Miiller,  Sacred 
Books  of  the  East,  32,  361,  who  thinks 
that  the  Pani  is  compared  unfavourably 
with  a  generous  woman,  but  this  is 
unlikely ;    Hillebrandt,    1,   92,    n.   3 ; 


Sieg,  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  58,  59 
Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  364. 

13  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 
Cf.  Yaska,  Nirukta,  ii.  17 ;  vi.  26. 

14  Altindisches  Leben,  257.  Cf.  Mac- 
donell,  loc.  cit.  ;  Geldner,  Rgveda, 
Glossar,  103. 

15  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,213- 
215.     Cf.  Bergaigne,  Religion   Vedique, 

2,  3*9- 

16  Vedische  Mythologie,   1,  83  et  seq.  ; 

3,  268;   Gbttingische  Gelehrte  Anzeigen, 
1894,  648. 

17  Rv.  vi.  61,  1-3. 


Pataiicala  Kapya  ]    SCHOLAR— WINGED  INSECT— A  SEER       473 


he  identifies  with  the  UapovrjTai  of  Ptolemy,18  and  with  Brsaya, 
whom  he  connects  with  Bapo-awrys  of  Arrian  ;19  he  also  con- 
siders that  the  frequent20  mention  of  the  Panis  as  opponents 
of  Divodasa  shows  that  the  latter  was  on  the  Arachosian 
Haraqaiti  (Sarasvati)  fighting  against  the  Parnians  and  Dahae, 
as  well  as  other  Iranian  tribes.  But  the  identification  of  Pani 
and  the  Parnians  is  needless,  especially  as  the  root  pan,  which 
is  found  also  in  the  Greek  irepvrjfit,  shows  a  satisfactory  deri- 
vation, while  the  transfer  of  Divodasa  to  the  Haraqaiti  is 
improbable.     See  also  Divodasa  and  Bekanata. 


18  vi.  20,  3. 

19  iii.  8,  4. 

20  The  Panis  occur  twelve  times  in 
Mandala  vi. ;  once  each  in  ii.  and  viii.  ; 


twice  in  v.  and  ix. ;  thrice  in  iv.  and 
vii.  ;  six  times  in  viii.  ;  nine  times  in  i. ; 
and  four  times  in  x.,  besides  the  refer- 
ences in  the  Sarama  hymn,  x.  108. 


Pandita,  a  '  learned  man,'  is  not  found  until  the  Upanisad 
period.1 

1  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  iii.  4,  1  ;    |  vi.  14,  2 ;  Mundaka  Upanisad,  i.  2,  8, 
vi.  4,   16.    17 ;    Chandogya   Upanisad,   |  etc. 


i.  Patariga,  '  flying,'  denotes  a  '  winged  insect '  in  the  Athar- 
vaveda1  and  the  Upanisads.2 


1  vi.  50,  I. 

2  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  1,  19 
(Madhyamdina  =  vi.  2,  14  Kanva)  ; 
2,  14  (  =  1,  14)  ;  Chandogya  Upanisad, 


vi.  g,  3  ;  10,  2  ;  vii.  2,  1  ;  7,  1  ;  8,  1  ; 
10,  i;  Adbhuta  Brahmana,  vi.  5  (Indischt 
Studien,  1,  40). 


2.  Patang-a  Prajapatya  ('  descendant  of  Prajapati  ')  is 
credited  by  the  Anukramani  (Index)  with  the  authorship  of  a 
hymn  of  the  Rigveda1  in  which  Patanga  means  the  'sun-bird.' 
He  is  also  mentioned  in  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana.2 

1  x.  177,  1.  I   xxv.    8  ;    Sankhayana    Srauta    Sutra, 

2  iii.  30,  1.   Cf.  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  |   xi.  14,  28. 


Pataiicala  Kapya  is  the  name  of  a  sage  mentioned  twice  in 
the   Brhadaranyaka    Upanisad.1      According   to    Weber,2   his 

1  "I-  3.  1  ;  7,  1. 

2  Indische  Studien,  1,  434,  435 ;  Indian  Literature,  126,  137,  223,  236,  237. 


474  BIRD— BANNER— HUSBAND-WIFE         [  Patatrin 

name  is  reminiscent  of  Kapila  and  Patanjali  of  the  Sankhya- 
Yoga  system,  but  this  suggestion  may  be  regarded  as  quite 
improbable.3 

3  Cf.  Garbe,  Sahkhya  Philosophic,  25,  26. 

Patatrin  denotes  a  '  flying  creature '  generally  in  the  Aitareya 
Upanisad,1  or  more  particularly  a  '  bird '  in  the  Atharvaveda.2 

1  "i.  3.  3-  2  viii.  7,  24;  x.  io,  14;  xiv.  2,  44. 

Pataka,  '  banner,'  is  not  found  until  the  Adbhuta  Brahmana.1 
Its  Vedic  equivalent  is  Dhvaja. 

1  Indische  Studien,  1,  39,  41  (here  erroneously  mentioned  as  pataka,  masculine). 

Pati,  Patni. — Under  these  words  denoting  primarily,  as  the 
evidence  collected  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  shows, 
*  lord  '  and  '  lady,'  and  so  ■  husband '  and  *  wife,'  it  is  convenient 
to  consider  the  marital  relations  of  the  Vedic  community. 

Child  Marriage. — Marriage  in  the  early  Vedic  texts  appears 
essentially  as  a  union  of  two  persons  of  full  development.  This 
is  shown  by  the  numerous  references1  to  unmarried  girls  who 
grow  old  in  the  house  of  their  fathers  (ama-jur),  and  who  adorn 
themselves  in  desire  of  marriage,  as  well  as  to  the  paraphernalia 
of  spells  and  potions  used  in  the  Atharvavedic  tradition2  to 
compel  the  love  of  man  or  woman  respectively,  while  even  the 
Rigveda3  itself  seems  to  present  us  with  a  spell  by  which  a 


1  Cf.  Rv.  i.  117,  7;  ii.  17,  7;  x.  39, 
3  ;  40,  5.  Ghosa  is  the  chief  example 
of  this  condition.  The  Atharvaveda 
(i.  14)  also  refers  to  such  a  case  (see 
Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
253).  The  ornaments  of  maidens,  espe- 
cially at  seasons  of  festival,  are  referred 
to  in  Rv.  i.    123,   11;   vii.   2,   5;  Av. 


3 ;  ix.  32,  5  ;  56,  3  ;  x.  34,  5  ;  and  to 
jealousy  and  love  philtres  for  the  pur- 
pose of  recalling  wandering  affections 
—e.g.,  Av.  vi.  18;  42;  43;  94;  139; 
vii.  45.  The  gifts  of  the  lover  are 
referred  to  in  Rv.  i.  117,  18.  Some  of 
these  passages  may,  of  course,  refer  to 
Hetairai.  but  not  all. 


ii.  36,  1 ;  xiv.  2,  59  et  seq.  3  vii.   55,  5.  8.     Cf.   Rv.  i.   134,  3  ; 

2  Cf.    Av.    iii.    18   (=  Rv.    x.    145)  ;  Aufrecht,  Indische  Studien,  4,  337  et  seq. 

vi.  89  ;  102  ;  130 ;  131 ;  vii.  36 ;  37  ;  38.  A  different  view  of  the  passage  is  taken 

Similarly  there  are  many  references  to  by  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  2,  57  et  seq. 

the  love  of  the  youth  for  the  maiden,  The  Atharvaveda  (iv.  5)  shows  that  the 

and  his  seeking  her — e.g.,  Rv.  i.  115,  2  ;  ;  view  of  Aufrecht  was  that  early  adopted 

Av.  ii.  30;  iii.  25;  vi.  8;  9;  82;   to  I   in  India, 

their  mutual  affection — e.g.,  Rv.  i.  167,  I 


Pati,  Patni  ] 


CHILD  MARRIAGE 


475 


lover  seeks  to  send  all  the  household  to  sleep  when  he  visits  his 
beloved.  Child  wives  first  occur  regularly  in  the  Sutra  period, 
though  it  is  still  uncertain  to  what  extent  the  rule  of  marriage 
before  puberty  there  obtained.4  The  marriage  ritual  also  quite 
clearly  presumes  that  the  marriage  is  a  real  and  not  a  nominal 
one  :  an  essential  feature  is  the  taking  of  the  bride  to  her 
husband's  home,  and  the  ensuing  cohabitation.5 

Limitations  on  Marriage. — It  is  difficult  to  say  with  certainty 
within  what  limits  marriage  was  allowed.  The  dialogue  of 
Yama  and  Yam!  in  the  Rigveda6  seems  clearly  to  point  to  a 
prohibition  of  the  marriage  of  brother  and  sister.  It  can 
hardly  be  said,  as  Weber 7  thinks,  to  point  to  a  practice  that 
was  once  in  use  and  later  became  antiquated.  In  the  Gobhila 
Grhya  Sutra8  and  the  Dharma  Sutras9  are  found  prohibitions 
against  marriage  in  the  Gotra  ('  family ')  or  v/ithin  six  degrees 
on  the  mother's  or  father's  side,  but  in  the  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana10  marriage  is  allowed  in  the  third  or  fourth  generation, 
the  former  being  allowed,  according  to  Harisvamin,11  by  the 
Kanvas,  and  the  second  by  the  Saurastras,  while  the  Daksi- 
natyas  allowed  marriage  with  the  daughter  of  the  mother's 
brother  or  the  son  of  the  father's  sister,  but  presumably  not 
with  the  daughter  of  the  mother's  sister  or  the  son  of  the 
father's  brother.  The  prohibition  of  marriage  within  the 
Gotra  cannot  then  have  existed,12  though  naturally  marriages 


4  Cf.  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  59  ;  Hop- 
kins, Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  13,  340  et  seq.  ;  23,  356 ;  Risley, 
People  of  India,  179  et  seq.  There  is  a 
possible  reference  to  a  child-wife  in 
the  Chandogya  Upanisad,  i.  10,  1. 
For  the  Sutra  evidence,  see  Bhandarkar, 
Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen 
Geseilschaft,  47,  143-156;  Jolly,  ibid., 
46,  413-426  ;  47,  610-615. 

6  Rv.  x.  85,  especially  verse  29  et  seq. 

6  x.  10. 

7  Proceedings  of  the  Berlin  Academy, 
1895,  822.  Cf.  also  Indische  Studien,  5, 
427 ;  10,  76,  n.  ;  Pischel,  Hermes,  18, 
465-468 ;  Max  Miiller,  Science  of  Lan- 
guage, 2,  507  ;  Herodotus,  iii.  19.  Craw- 
ley's Mystic  Rose  gives  strong  reasons 


against  the  early  prevalence  of  such 
marriages. 

8  iii-  4,  5- 

9  Apastamba  Dharma  Sutra,  ii.  5, 
15, 16,  etc.  Cf.  Manava  Dharma  Sastra, 
iii.  5  ;  Yajnavalkya  Dharma  Sastra, 
i-  52,  53- 

10  i.  8,  3,  6. 

11  On  Satapatha  Brahmana,  loc.  cit. 
11  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  10,  75, 

76  ;  Max  Miiller,  Ancient  Sanskrit  Litera- 
ture, 387  ;  Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiqui- 
ties, 392  ;  Geiger,  Ostiranische  Kultur, 
246 ;  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen Geseilschaft,  43, 308-312  ;  Jolly, 
Recht  und  Sitte,  62,  63  ;  Hopkins,  Journal 
of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  13,  345 
ct  seq. 


476 


LIMITATIONS  ON  MARRIAGE 


[  Pati,  Patni 


outside  the  Gotra  were  frequent.13  Similarity  of  caste  was  also 
not  an  essential  to  marriage,  as  hypergamy  was  permitted  even 
by  the  Dharma  Sutras,14  so  that  a  Brahmana  could  marry 
wives  of  any  lower  caste,  a  Ksatriya  wives  of  the  two  lowest 
castes  as  well  as  of  his  own  caste,  a  Vaisya  a  Sudra.  as  well  as 
a  Vaisya,  although  the  Sudra  marriages  were  later  disapproved 
in  toto.  Instances  of  such  intermarriage  are  common  in  the 
Epic,  and  are  viewed  as  normal  in  the  Brhaddevata..15 

It  was  considered  proper  that  the  younger  brothers  and 
sisters  should  not  anticipate  their  elders  by  marrying  before 
them.  The  later  Samhitas  and  Brahmanas16  present  a  series 
of  names  expressive  of  such  anticipation,  censuring  as  sinful 
those  who  bear  them.  These  terms  are  the  pari-vividdna,17  or 
perhaps  agre-dadhus,18  the  man  who,  though  a  younger  brother, 
marries  before  his  elder  brother,  the  latter  being  then  called  the 
parivitta;19  the  agre-didhisu,20  the  man  who  weds  a  younger 
daughter  while  her  elder  sister  is  still  unmarried ;  and  the 
Didhisu-pati,21  who  is  the  husband  of  the  latter.  The  passages 
do  not  explicitly  say  that  the  exact  order  of  birth  must  always 
be  followed,  but  the  mention  of  the  terms  shows  that  the  order 
was  often  broken. 

remarriage    of    a    widow    was 


Widow    Remarriage.  —  The 

13  Cf.  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der 
Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft, 
5i.  279. 

14  Gautama  Dharma  Sutra,  iv.  16 ; 
Baudhayana  Dharma  Sutra,  i.  16,  2-5  ; 
Vasistha  Dharma  Sutra,  i.  24  ;  25  ; 
Paraskara  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  4,  etc.  ; 
Risley,  People  of  India,  156  et  seq. 
Cf.  Varna. 

15  See  Hopkins,  cited  in  note  12  ; 
Brhaddevata,  v.  79  ;  and  Varna. 

16  See  Delbriick,  Die  indogermanischen 
V erwandtschaftsnamen,  578  et  seq. 

17  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iv.  i,  9,  and 
Kathaka  and  Kapisthala  Samhitas, 
cited  by  Delbriick,  579,  580;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxx.  9.  In  Apastamba  Dharma 
Sutra,  ii.  5,  12,  22,  the  expression  is 
paryahita. 

18  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iv.  1,  9,  ac- 
cording   to    Delbriick,    581.      But,   as 


pari-vividana  follows,  it  seems  very 
doubtful  ;  the  reading  is  probably 
wrong,  especially  in  view  of  the  Kathaka 
and  Kapisthala  parallels,  which  have 
agre-didhisau  and  agre-dadhisau. 

19  See  passages  cited  in  note  17;  also 
Av.  vi.  112,  3;  Taittiriya  Brahmana, 
iii.  2,  8,  11.  Apastamba  Srauta  Sutra, 
ix.  12,  n,  and  Dharma  Sutra,  ii.  5, 
12,  22,  add  parivinna  to  parivitta,  but 
probably  the  two  words  should  be 
identical  in  sense. 

20  Kathaka  Samhita  (see  note  17)  has 
agre-didhisu  ;  Kapisthala,  agre-dadhisu  ; 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  2,  8,  II, 
agra-didhisu.  The  Dharma  Sutras  adopt 
agre-didhisu. 

21  Kathaka  Samhita  has  didhisu-pati ; 
Kapisthala,  dadhisu-pati ;  and  so  the 
Dharma  Sutras.  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xxx.  9,  has  the  corrupt  edidhisuh-pati. 


Pati,  Patni  ] 


REMARRIAGE  OF  WIDOWS 


477 


apparently  permitted.  This  seems  originally  to  have  taken  the 
form  of  the  marriage  of  the  widow  to  the  brother  or  other 
nearest  kinsman  of  the  dead  man  in  order  to  produce  children. 
At  any  rate,  the  ceremony  is  apparently  alluded  to  in  a  funeral 
hymn  of  the  Rigveda  ;22  for  the  alternative  explanation,  which 
sees  in  the  verse  a  reference  to  the  ritual  of  the  Purusamedha 
('human  sacrifice'),  although  accepted  by  Hillebrandt23  and 
Delbruck,24  is  not  at  all  probable,  while  the  ordinary  view  is 
supported  by  the  Sutra  evidence.25  Moreover,  another  passage 
of  the  Rigveda26  clearly  refers  to  the  marriage  of  the  widow 
and  the  husband's  brother  (devr),  which  constitutes  what  the 
Indians  later  knew  as  Niyoga.27  This  custom  was  probably 
not  followed  except  in  cases  where  no  son  was  already  born. 
This  custom  was  hardly  remarriage  in  the  strict  sense,  since 
the  brother  might — so  far  as  appears — be  already  married 
himself.  In  the  Atharvaveda,28  a  verse  refers  to  a  charm  which 
would  secure  the  reunion,  in  the  next  world,  of  a  wife  and  her 
second  husband.  Though,  as  Delbruck 29  thinks,  this  very 
possibly  refers  to  a  case  in  which  the  first  husband  was  still 
alive,30  but  was  impotent  or  had  lost  caste  (patita)?1  still  it  is 
certain  that  the  later  Dharma  Sutras32  began  to  recognize 
ordinary  remarriage  in  case  of  the  death  of  the  first  husband. 


22  x.  18,  8. 

23  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  40,  708. 

2*  Die  indogermanischen  Verwandtschafts- 
namen,  553.  Cf.  also  Lanman,  Sanskrit 
Reader,  385 ;  for  the  other  view,  see 
Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, 848 ;  Roth,  Siebenzig  Lieder, 
151,   n.  ;    Zimmer,   Altindisches  Leben, 

329. 

25  Asvalayana  Grhya  Sutra,  iv.  2, 
18.  Cf.  Lanman  in  Whitney,  op.  cit., 
849. 

26  X.  40,  2. 

27  Cf.  Yaska,  Nirukta,  iii.  15,  with 
Roth's  note ;  Geldner,  Rgveda,  Kom- 
mentar,  160 ;  Weber,  Indische  Studien, 
v,  343,  n.  ;  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the 
American  Oriental  Society,  13,  355,  n., 
367 ;  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  71 ;  Muir, 


Sanskrit  Texts,  5,  459  ;  von  Schroeder, 
Indiens  Liter atur  und  Cultur,  429.  The 
custom  died  out  in  later  times,  it 
seems. 

28  ix.  5,  27.  28. 

29  Die  indogermanischen  Verwandt- 
schaftsnamen,  553-555.  Cf.  Jolly,  Recht 
und  Sitte,  59  ;  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the 
American  Oriental  Society,  13,  371,  n. 

30  This  is  certainly  the  case  in  Av. 
v.  17,  8,  which,  however,  merely  exalts 
the  sanctity  of  the  Brahmana,  and  does 
not  necessarily  imply  remarriage  at  all . 

31  E.g.,  Baudhayana  Dharma  Sutra, 
ii.  2,  3,  27. 

32  Vasistha  Dharma  Sutra,  xvii.  19. 
20.  72-74  ;  Baudhayana  Dharma  Sutra, 
iv.  i,  16 ;  Manava  Dharma  Sastra, 
ix.  175.  Cf.  also  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts, 
i2,  281 ;  5,  306. 


478 


POLYGAMY 


[  Pati,  Patnl 


Pischel33  finds  some  evidence  in  the  Rigveda34  to  the  effect 
that  a  woman  could  remarry  if  her  husband  disappeared  and 
could  not  be  found  or  heard  of. 

.Polygamy. — A  Vedic  Indian  could  have  more  than  one  wife. 
This  is  proved  clearly  by  many  passages  in  the  Rigveda;35 
Manu,  according  to  the  Maitrayani  Samhita,36  had  ten  wives  ; 
and  the  Satapatha  Brahmana37  explains  polygamy  by  a 
characteristic  legend.  Moreover,  the  king  regularly  has  four 
wives  attributed  to  him,  the  Mahisi,38  the  Parivrkti,39  the 
Vavata,40  and  the  Palagall.41  The  Mahisi  appears  to  be  the 
chief  wife,  being  the  first,  one  married  according  to  the  Sata- 
patha Brahmana.42  The  Parivrkti, '  the  neglected,'  is  explained 
by  Weber43  and  Pischel44  as  one  that  has  had  no  son.  The 
Vavata  is  'the  favourite,'  while  the  Palagall  is,  according  to 
Weber,  the  daughter  of  the  last  of  the  court  officials.  The 
names  are  curious,  and  not  very  intelligible,  but  the  evidence 
points  to  the  wife  first  wedded  alone  being  a  wife  in  the  fullest 
sense.     This   view  is   supported   by  the   fact   emphasized   by 


33  Vedische  Studien,  i,  27. 

34  vi.49,8.  C/.Mahabharata,iii.  70,26. 

35  Rv.  i.  62,  11  ;  71,  1  ;  104,  3  ; 
105,  8;  112,  19;  186,  7;  vi.  53,  '4 ; 
vii.  18,  2;  26,  3;  x.  43,  1;  101,  11. 
Cf.  Av.  iii.  4 ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  5, 
1,  4,  etc.  See  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  5, 
455  et  seq.  ;  Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiqui- 
ties, 387  ;  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  64  ;  von 
Schroeder,  Indiens  Literatur  und  Cultur, 
430,  431 ;  Delbruck,  Die  indogermanischen 
Verwandtschaftsnamen,  539,  540  ;  Hop- 
kins, Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  13,  353  ;  Bloomfield,  Zeitschrift 
der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen  Gesell- 
schaft,  48,  561. 

36  i.  5.  8. 

37  ix.  1,  4,  6. 

38  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  9,  4,  4 ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  3,  1,  4 ;  vi.  5, 
3,  1 ;  vii.  5,  1,  1  ;  xiii.  2,  6,  4 ;  4,  1,  8 ; 
5,  2,  2.  5.  9 ;  Pancavimsa  Brahmana, 
xix.  1,  4.  Cf.  Rv.  v.  2,  2;  37,  3; 
Av.  ii.  36,  3  ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  i.  8, 
9,  1 ;  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  5,  220. 


39  Pari-vrktd  occurs  in  Rv.  x.  102,  11  ; 
Av.  vii.  113,  2;  xx.  128,  10.  11;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  xiii.  2,  6,  6 ;  4,  1,  8 ; 
5,2,7;  parivrkti  in  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
i.  8,  9,  1  ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  7, 
3,  4;  iii.  9,  4,  4;  Kathaka  Samhita, 
x.  10;  xv.  4;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
v.  3,  1,  13- 

40  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iii.  22  ;  Tait- 
tiriya Brahmana,  i.  7,  3,  3;  iii.  9,  4,  4; 
Av.  xx.  128,  10.  11;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, xiii.  2,  6,  5  ;  4,  1,8;  5,  2,  6. 
Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  5,  308,  n.  ; 
Bloomfield,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenldndischen    Gesellschaft,    48,    553, 

554- 

41  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  7,  3,  3 
et  seq. ;  iii.  9,  4,  5  ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, xiii.  4,  1,8;  Sankhayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  xvi.  4,  4. 

42  vi.  5,  3,  1. 

43  Indische  Studien,  10,  6. 

44  Vedische  Studien,  2, 199.  Cf.  Geldner, 
ibid.,  2,  38. 


Pati,  Patnl  ] 


POLYANDRY 


479 


Delbriick,45  that  in  the  sacrifice  the  Patni  is  usually  mentioned 
in  the  singular,  apparent  exceptions  being  due  to  some  mytho- 
logical reason.46  Zimmer47  is  of  opinion  that  polygamy  is 
dying  out  in  the  Rigvedic  period,  monogamy  being  developed 
from  pologamy;  Weber,48  however,  thinks  that  polygamy  is 
secondary,  a  view  that  is  supported  by  more  recent  anthro- 
pology.49 

Polyandry. — On  the  other  hand,  polyandry  is  not  Vedic.50 
There  is  no  passage  containing  any  clear  reference  to  such 
a  custom.  The  most  that  can  be  said  is  that  in  the  Rigveda51 
and  the  Atharvaveda52  verses  are  occasionally  found  in  which 
husbands  are  mentioned  in  relation  to  a  single  wife.  It  is 
difficult  to  be  certain  of  the  correct  explanation  of  each  separate 
instance  of  this  mode  of  expression;  but  even  if  Weber's53 
view,  that  the  plural  is  here  used  majestatis  causa,  is  not 
accepted,  Delbriick's54  explanation  by  mythology  is  probably 
right.     In  other  passages55  the  plural  is  simply  generic. 

Marital  Relations. — Despite  polygamy,  however,  there  is 
ample  evidence  that  the  marriage  tie  was  not,  as  Weber56  has 
suggested,  lightly  regarded  as  far  as  the  fidelity  of  the  wife 
was  concerned.  There  is,  however,  little  trace  of  the  husband's 
being  expected  to  be  faithful  as  a  matter  of  morality.     Several 


45  Indogermanische  Verwandtschafts- 
namen,  539.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches 
Leben,  325.  Yajnavalkya  had,  however, 
two  apparently  equal  wives  (Brhad- 
aranyaka  Upanisad,  iii.  1,  and  cf.  Tait- 
tirlya  Brahmana,  i.  3,  10,  3). 

48  E.g.,  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  6,  4; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  3,  1. 

47  Altindisches  Leben,  323. 

48  Indische  Studien,  5,  222.  Weber's 
theory  that  sapatna  cannot  be  derived 
from  sapatnl  is,  however,  quite  un- 
tenable. 

49  See,  e.g.,  Westermaarck,  Origin  and 
Development  of  Marriage ;  Crawley,  Mystic 
Rose. 

50  Mayr,  Indisches  Erbrecht,  Wien, 
1873,  contends  in  favour  of  its  exist- 
ence. But  see  Weber,  Indische  Studien, 
5,  191,  207;  10,  83,  84;  Jolly,  Recht 
und  Sitte,  48 ;  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the 


American  Oriental  Society,  13,  354  et  seq. ; 
von  Schroeder,  Indiens  Literatur  und 
Cultur,  431,  n.  2 ;  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft ,  44,  340- 
342 ;  Delbriick,  Die  indogermanischen 
Verwandtschaftsnamen,  54 1-545. 

51  x.  85,  37.  38. 

52  Av.  xiv.  1,  44.  52.  61 ;  2,  14.  27. 

53  Indische  Studien,  5, 191 .  So  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  326,  who,  however, 
suggests  that  the  plural  is  generic. 

54  Op.  cit.,543. 

55  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  6,  2,  14. 
Cf.  the  plural  svasurah,  '  fathers-in-law,' 
in  Kathaka  Samhita,  xii.  12.  The 
Niyoga  has,  of  course,  nothing  to  do 
with  polyandry. 

56  Indische  Studien,  10,  83.  Cf.  Lud- 
wig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  5,  573, 
and  cf.  Dharma. 


480 


MARITAL  RELATIONS 


[  Pati,  Patni 


passages,57  indeed,  forbid,  with  reference  to  ritual  abstinence, 
intercourse  with  the  stri  of  another.  This  may  imply  that 
adultery  on  the  husband's  part  was  otherwise  regarded  as 
venial.  But  as  the  word  stri  includes  all  the  'womenfolk,' 
daughters  and  slaves,  as  well  as  wife,  the  conclusion  can  hardly 
be  drawn  that  intercourse  with  another  man's  '  wife '  was 
normally  regarded  with  indifference.58  The  curious  ritual  of 
the  Varunapraghasas,59  in  which  the  wife  of  the  sacrificer  is 
questioned  as  to  her  lovers,  is  shown  by  Delbrtick60  to  be  a 
part  of  a  rite  meant  to  expiate  unchastity  on  the  part  of  a  wife, 
not  as  a  normal  question  for  a  sacrificer  to  put  to  his  own  wife. 
Again,  Yajnavalkya's  doctrine  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,61 
which  seems  to  assert  that  no  one  cares  if  a  wife  is  unchaste 
(parah-pumsa)  or  not,  really  means  that  no  one  cares  if  the  wife 
is  away  from  the  men  who  are  sacrificing,  as  the  wives  of 
the  gods  are  apart  from  them  during  the  particular  rite  in 
question.  Monogamy  is  also  evidently  approved,62  so  that 
some  higher  idea  of  morality  was  in  course  of  formation.  On 
the  other  hand,  no  Vedic  text  gives  us  the  rule  well  known  to 
other  Indo-Germanic63  peoples  that  the  adulterer  taken  in  the 
act  can  be  killed  with  impunity,  though  the  later  legal  literature 
has  traces  of  this  rule.64  There  is  also  abundant  evidence  that 
the  standard  of  ordinary  sexual  morality  was  not  high. 

Hetairai. — In  the  Rigveda65  there  are  many  references  to 
illegitimate  love  and  to  the  abandonment  of  the  offspring  of 


57  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  6,  8,  3  ; 
Mai  tray  aril  Samhita,  iii.  4,  7. 

68  Cf.  above,  p.  396. 

59  Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  10,  11  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  5,  2,  20; 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  6,  5,  2. 

10  Op.  »/.,  550. 

61  i.  3,  1,  21.  Cf.  Eggeling,  Sacred 
Books  of  the  East,  12,  76,  n.  2;  Boht- 
lingk,  Dictionary,  s.v.  parahpumsa  (cf. 
above,  p.  397).  Delbriick,  op.  cit.,  551, 
shows  also  that  neither  the  Diksa 
('  consecration  ')  nor  the  Pravara  ('  in- 
vitation '  to  Agni,  as  described  by  the 
names  of  the  mythical  ancestors  of 
the  invoker)  gives  any  countenance  to 


the  theory  of  doubt  as  to  the  parentage 
of  the  Vedic  Indians. 

62  Rv.  i.  124,  7;  iv.  3,  2;  x.  71,  4, 
etc. 

e3  Leist,  Altarisches  Jus  Gentium,  276 
et  seq.  Cf.  Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiqui- 
ties, 388,  389  ;  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the 
American  Oriental  Society,  13,  366,  367. 

64  Cf.  above,  p.  396. 

65  Rv.  i.  134,  3 ;  iii.  53,  8  ;  viii.  17,  7. 
Mahanagn'i,  Av.  xiv.  1,  36;  xx.  136,  5; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  27,  denotes  a 
courtesan.  Cf.  Av.  v.  7,  8.  So  also 
pumscali,  Av.  xv.  2  ;  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 
hita, xxx.  22  ;  pumscalu,  Taittiriya 
Brahmana,  iii.  4,  15,  1. 


Pati,  Patnl  ] 


COURTESANS 


48  j 


such  unions,66  especially  in  the  case  of  a  protege  of  Indra, 
often  mentioned  as  the  pardvrkta  or  pardvrj.67  The  'son  of 
a  maiden  '  (kumdn-putra)  is  already  spoken  of  in  the  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita.68  Such  a  person  appears  with  a  metronymic  in  the 
Upanisad  period:69  this  custom  may  be  the  origin  of  metro- 
nymics  such  as  those  which  make  up  a  great  part  of  the  lists 
of  teachers  (Vamsas)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad.70  The 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita71  refers  to  illicit  unions  of  Sudra  and  Arya, 
both  male  and  female,  besides  giving  in  its  list  of  victims  at 
the  Purusamedha,  or  'human  sacrifice,'  several  whose  desig- 
nations apparently  mean  '  courtesan '  (atTtvari)72  and  '  procuress 
of  abortion '  (atiskadvarl),73  while  the  '  dyeing  woman '  (rajayitrl) 
is  dedicated  to  sensuality.74  Pischel  and  Geldner  also  see 
many  references  to  Hetairai  in  other  passages  of  the  Rigveda,75 
especially  where  mention  is  made  of  Usas,  the  goddess  of 
Dawn,  who  in  their  view  is  the  characteristic  Hetaira.  At  any 
rate,  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  '  dancer '  (nrtu)  referred  to  in 
one  passage  of  the  Rigveda76  was  a  Hetaira.  When  women 
are  referred  to  as  going  to  the  Samana,  or  '  place  of  meeting,' 
Hetairai  are  probably  also  meant.77  Grave  cases  of  immorality 
are  alluded  to  in  the  Rigveda.78  The  love  of  father  and 
daughter,  as  shown  in  the  myth  of  Prajapati,79  is  evidently 
censured,  but  the  actual  existence  of  this  form  of  incest  is 
recognized   in  the  Atharvaveda.80     Girls  who   had  lost  their 


06  Rv.  ii.  29,  1  (raha-silh,  '  one  who 
bears  in  secret.'  Cf.  Max  MUller, 
Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  26;  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  333,  334). 

67  Rv.  ii.  13,  12;  15,  7;  iv.  19,  9; 
30,  16 ;  Zimmer,  op.  cit. ,  335.  The 
child,  when  exposed,  was  in  danger 
of  being  consumed  by  ants  {vamrl). 
Cf.  below,  p.  493. 

68  xxx.  6. 

69  Cf.  Jabala  Satyakama. 

70  Cf.  Panini,  iv.  1,  116.  But  the 
custom  may  be  due  simply  to  poly- 
gamy (Keith,  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  p.  244, 
n.  2). 

71  xxiii.  30.  31 ;  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
vii.  4,  19,  2.  3. 

VOL.  I. 


'*  xxx.  15. 

73  xxx.  15  ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana, 
iii.  4,  11,  1,  has  apaskadvarl. 

7*  xxx.  12 ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana, 
iii.  4,  7,  I. 

75  Cf.  Vedische  Studien,  1,  xxv,  196, 
275>  299»  3°9I  2»  I2°t  I54i  x79»  etc.; 
Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  48. 


76 


1.  92,  4. 


x.  168,  2. 
126,  5. 


77  Rv.  iv.  58,  8  ;  vi.  75,  4 ; 
Perhaps  also  vra  in  i.  124,  8 

78  x.  162,  5  (brother  and  sister : 
cf.  above,  p.  397). 

79  Rv.  x.  61,  5-7;  Paficavimsa  Brah- 
mana, viii.  2,  10 ;  Aitareya  Brahmana, 
iii.  33 ;  £atapatha  Brahmana,  i.  7, 
4,  1.  80  viii.  6,  7. 

31 


482 


FORMS  OF  MARRIAGE 


[  Pati,  Patnl 


natural  protectors — father  or  brother81 — were  apt  to  be  reduced 
to  live  by  immorality. 

Forms  of  Marriage. — The  state  of  society  revealed  in  the 
Vedic  age  seems  to  point  to  considerable  freedom  on  the  part 
of  both  man  and  woman  in  selecting  a  wife  or  a  husband. 
At  any  rate,  it  is  not  clear  that  either  the  father  or  the  mother 
controlled  the  marriage  of  son  or  daughter  of  mature  age,82 
though  no  doubt  the  parents  or  parent  often  arranged  a  suit- 
able match.83  The  marriage  was  frequently  arranged  through 
an  intermediary,  the  'wooer'  (vara),84  presumably  after  those 
concerned  had  in  effect  come  to  an  agreement.  The  sale  of 
a  daughter  was  not  unknown,85  but  a  certain  amount  of  dis- 
credit would  seem  to  have  attached  to  it,86  and  sons-in-law  in 
such  cases  were  sometimes  stingy.  On  the  other  hand,  dowries 
were  not  infrequently  given,  especially  no  doubt  when  damsels 
offered    from    bodily   defects.87      Occasionally   marriages   by 


«  Rv.  i.  124,  7.     Cf.  Putrika. 

82  Cf.  Delbruck,  op.  cit.,  574.  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  309,  asserts  that  the 
consent  of  parent  or  brother  was  needed, 
but  no  clear  evidence  of  this  can  be 
adduced.  The  later  custom  is  not  con- 
clusive, since  it  is  bound  up  with  the 
usage  of  child  marriage,  which  deprived 
both  son  and  daughter  of  any  free  choice. 
Cf.  ibid.,  315;  Kaegi,  Der  Rigveda,  15. 

83  This  is  so  natural  as  not  to  need 
express  evidence.  Cf.,  e.g.,  the  marriage 
proposals  of  Syavasva  Atreya,  as  de- 
tailed in  the  Brhaddevata,  v.  49  et  seq.  ; 
Sieg,  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  51  etseq. 

84  Rv.  x.  78,  4  ;  85, 15.  23.  Zimmer, 
op.  cit.,  310,  exalts  this  into  a  universal 
practice,  and  compares  the  use  of 
aryaman,  '  friend,'  as  '  bride-wooer.'  In 
SyavasVa's  case,  his  father  acted  for 
him. 

85  Cf.  Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  10,  11 ; 
Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  3,  4,  1 ;  Tait- 
tiriya  Brahmana,  i.  1,  a,  4  ;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  xxxvi.  5.  See  also  Manava 
Dharma  Sastra,  iii.  53  ;  viii.  204 ; 
ix.  98 ;  Megasthenes  in  McCrindle's 
translation,  p.  70 ;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  5,  407 ;  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the 
American  Oriental  Society,  13,  345  et  seq. ; 


Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities,   381 
Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  2,  78  et  seq. 
Hillebrandt,     Vedische    Mythologie,     3, 
86,  n. ;  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  52. 

86  Rv.  i.  109,  2,  refers  to  the  gods 
Indra  and  Agni  as  more  generous  than 
a  vijamatr,  'son-in-law,'  or  a  syala, 
'  brother-in-law. '  The  force  of  vi  in 
the  former  word  must  be  unfavourable, 
and  the  sense,  as  indicated  by  Pischel, 
is,  no  doubt,  that  a  son-in-law  who  was 
not  in  other  respects  altogether  suitable 
might  have  to  buy  his  bride  at  a  heavy 
cost.  The  vijamatr  is,  in  fact,  the 
agrtro  jamata,  the  'ignoble  son-in-law,' 
of  Rv.  viii.  2,  20.  Cf.  Yaska,  Nirukta, 
vi.  9  ;  Hloombeld,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  15,  255. 

87  Cf.  Rv.  vi.  28,  5 ;  x.  27,  12 ;  Av. 
v.  17,  12.  Possibly  in  Rv.  i.  109,  2, 
there  is  a  reference  to  a  generous 
brother  giving  his  sister  a  dowry  in 
order  to  get  her  a  husband.  Cf.  Hop- 
kins, Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  13,  345 ;  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts, 
5,  459;  Kaegi,  Der  Rigveda,  n.  352; 
Zimmer,  op.  cit.,  310,  n.  It  is  doubtful 
whether  anudeyl  in  Rv.  x.  85,  6,  means 
4  dowry '  or  not.  See  Whitney,  Trans- 
lation of  the  Atharvaveda,  741. 


Pati,  Patnl  ] 


WEDDING  CEREMONY 


483 


capture  may  have  taken  place,  but  only  as  knightly  feats,  as 
when  Vimada  carried  off  Pupumitra's  daughter  against  her 
father's  wish,  but  very  possibly  with  her  own  consent.88  The 
later  law-books  and  the  Epic  describe  in  much  detail  various 
forms  of  marriage,  but  they  all  seem  reducible  to  three  types : 
(a)  that  which  is  based  on  mutual  consent,  the  prdjdpatya 
('  connected  with  Prajapati ') ;  (6)  that  in  which  a  price  is  paid 
for  the  bride,  the  dsura  (' Asura-like'),  arsa  ('connected  with 
the  Rsis'),  brdhma  ('relating  to  Brahman'),  or  daiva  ('divine'); 
(c)  those  which  consist  in  stealing  the  bride,  the  ksdtra 
('  warrior-like ')  or  the  raksasa  ('  demon-like ')  mode,  of  all  of 
which  traces  are  found  in  Vedic  literature.89  For  instance, 
the  gift  of  a  maiden  for  services  rendered  or  other  object  is 
exemplified  in  the  story  of  Cyavana  in  the  Jaiminiya  Brah- 
mana,90  and  in  that  of  SyavaSva  in  the  Brhaddevata.91 

Wedding  Ceremony. — In  normal  marriages  the  bridal  was 
celebrated  by  an  elaborate  ceremony  which  bears  in  essentials 
and  details  the  strongest  resemblance  to  the  form  observed  by 
other  Indo-Germanic  as  well  as  non-Indo-Germanic  peoples,92 
and  which  was  destined  to  secure  the  stability  and  fruitfulness 
of  the  union.  The  ceremony  commenced  at  the  bride's  house,93 
to  which  the  bridegroom  with  his  friends  and  relations  repaired, 
and  in  which  he  met  the  friends  and  relations  of  the  bride.94 
A  cow  or  cows  were  slain  for  the  entertainment  of  the  guests.95 
The  bridegroom  having  caused  the  bride  to  mount  a  stone, 
formally  grasped  her  hand,  and  led  her  round  the  household 


88  Cf.  Rv.  i.  112,  19;  116,  I;  117, 
20 ;  x.  39,  7  ;  65,  12.  Sayana's  view 
that  Kamadytt.  was  daughter  of  Puru- 
mitra  seems  certain,  though  Zimmer, 
loc.  tit.,  is  doubtful. 

89  Hopkins,  Journal  oj  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  13,  361,  362  ;  Jolly, 
Recht  und  Sitte,  50  et  seq.  ;  Pischel, 
Vedische  Studien,  1,  29;  Schrader,  Pre- 
historic Antiquities,  383. 

90  iii.  122. 

91  v.  49  et  seq. 

92  The  older  ritual  is  described  with 
considerable  detail  in  Rv.  x.  85  and 
Av.  xiv.  1  and  2.     The  later  ritual,  as 


elaborately  traced  in  the  Gr-hya  Sutras, 
is  set  out  by  Weber  and  Haas,  Indische 
Studien,  5,  177-41 1.  See  also  Leist, 
Altarisches  Jus  Gentium,  144  et  seq. ;  von 
Schroeder,  Die  Hochzeitsgebrauche  der 
Esten,  Berlin,  1888 ;  Schrader,  Prehistoric 
Antiquities,  384  et  seq.  ;  Hopkins,  op.  cit., 
13.  355  et  seq.-,  Winternitz,  Das  altin- 
dische  Hochzeitsrituell,  1892 ;  Whitney, 
Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  739 
et  seq.  ;  Lanman,  Sanskrit  Reader,  389 
et  seq. 

93  x.  17,  1. 

9*  Rv.  iv.  58,  9  ;  Av.  vi.  60  ;  xiv.  2,  59. 

9»  Rv.  x.  85,  13. 

31—2 


4»4 


WIFE'S  PROPERTY 


[  Pati,  Patni 


fire.96  This  act  constituted  the  marriage,  the  husband  hence 
being  called  '  he  who  takes  by  the  hand  '  (hasta-grabha)?1  The 
festivities  being  over,98  the  bridegroom  took  the  bride  to  his 
home  on  a  car  in  a  marriage  procession,99  all  to  the  accom- 
paniment of  suitable  stanzas.     Then  followed  cohabitation.100 

Wife's  Property  and  Status. — We  have  very  little  information 
as  to  the  legal  relations  of  wife  and  husband  after  marriage. 
It  may  be  assumed  that  the  husband  appropriated  the  wife's 
dowry,  if  any,  as  well  as  her  earnings,  if  any :  even  in  the 
Epic101  the  rise  of  the  recognition  of  women's  property  as 
their  own  (stri-dhana)  is  only  slow.  That  the  husband  was 
absolute  master  of  a  wife  as  of  a  slave  is  not  probable,  though 
he  doubtless  exercised  the  same  power  of  correction  as  was 
expressly  allowed  in  the  eighteenth  century  by  English  law. 
The  poetical  ideal102  of  the  family  was  decidedly  high,  and  we 
have  no  reason  to  doubt  that  it  was  often  actually  fulfilled. 
Moreover,  the  wife  on  her  marriage  was  at  once  given  an 
honoured  position  in  the  house :  she  is  emphatically  mistress 
in  her  husband's  home,  exercising  authority  over  her  father- 
in-law,  her  husband's  brothers,  and  her  unmarried  sisters.103 
No  doubt  the  case  contemplated  is  one  in  which  the  eldest  son 


96  Cf.  Rv.  x.  85,  36.  38  ;  Av.  xiv.  1, 
47.  48.  Before  the  bride  mounted  the 
stone,  the  groom  repeated,  according 
to  the  Grhya  Sutras  (Asvalayana,  i.  7, 
3  ;  Sankhayana,  i.  13, 4  ;  Paraskara,  i.  6, 
3,  etc.),  the  words,  '  I  am  he,  thou  art 
she  ;  I  the  Saman,  thou  the  Re  ;  I  the 
heaven,  thou  the  earth  ;  here  will  we 
unite  ourselves  and  produce  offspring, ' 
for  which  see  A  v.  xiv.  2,  71  ;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  xxxv.  18 ;  Aitareya  Brahmana, 
viii.  27 ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad, 
vi.  4,  19  (Madhyamdina). 

»7  x.  18,  8.     Cf.  Av.  xiv.  1,  51. 

98  Av.  xiv.  2,  59  et  seq. 

99  Rv.  x.  85,  7.  8.  10.  24.  25.  26.  27. 
42  et  seq.  ;  Av.  xiv.  1,  60. 

100  See  for  the  purification  of  the 
bride's  garment,  Rv.  x.  85,  28-30.  35. 

101  « They  own  neither  themselves 
nor  an  inheritance  '  (ndtmanas  caneiate 
na  ddyasya),  says  the  Satapatha  Brah- 


mana, iv,  4,  2,  13.  Cf.  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  iv.  6,  4 ;  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
vi.  5,  8,  2  ;  Nirukta,  iii.  4.  Cf.  for  the 
Epic,  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  1 3, 368.  For  compulsory 
obedience  of  the  wife,  cf  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad,  vi.  4,  7.  In  the  same  Upani- 
sad Yajnavalkya,  on  retiring  from  the 
ordinary  life,  divides  his  goods  between 
his  two  wives. 

102  rv  vjii  21,  5-9  ;  x.  34,  11 ;  85, 
18.  19.  42  et  seq. ;  Av.  iii.  30 ;  xiv.  2, 
32. 

103  Rv.  x.  85,  46.  Cf.  as  regards  the 
bridegroom's  sisters,  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana, iii.  37.  In  Av.  xiv.  2,  26,  the 
daughter  -  in  -  law  is  to  be  '  wealful ' 
(iambhuh)  to  her  father-in-law,  and 
'  pleasant '  (syona)  to  her  mother-in-law, 
which  is  correct  on  either  theory  of  her 
position  as  a  daughter  or  a  mistress. 


Pati,  Patni  ] 


WIFE'S  STATUS 


485 


of  a  family  has  become  its  head  owing  to  the  decrepitude104  of 
the  parents,  his  wife  then  taking  the  place  of  the  mistress 
of  the  joint  family  while  the  brothers  and  sisters  are  still 
unmarried.  It  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  great  stress  else- 
where105 laid  on  the  respect  due  to  a  father-in-law,  who  then 
is  probably  regarded  as  still  in  full  possession  of  his  faculties, 
and  controls  the  house  while  his  son  continues  to  live  with 
him.  The  respect  would  no  doubt  equally  apply  if  the  son 
had  set  up  a  separate  family  of  his  own.106 

Moreover,  the  wife  was  a  regular  participator  in  the  offerings 
of  the  husband.  In  this  connexion  the  term  Patni  regularly 
applies  to  her  in  the  Brahmanas,107  where  Jaya  designates  her 
in  her  conjugal  capacity,  not  in  that  of  sharer  in  the  sacrifice. 
In  this  respect  her  position  gradually  deteriorated :  thus  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana108  describes  a  certain  ceremony  in  which 
the  wife  (jaya)  alone  offered  the  oblation  in  former  times,  while 
later  a  priest  might  do  so  instead.  The  same  Brahmana 
shows  other  traces  of  a  lowering  in  the  position  of  women, 
probably  due  to  the  growing  sense  of  the  importance  of  cere- 
monial priority.109  So  in  the  MaitrayanI  Samhita110  women 
generally  are  classed  with  dice  and  drink  as  three  chief  evils, 
and  woman  is  declared  to  be  'untruth,'111  and  connected  with 
Nirrti,  '  calamity.'112  A  woman  too,  according  to  the  Taittirlya 
Samhita,113  is  inferior  even  to  a  bad  man,  and  a  sarcastic 
reference  is  made  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita114  to  her  power  of 


104  Cf.  Rv.  i.  70,  5,  where  an  old 
father's  goods  are  divided  by  his  sons, 
and  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  327. 
Cf  also  the  possible  case  of  a  father 
who  recovers  after  giving  over  all  his 
goods  to  his  son,  Kausitaki  Upanisad, 
iv.  15. 

105  Av.  viii.  6,  24 ;  MaitrayanI  Sam- 
hita, ii.  4,  2;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xii.  12 
(Indische  Studien,  5,  260) ;  Taittirlya 
Brahmana,  ii.  4,  6,  12 ;  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana, iii.  22 ;  Delbriick,  Die  indoger- 
manischen  Verwandtschaftsnamen,  514, 515. 

106  No  doubt  it  might  also  apply 
even  if  the  father-in-law  were  decrepit ; 
but  it  is  hardly  likely  that,  in  these 
circumstances,    the    strong    sense    of 


respect  evident  in  Av.  viii.  6,  24,  which 
implies  fear,  would  have  developed. 

107  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  9,  2,  14 ; 
Panini,  iv.  1,  33 ;  Delbriick,  op.  cit., 
5!o.  512. 

108  i.  1,4,  13.  For  the  older  practice, 
cf.  Rv.  i.  122,  2  ;  iii.  53,  4-6;  viii.  31,  5 
et  seq.  ;  x.  86,  10,  etc. 

i°9  E.g.,  i.  3,  i.  9.  12.  13.     Cf.  Levi, 
La  doctrine  du  sacrifice,  157,  158. 
"0  iii.  6,  3. 

111  i.  10,  11. 

112  Jbid. 

113  vi.  5,  8,  2.  Cf.  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, i.  3,  1,  9. 

114  xxxi.  1.  Cf.  Aitareya  Brahmana, 
iii.  22. 


486 


WIFE'S  STATUS 


[  Pati,  Patnl 


getting  things  from  her  husband  by  cajolery  at  night.  On  the 
other  hand  must  be  set  the  encomia  on  woman :  a  woman  is 
half  her  husband,115  and  completes  him;116  and  in  the  Rigveda117 
attacks  on  women  mingle  with  the  general  assumption  of  their 
good  qualities.  None  the  less,  the  Brahmanas  clearly  indicate 
a  gradual  decline  in  their  position,  which  is  evident  from  the 
rule  that  requires  the  wife  to  eat  after  her  husband.118  Scolds 
were  also  known:  the  Aitareya  Brahmana119  praises  the  wife 
*  who  does  not  answer  back '  (aprativddirii).  Women  bore  no 
part  in  political  life :  men  go  to  the  assembly,  not  women,  the 
Maitrayani  Samhita120  expressly  says.  On  the  other  hand, 
with  the  advance  of  education,  women  shared  in  the  intel- 
lectual interests  of  the  day,  as  is  exemplified  by  Yajnavalkya's121 
two  wives,  of  whom  one  was  interested  in  his  philosophical 
discussions,  the  other  not.  Other  women  are  also  referred  to 
in  the  Upanisads  as  teachers,  but  whether  they  were  married 
is  not  certain.122 

But  the  main  object  of  a  woman's  marriage  was  the  pro- 
duction of  children,  this  being  repeatedly  asserted  in  the 
Rigveda  and  later.123  The  desire  for  offspring,  as  was  natural 
in  a  society  which  mainly  counted  relationship  through  the 
father,  took  the  form  of  a  wish  for  a  son  to  perform  the 
necessary  funeral  rites  for  the  father,  and  to  continue  his  line. 
It  was  no  doubt  possible  to  adopt  a  son,  but  in  the  Rigveda124 
this  custom  is  plainly  viewed  as  unsatisfactory.     The  practice 


115  Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  2,  1,  10. 

116  Brhadaranyaka   Upanisad,    i.    4, 

17. 

117  In  viii.  33,  17,  Indra  is  credited 
with  a  poor  opinion  of  woman's  intelli- 
gence, and  Pururavas  in  x.  95,  15, 
frankly  calls  them  hyenas.  They  are 
defended  in  v.  61,  6-8,  but  only  against 
mean  men  (Pani).  Cf.  Kaegi,  Der 
Rigveda,  n.  351. 

118  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  9,  2,  12  ; 
x.  5,  2,  9.  Cf.  Vasistha  Dharma  Sutra, 
xii.  13 ;  Baudhayana  Dharma  Sutra, 
i.  1,  2,  2;  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  5, 
330,  n.  ;  Yi-O^ins,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  13,  365,  n. 

"9  iii.   24,    7.     Cf.   Gopatha   Brah- 


mana, ii.  3,  22;  Bloomfield,  Journal  of 
the  American  Oriental  Society,  19,  14, 
n.  2. 

120  iv.  7,  4.     Cf.  Av.  vii.  38,  4. 

121  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  iii.  4, 1; 
iv.  5,  1. 

132  Cf.  the  epithet  gandharva-grhltd, 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  v.  29 ;  Kausitaki 
Brahmana,  ii.  9 ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upani- 
sad, iii.  3,  1 ;  7,  1 ;  and  see  AsValayana 
Grhya  Sutra,  iii.  4,  4  ;  Sankhayana 
Grhya  Sutra,  iv.  10. 

123  Rv.  i.  91,  20;  92,  13;  iii.  1,  23; 
x.  85,  25.  41.  42.  45 ;  Av.  iii.  23,  2  ; 
v.  25,  n  ;  vi.  11,  2,  etc. 

12*  vii.  4,  7.  8.     Cf.  Nirukta,  iii.  2. 


Pati,  Patni  ] 


CHILD  LIFE 


487 


is  recognized,125  as  we  have  seen  above  of  Niyoga,  in  the 
appointment  of  a  brother  to  beget  children  with  the  wife  of 
a  dead  man,  or  perhaps  of  a  man  who  is  childless.  \  Sonless- 
ness '  (aviratd)  is  placed  on  the  same  level  as  lack  of  property 
(atnati),  and  Agni  is  besought  to  protect  from  it.126  The  birth 
of  a  daughter  was  certainly  not  specially  welcome :  the  Athar- 
vaveda127  in  one  hymn  distinctly  invokes  the  birth  of  a  son, 
and  deprecates  that  of  a  daughter,  while  the  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana128 contains  an  old  verse  which  says  that  a  daughter  is 
a  misery  (krpanatn),  while  a  son  is  a  light  in  the  highest  heaven 
(jyotir  ha  putrah  parame  vyoman).  But  there  is  no  proof  that 
the  Vedic  Indians  practised  the  exposure  of  female  children. 
This  conclusion,  deduced  from  certain  passages  in  the  later 
Samhitas129  by  Zimmer130  and  Delbruck,131  has  been  disproved 
by  Bohtlingk. 

Child  Life.  —  No  doubt  the  care  of  a  child  was  left  to 
the  mother,  but  we  learn  little  from  the  earlier  litera- 
ture132 of  the  life  of  the  young.  The  length  of  the  period 
of  pregnancy  is  frequently  placed  at  ten  (doubtless  lunar) 
months.133  On  birth  the  child  was  first  fed  with  milk  or  ghee, 
and  then  given  the  breast.134     On  the  eighth  day  after  birth 


125  x.  18,  8 ;  40,  2. 
i26  Rv.  iii.  16,  5. 

127  vi.  11,  3.     Cf.  viii.  6,  25. 

128  vii.  15.  Cf.  Max  Muller,  Ancient 
Sanskrit  Literature,  409. 

129  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  5,  io,  3  ; 
Mailrayani  Samhita,  iv.  6,  4 ;  7,  9 ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxvii.  9;  Nirukta,  iii. 
4;  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  17, 
12. 

130  Altindisches  Leben,  319.  Cf.  Weber, 
Naxatra,  2,  314,  n.,  who  cites  Panca- 
vimsa  Brahmana,  xi.  8,  8,  as  evidence 
of  the  exposure  of  two  boys,  but  the 
sense  is  doubtful. 

131  Die  indogermanischen  Verwandt- 
schaftsnamen,  575.  See  also  Weber, 
Indische  Studien,  5,  54,  210 ;  Ludwig, 
Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  6,  142  ; 
Kaegi,  Der  Rigveda,  n.  49  ;  Schrader, 
Prehistoric  Antiquities,  389,  390.  Boht- 
lingk's  view  is  given  in  Zeitschrift  der 
Deutschen   Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft, 


44,  494-496,  and   cf.  Pischel,    Vedische 
Studien,  2,  48,  who  compares  iv.  18,  5. 

132  The  later  literature  is  full  of 
details  of  the  ceremonies  before  and 
after  birth  (see  Delbruck,  op.  cit.,  573 
et  seq.).  Weber,  Naxatra,  2,  314,  n., 
gives  the  Vedic  embryology ;  twins  were 
disliked,  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  9,  etc. 

133  Rv.  v.  78,  9  ;  x.  184,  3 ;  Av.  i.  11, 
6 ;  iii.  23,  2 ;  Aitareya  Brahmana, 
vii.  13,  9  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iv.  5, 
2,  4 ;  Chandogya  Upanisad,  v.  9,  1  ; 
Weber,  Naxatra,  2,  314,  n.  There  are 
in  the  Av.  many  spells  concerned  with 
birth  (i.  11,  etc.),  and  miscarriages  are 
mentioned  (avatoka,  avasu,  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  xxx.  15  ;  Av.  viii.  6,  9,  etc.). 

134  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  i.  3,  4 
(Madhyamdina  =  i.  5,  2  Kanva).  Cf. 
also  vi.  4,  24  et  seq. ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, ii.  5,  1,  6.  After  being  weaned 
the  child  is  ati-stana  (Kausitaki  Brah- 
mana, xiii.  2). 


488 


SATI 


[  Pati,  Patnl 


the  infant  was  washed.136  The  cutting  of  the  teeth  was  also 
a  solemn  occasion,136  and  is  the  subject  of  a  hymn  in  the 
Atharvaveda.  Reference  is  also  made  to  children's  learning 
to  speak,  which  the  Taittiriya  Samhita137  ascribes  to  the  end 
of  the  first  year  of  life.  The  Aitareya  Aranyaka138  asserts  that 
the  words  Tata  and  Tata,  onomatopoetic  words  like  *  dada,' 139 
are  the  first  words  of  a  child's  speech,  giving  therein  perhaps 
an  unfair  prominence  to  the  father.  The  Atharvaveda140 
further  contains  at  least  one  hymn  for  the  ceremony  of  the 
first  shaving  of  the  young  man's  beard.  The  giving  of  a  name 
was  also  an  occasion  of  importance,  a  second  one  being  often 
added.141 

Sati. — On  the  death  of  her  husband,  in  some  cases  the 
widow  burned  herself  or  was  burned  by  his  relations.142  This 
is  clearly  implied  in  the  reference  to  this  ancient  custom  in 
the  Atharvaveda.143  On  the  other  hand,  the  Rigveda  does  not 
contemplate  the  custom  anywhere,  but  on  the  contrary  con- 
siders the  widow  as  married  apparently  to  the  brother  of  the 
dead  man.144  The  custom  of  Suttee  would  therefore  appear 
during  the  Vedic  age  to  have  been  in  abeyance,  at  least  as 
a  general  rule.  At  all  times  the  practice  seems  to  have  been 
mainly  usual  among  families  of  the  warrior  class,  to  judge 
from  the  other  Indo-Germanic  parallels.145     In  other  classes 


135  PaficavimSa  Brahmana,  xiv.  7,  2 
(on  Samaveda,  ii.  525  =  Rv.  ix.  96,  17). 
The  first  ten  days  were  the  dangerous 
period  (Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  14 ; 
Paficavimsa  Brahmana,  xxii.  14,  3). 

136  Av.  vi.  140. 

137  vi.  1,  6,  7.  Cf.  £atapatha  Brah- 
mana, vii.  4,  2,  38;  xi.  1,  6,  3-5. 

13«  i.  3.  3- 

189  Cf.  Delbriick,  op.  cit.,  449,  596. 

140  vi.  68.  Cf.  ii.  13,  according  to 
KauSika  Sutra,  53.  54,  and  cf.  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  xi.  4,  1,  6. 

141  Cf.  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  i.  3,  3, 
with  Keith's  note ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, vi.  1,  3,  9,  and  Naman. 

142  Cf.  Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiqui- 
ties, 391 ;  von  Schroeder,  Indiens  Litera- 
tur  tend   Cultur,   41  ;    Jolly,   Recht  und 


Sitte,  67-69 ;  Weber,  Proceedings  of  the 
Berlin  Academy,  1896,  254  et  seq.  ;  Roth, 
Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen 
Gesellschaft,  8,  468  ;  Wilson,  Journal  of 
the  Royal  A  siatic  Society,  16, 202 ;  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  329;  Geldner,  Rig- 
veda,  Kommentar,  154. 

143  Av.  xviii.  3,  1. 

144  x.  18,  7.  8. 

145  Cf.  Herodotos,  v.  5  (of  the 
Thracians) ;  iv.  71  (of  the  Scythians) ; 
Procopius,  De  Bello  Gothico,  ii.  14  (of 
theHeruli).  So  in  Germany  Brynhild 
and  Nanna  are  instances  {cf.  Weinhold, 
Altnordisches  Leben,  476  et  seq.).  The 
universality  of  the  custom  must  not  be 
exaggerated,  as  Zimmer,  331,  is  inclined 
to  do.  To  burn  all  the  wives  of  a  king 
would,  in  primitive  ages,  have  been  a 


Pathikrt  ] 


FOOT-SOLDIER— PA  TH-MA  KER 


489 


the  survival  of  wives  was  more  necessary,  and  the  remarriage  of 
widows,  whether  prohibited  or  allowed  in  the  texts,  is  proof 
that  there  were  widows  who  could  be  remarried.146 


wasteful  action  ;  even  the  chief  wife 
would  often  have  had  to  be  spared  on 
one  ground  or  another.  The  Rigveda 
already  reveals  a  state  of  society  in 
which  the  actual  burning  of  the  wife 
was  avoided  by  a  semblance  of  it  in 
the  funeral  ritual  of  (cf.  Macdonell, 
Sanskrit  Literature,  126).  The  reward 
of  a  good  wife  was  to  go  to  the  world 
of  her  husband  (pati-loka)  after  death 
{cf.   Av.   xiv.    1,   64;    xviii.   3,    1;   Rv. 


x-  85.  43)-  A-  Vedic  citation  in  the 
scholiast  on  Panini,  hi.  2,  8,  Varttika,  2, 
says  that  a  Brahmin  woman  who  drinks 
Sura,  an  intoxicating  liquor,  does  not 
go  to  the  world  of  her  husband  after 
death. 

146  Cf.  perhaps  the  gartdruh  of  Rv. 
i.  124,  7,  as  explained  by  Yaska, 
Nirukta,  iii.  5  ;  Geldner,  Rigveda,  Kom- 
mentar,  22. 


Patti  is  used  in  the  Atharvaveda  (vii.  62,  1)  to  designate  the 
'foot  soldier'  in  war  as  opposed  to  the  Rathin,  'charioteer,' 
the  latter  defeating  (ji)  the  former.  One  of  the  epithets  of 
Rudra  in  the  Satarudriya  liturgy  of  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita 
(xvi.  19)  is  'lord  of  footmen  '  (pattlnam  pati). 


Patni.  See  Pati.  A  part  of  the  house  is  the  Patriinam 
Sadana,  mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  presumably  the 
women's  quarters.  The  phrase  is  borrowed  from  the  Patm- 
sala,  *  hut  for  the  wife,'  of  the  Brahmana2  ritual. 


ix.  3,  7. 


3,  1  ;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  v.  22  (-said) 


2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xix.  18 ;  Sata-  j   Kausltaki  Brahmana,  xix.  6,  etc. 
patha   Brahmana,  iv.   6,   9,  8 ;   x.    2, 


Pathin  Saubhara  ('  descendant  of  Sobhari ')  is  mentioned  in 
the  first  two  Vamsas  (lists  of  teachers)  in  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad1  as  the  pupil  of  Ayasya  Arigirasa. 

1  ii.  5,  22  (Madhyamdina  =  ii.  6,  3  Kanva);  iv.  5,  28  (Madhyamdina  =  iv.  6, 
3  Kanva). 


Pathi-krt,  '  path-maker,'  is  not  a  rare  epithet  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  later,2  showing  clearly  the  importance  naturally  attached 
in   primitive  times  to  the  finding   of  roads.     The  frequency 


1  ii.  23,  6 ;  vi.  21,  12  ;  ix.  106,  5 

2  Av.  xviii.  2,  53  ;  3,  25,  etc. 


x.  14,  15  ;  in,  3,  etc. 


49Q 


Q  UA  RTER—  WORD— MILK 


[  Pad 


with  which  the  epithet  is  applied  to  Agni3  suggests  that  there 
is  here  an  allusion  to  fire  burning  the  primaeval  forest  and 
rendering  advance  possible.  The  god  Pusan  is  pathi-krt,  as 
guarding  the  flocks.4  The  Rsis,5  or  seers,  as  'path-makers,' 
may  be  compared  with  the  Roman  Pontifices. 


3  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  2,  1,  1  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  i,  5,  5 ;  xii. 
4,  4,  1 ;  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  iv.  3, 
etc. 

*  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  iii.  4,  9; 
xvi.  1,  17.  The  Sutra,  xvi.  1,  18,  ex- 
plains  pathi-krt    merely    as    adhipati, 


'lord';   but  the  sense  must  be  more 
pregnant  than  that. 

5  Rv.  x.  14,  15,  where  the  expression 
refers  to  their  finding  the  way  to  the 
heavenly  world ;  but  it  is  probably  a 
transfer  of  an  epithet  of  terrestrial 
application. 


Pad  in  the  Atharvaveda  (xix.  6,  2)  and  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana  (xi.  3,  2,  3)  denotes  a  *  quarter.'  This  sense  is 
derived  from  the  primary  meaning  of  '  foot,'  which  as  applied 
to  quadrupeds  would  represent  '  one-fourth.'     C/.  Pada. 


Pada  in  the  sense  of '  quarter  of  a  stanza '  is  found  as  early 
as  the  Rigveda1  and  often  later.2  In  the  Brahmanas  it  also 
denotes  a  ■  word '  as  opposed  to  a  '  letter '  (Varna).3 


1  i-  164,  24.  45. 

3  Av.  ix.  io,  19 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xix.  25 ;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  6.  10. 
17,  etc. ;  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xxii. 
1.5- 


3  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xxvi.  5,  where 
the  sequence  is  half-stanza  (ardharca), 
quarter-stanza  (pada),  word  ipada),  and 
letter  (varna).  Cf.  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, x.  2,  6,  13 ;  xi.  5,  6,  9,  etc. 


Padi  is  found  once  in  the  Rigveda,1  where,  according  to  the 
St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  the  word  probably  designates  some 
kind  of  animal.  Yaska2  explains  it  as  equivalent  to  ganlu, 
*  a  moving  creature,'  but  Durga3  as  meaning  '  bird.'  The 
passage  may  refer  to  catching  the  Padi  in  a  net  (?  muksljd).4 

1  i.  125,  2.  I       3  In   his   commentary  on   Nirukta, 

3  Nirukta,  v.  18.  |  loc.  tit. 

4  Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  129;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  244. 


Payas  denotes  the  '  milk '  of  the  cow  in  the  Rigveda1  and 
later.2     More  generally  it  has  also  the  sense  of  '  sap '  or  '  fluid ' 

1  i.   164,   28;  ii.   14,   10;   iv.    3,   9;   I       3  Av.  iv.  11, 4;  xii.  1,10;  Vajasaneyi 
v.  85,  2  ;  x.  30,  13  ;  63,  3,  etc.  |   Samhita,  iv.  3.     Cf.  Go  and  Kaira. 


Paramajya  ] 


CURDS— AN  ANCIENT  KING 


491 


found  in  plants,3  and  giving  them  life  and  strength.  In  other 
passages  it  denotes  the  '  water '  of  heaven.4  A  vow  to  live  for 
a  time  on  milk  alone  occurs  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.5 


3  Av.  iii.  5,  1 ;  x.  1,  12;  xiii.  1,  9; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvii.  1  ;  xviii.  36, 
etc.     So  of  Soma,  Rv.  ix.  97,  14. 

4  Rv.  i.  64.  5  ;  166,  3  ;  iii.  33,  1.  4; 
iv.  57,  8,  etc. 


5  Payo-vrata,  '  one  who  undergoes  a 
vow  (to  subsist)  on  (nothing  but)  milk,' 
ix.  5,  1,  1  et  seq. ;  Kausitaki  Brahmana, 
viii.  9.  The  Diksita  subsists  on  it 
alone. 


Payasya  in  the  later  Samhitas  and  Brahmanas1  denotes 
curds,  said  to  consist  of  a  mixture  of  sour  milk  and  hot  or  cold 
fresh  milk.2 


1  Taittirlya  Samhita,  ii.  3,  13,  2  ; 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  5,  11,  2 ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  22.  24 ;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  ii.  4,  4,  10.  21  ;  5,  1, 
12  ;  2,  9,  etc. 


2  See  Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the 
East,  12,  381,  n.  2. 


Para  Atnara  ('  descendant  of  Atnara ')  appears  in  the  later 
Samhitas1  and  the  Brahmanas2  as  one  of  the  ancient  great 
kings  who  won  sons  by  performing  a  particular  sacrifice.  In 
the  Satapatha  Brahmana3  he  is  styled  Hairanyanabha,  'de- 
scendant of  Hiranyanabha,'  and  in  the  Sankhayana  Srauta 
Sutra4  he  is  called  Para  Ahlara  Vaideha,  a  fact  testifying  to 
the  close  connexion  of  Kosala  and  Videha.  A  Yajna-gutha, 
or  '  sacrificial  verse,'  there5  cited  mentions  Hiranyanabha 
Kausalya  in  connexion  with  Para. 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  6,  5,  3  ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxii.  3  (Indische 
Studien,  3,  473). 

2  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xxv.  16,  3  ; 
Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana,  ii.  6, 
11. 


a  xm.  5,  4,  4. 

4  xvi.  9,  11. 

5  Ibid.,  13.  Cf.  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  10,  7 ;  Episches  im  vedischen 
Ritual,  7;  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Myth- 
ologie,  2,  165,  n.  4. 


Parama-jya,  'of  supreme  power,'  is  understood  by  Ludwig1 
in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda2  as  the  proper  name  of  a  great 
man  among  the  Yadus.  But  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  word 
is  more  than  an  epithet.3 

1  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  159.   I       3  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 

2  viii.  1,  30.  I  Oriental  Society,  17,  39. 


492 


AXE— WILD  ASS— EXILE 


[  ParaSu 


ParaSu  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  denotes  the  axe  of  the 
woodcutter.  Of  its  form  we  know  nothing.  A  red-hot  axe 
was  used  in  a  form  of  ordeal  (Divya)  applied  in  accusations  of 
theft.3     See  also  ParSu. 


1  i.  127,  3 ;  vii.  104,  21 ;  x.  28,  8  ; 
53.  9.  etc. 

8  Av.  iii.  19,  4 ;  vii.  28,  1 ;  xi.  9,  1  ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xii.  10 ;   Satapatha 


Paragvan.  See  Parasvant. 


Brahmana,    iii.    6,    4,    10 ;    Aitareya 
Brahmana,  ii.  35 ;  Kausitaki  Brahmana, 
x.  1 ;  Kausitaki  Upanisad,  ii.  11,  etc. 
3  Chandogya  Upanisad,  vi.  16,  1. 


Parasvant  denotes  a  large  wild  animal  which  Roth1  con- 
jectures to  be  the  wild  ass.  It  is  mentioned  in  the  Vrsakapi 
hymn2  of  the  Rigveda,  twice  in  the  Atharvaveda,3  and  in  the 
list  of  victims  at  the  Asvamedha  (' horse  sacrifice')  in  the 
Yajurveda  Samhitas,4  in  all  of  which  passages  the  sense  of 
1  wild  ass  '  is  satisfactory.  More  doubtful  is  the  meaning  of  the 
word  parasva(n)  in  the  Kausitaki  Upanisad,6  where  the  com- 
mentary explains  it  as  *  serpent.'  It  is,  of  course,  quite  possible 
that  the  word  has  nothing  to  do  with  parasvant.  Biihler6 
suggests  connexion  with  the  Pali  paldsdda,  '  rhinoceros.' 


1  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

2  x.  86,  18. 

3  vi.  72,  2;  xx.  131,  22. 

4  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  10; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  8  ;  Taittirlya 
Samhita,  v.  5,  21,  1,  where  the  com- 
mentator takes  it  to  be  the  wild 
buffalo. 


6  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
Icindischen  Gesellschaft,  48,  63  ;  Keith, 
Sahkhayana  Aranyaka,  17,  n.  1  ;  Aitareya 
Aranyaka,  377,  n.  1. 

Cf  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda, 2, 633  ;  Zimmer,  A  Itindisches  Leben, 
86,  87;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  335 ;  Geldner,  Rigveda, 
Glossar,  105. 


Para-vrj  is  a  term  found  in  four  passages  of  the  Rigveda,1 
in  all  of  which  it  refers  to  a  person  in  a  forlorn  condition, 
while  one2  of  them  also  speaks  of  him  as  going  south.  Sayana's3 
view  that  the  word  is  a  proper  name  is  most  unlikely,  while 
Grassmann's4  explanation  of  it  as  *  cripple'  is  still  less  probable. 

1  i.  112,  8;  ii.  13,  12;  15,  7;  x.  61,  8.   I       3  On  i.  112,  8,  etc.,  cf.  Macdonell, 

2  x.  61,  8.  I    Vedic  Mythology,  152. 

4  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  1,  23,  and  cf.  Worterbuch,  s.v. 


Parik§it  ] 


PARASARA—KING  PARIKSIT 


49 


Roth's5  interpretation  of  it  as  'exile '  seems  clearly  right  in  the 
passage  which  refers  to  the  Paravrj  as  going  south.  Zimmer e 
accepts  Roth's  view  for  this  passage,  but  in  the  others  sees 
a  reference  to  the  child  of  a  maiden  exposed  by  her  and  in 
danger  of  being  eaten  by  insects  (vamri).  This  view  is  sup- 
ported by  the  fact  that  pardvrkta  seems  to  have  the  same 
sense,7  and  is  accepted  by  Oldenberg.8 


5  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

6  Altindisches  Leben,  185,  334,  335. 

7  Rv.    iv.   30,    19.     Cf.   iv.   30,  16  ; 
19,9. 


8  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  200.  Cf.  above, 
p.  481,  n.  67. 

Cf.  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  5,  248  ; 
Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities,  402. 


ParaSara  is  mentioned  with  Satayatu  and  Vasistha  in  the 
Rigvedic  hymn  celebrating  Sudas'1  victory  over  the  ten  kings. 
According  to  the  Nirukta2  he  was  a  son  of  Vasistha,  but  the 
Epic  version  makes  him  a  son  of  3akti  and  grandson  of  Vasistha. 
Geldner3  thinks  that  he  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda  along  with 
Satayatu,  perhaps  his  uncle,  and  his  grandfather  Vasistha,  as 
the  three  sages  who  approached  Indra  and  won  his  favour  for 
Sudas.  He  is  erroneously  credited  with  the  authorship  of 
certain  hymns  of  the  Rigveda4  by  the  Anukramani  (Index). 


1  vii.  18,  21. 

2  vi.  30. 

3  Vedische  Studien,  2,  132. 

4  i.  65-73. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 


veda, 3,  no,  in  ;  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  9,  324.  The  Parasaras  as  a 
school  appear  in  the  Kathaka  Anu- 
kramani (Indische  Studien,  3,  460). 


Pari-ksit  appears  in  the  Atharvaveda1  as  a  king  in  whose 
realm,  that  of  the  Kurus,  prosperity  and  peace  abound.  The 
verses  in  which  he  is  celebrated  are  later2  called  Pariksityah, 
and  the  Brahmanas  explain  that  Agni  is  pari-ksit  because  he 
dwells  among  men.  Hence  Roth3  and  Bloomfield4  regard 
Pariksit  in  the  Atharvaveda  not  as  a  human  king  at  all.  This 
may  be  correct,  but   it  is  not   certain.     Both  Zimmer5  and 

1  xx.  127,  7-10.     See  also  Scheftelo-      Brahmana,  ii.  6, 12;  Sankhayana  Srauta 
witz,   Die   Apokryphen   des    Veda,    156,      Sutra,  xii.  17. 

157,   and  the  verses  in   the  Vaitana  3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

Sutra,  xxxiv.  9.     The  Vedic  spelling  is  *  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  690,  691. 

Pariksit,  not  Pariksit.  but  see  Atharvaveda,  101,  n.  9. 

2  Aitareya    Brahmana,    vi.    32,    to;  6  Altindisches  Leben,  131. 
Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xxx.  5  ;  Gopatha 


494 


BOLT— A  TOWN— ATTENDANT— THONG        [  Parigha 


Oldenberg6  recognize  Pariksit  as  a  real  king,  a  view  supported 
by  the  fact  that  in  the  later  Vedic  literature  King  Janamejaya 
bears  the  patronymic  Pariksita.  If  this  be  so,  Pariksit 
belonged  to  the  later  period,  since  the  Atharvan  passage  in 
which  his  name  occurs  is  certainly  late,  and  none  of  the  other 
Samhitas  know  Pariksit  at  all.  The  Epic7  makes  him  grandfather 
of  Pratisravas  and  great-grandfather  of  Pratipa,  and  Zimmer,5 
probably  with  justice,  compares  the  Pratisutvana  and  Pratipa 
found  in  another  late  Atharvan  passage.8  But  Devapi  and 
Santanu  cannot  be  brought  into  connexion  with  Pratipa.9 


6  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
liindischen  Gesellschap,  42,  237;  Buddha, 
396. 

7  See  Zimmer,  loc.  cit. 

8  xx.  T29. 

9  Devapi  is  really  a  Brahmin,  son 


of  Rstisena,  and  not  connected  directly 
with  Santanu.  Yaska,  Nirukta,  ii.  10, 
identifies  them  as  brothers  and  Kurus; 
but  the  former  part  of  the  identification 
is,  no  doubt,  wrong. 


Pari-giia  denotes  an  iron  bolt  or  bar  in  the  Chandogya 
Upanisad  (ii.  24,  6.  10.  15)  as  often  later. 

Pari-cakra  is  according  to  one  reading  the  name  of  a 
Pancala  town  mentioned  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  and 
identified  by  Weber2  with  the  later  Ekacakra,  which  was  near 
Kampila.3     There  is  a  various  reading  Parivakra.4 


1  xin.  5,  4,  7. 

2  Indische  Studien,  1,  192. 

3  Mahabharata,  i.  6094. 


4  Accepted  by  the  scholiast  an( 
Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  44, 
397- 


Pari-cara  is  found  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  in  the  sense 
of  'attendant.'  In  the  Kausltaki  Brahmana2  pari-carana  has 
the  same  sense  metaphorically,  the  other  two  Vedas  (Sama 
and  Yajur)  being  said  to  be  subsidiary  to  the  Rigveda. 

1  iv-  3»  5.  9-     Cf.  pari-caritr,  Chandogya  Upanisad,  vii.  8,  1. 

2  vi.  11 ;  Max  Muller,  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  457. 

Pari-carmanya  denotes  a  thong  of  leather  in  the  Kausltaki 
Brahmana  (vi.  12)  and  the  Sarikhayana  Aranyaka  (ii.  1). 

Pari-takmya  in  a  number  of  passages  of  the  Rigveda1 
denotes  '  night '  according  to  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary. 

1  i.  116,  15  ;  iv.  41,  6 ;  43,  3  ;  v.  30,  13 ;  31,  11  ;  vi.  24,  9 ;  vii.  69,  4. 


Parimo§a  ]     NIGHT— GARMENT— ROBBER— THEFT  495 

Sieg2  thinks  that  in  one  place3  at  least  the  word  signifies  the 
decisive  point  of  the  race,  something  like  the  sense  of  Prapitva. 
But  this  is  very  doubtful. 

2  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  128.    Cf.  Geldner,  Vedische  Studien,  2,  36;  Rigveda, 
Glossary  106. 

3  i.  116,  15. 

Pari-da  in  a  few  passages  of  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  has 
the  sense  of  '  giving  oneself  up  to  the  mercy  or  protection  of 
another.' 

1  ii.  4,  1,  11  ;  ix.  2,  1,  17 ;  4,  2,  17 ;  4)  5  ;  5,  1,  53. 

Pari-dhana  denotes  *  garment,'  probably  'under  garment,'  in 
the  Atharvaveda  (viii.  2,  16)  and  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upani- 
sad  (vi.  1,  10).  A  garment  of  saffron  is  mentioned  in  the 
Sankhayana  Aranyaka  (xi.  4). 

Pari-pad  seems  in  the  Rigveda1  to  denote  a  pitfall  used  to 
capture  lions. 

1  x.  28,  10 ;  metaphorically,  viii.  24,  24. 

Pari-panthin,  '  besetting  the  path,'  denotes  '  robber '  in  the 
Rigveda1  and  later.2    Cf  Taskara,  Tayu,  Stena. 

1  i.  42,  3;  103,  6;  x.  85,  32. 

2  Av.  i.  27,  1 ;  iii.  15,  1 ;  xii.  1,  32 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  iv.  34,  etc. 

Pari-pavana  signifies  in  the  Nirukta  (iv.  9. 10)  an  instrument 
for  winnowing  grain. 

Pari-mit  occurs  once  in  the  Atharvaveda1  in  the  description 
of  a  house,  meaning  perhaps  the  '  crossbeams '  connecting  the 
vertical  posts.2     Cf.  Grha. 


1  ix.  3.  1. 

2  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, 596;   Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben, 


158 ;     Whitney,    Translation    of    the 
Atharvaveda,  525. 


Pari-mosa  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita1  signifies  *  theft,'  and 
parimosin  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana2  'thief.' 

1  "•  5>  5.  x  5  vi-  J>  XI>  5«  2  xi-  6.  3»  JI  ;  xiii.  2,  4,  2,  etc. 


496  YEAR— RICE— UNMARRIED  ELDER  BROTHER  [  Parirathya 

Pari-rathya  occurs  once  in  the  Atharvaveda1  meaning  either 
'road'2  or  a  part  of  the  chariot,  perhaps  as  Ludwig3  and 
Whitney4  render  it,  the  'rim.' 


1  viii.  8,  22. 

2  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, 587,  following  Nilakantha's  ex- 
planation of  parirathya,  Mahabharata, 
viii.  1487. 


3  Translation    of    the    Rigveda,    3, 
528. 

4  Translation  of    the   Atharvaveda, 
506. 


Pari-vakra  is  the  reading  accepted  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana 
(xiii.  5,  4,  7)  by  the  scholiast  instead  of  the  variant  Paricakra, 
which  is  supported  by  the  Epic  Ekacakra. 


Pari-vatsara  denotes  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  a  '  full  year.' 
It  is  often  mentioned  with  other  names  of  year  (see  Samvatsara) , 
and  in  the  later  five  year  cycle  counts  as  the  second  year. 


1  x.  62,  2. 

2  Taittiriya  Brahmana    i.   5,  5,  6; 
Mahabharata,  i.  3202,  etc.     So  fari- 


vatsarlna,  as  an  adjective,  'relating  to 
a  full  year,'  Rv.  vii.  103,  8;  Av. 
iii.  10,  3. 


Pari-vapa  in  the  later  Samhitas1  and  Brahmanas2  denotes 
'  fried  grains  of  rice.' 

2  Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  24;  Tait- 
tiriya Brahmana,  i.  5,  11,  2,  etc. 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  i,  10,  1  ; 
vi.  5,  11,  4;  vii.  2,  10,  4;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  xxxiv.  11  ;  Vajasaneyi  Sam- 
hita, xix.  21.  22. 


Pari-vitta  denotes  an  '  elder  brother  who  is  not  married 
when  his  younger  brother  is.'  The  term  occurs  in  the  list  of 
sinful  persons  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas1  as  well  as  in  the 
Atharvaveda,2  where  Ludwig3  needlessly  proposes  to  read 
parivettd,  the  'younger  brother  who  marries  before  his  eldesl 
brother.'  The  name  for  the  younger  brother  in  the  older  texts 
is  Parivividana.4 


1  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxxi.  7 ;  Kapis- 
thala  Samhita,  xlvii.  7 ;  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  iv.  1,9;  Taittiriya  Brahmana, 
iii.  2,  8,  11  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xxx.  9. 

2  vi.  112,  3. 

3  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3, 
470. 

4  So   in   the   Kathaka,    Kapisthala, 


Maitrayani,  and  Vajasaneyi  Samhitas, 
loc.  cit. 

Cf.  Delbriick,  Die  indogermanische 
Verwandtschaftsnamen,  580  et  seq. ;  Bloom- 
field,  American  Journal  of  Philology,  17, 
430  et  seq.  ;  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
522  et  seq.  ;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben, 
315 ;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  362. 


Parisyanda]  WAITER— MENDICANT— COUNCIL— FOOTMAN    497 

Pari-vrkta,  Pari-vrkti,  Pari-vrtti,  are  variant  forms  of  the 
name  of  the  rejected  one  among  the  royal  wives.     See  Pati. 


Papi-ve§tr  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  later2  denotes  an 
'  attendant,'  more  especially  one  who  serves  up  food,  a  '  waiter/ 
The  feminine  form  Parivestri  signifies  a  ■  female  attendant '  or 
*  handmaid.'3 


1  ix.  6,  51. 

2  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  3,  1,  3 ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  2,  16 ;  Vaja- 
saneyi  Samhita,  vi.  13 ;  xxx.  12.  13  ; 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  a,  8,  1  ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  21 ;  Satapatha 


Brahmana,  xiii.  5,  4,  6 ;  iii.  8,  2,  3  ; 
vi.  2,  13,  3,  etc. 

3  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  2,  7,  4 ; 
Kausitaki  Upanisad,  ii.  1  ;  Keith, 
Sahkhayana  Aranyaha,  21,  n.  2. 


Pari-vrajaka  (lit.,  *  wandering  about ')  denotes  in  the  Nirukta 
(i.  14;  ii.  8)  a  'mendicant  monk.' 


Pari-sad  (lit.,  '  sitting  around ')  denotes  in  the  Upanisads1  an 
'assemblage'  of  advisers  in  questions  of  philosophy,  and  the 
Gobhila  Grhya  Sutra2  refers  to  a  teacher  with  his  Parisad  or 
'  council.'  In  the  later  literature  the  word  denotes  a  body  of 
advisers  on  religious  topics,  but  also  the  assessors  of  a  judge, 
or  the  council  of  ministers  of  a  prince.3  But  in  none  of  these 
senses  is  the  word  found  in  the  early  literature,  though  the 
institutions  indicated  by  it  must  have  existed  at  least  in 
embryo. 


1  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  1,  1 
(Madhyamdina  =  vi.  2,  1  Kanva) ;  daivl 
parisad,  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana, 
ii.  11,  13.  14. 

2  iii.  2,  40. 


3  Cf.  Jolly,  Recht  und  Sitte,  136,  137 ; 
Foy,  Die  honigliche  Gewalt,  16-19;  33- 
37  ;  66 ;  Biihler,  Zeitschri/t  der  Deutschen 
Morgenldndischen  Gesellschaft,  48,  55,  56  ; 
Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  2,  124. 


Pari-skanda  (lit.,  'leaping  around')  occurs  in  the  Vratya 
hymn  of  the  Atharvaveda  (xv.  2,  1  et  seq.)  denoting,  in  the  dual, 
the  two  footmen  running  beside  a  chariot. 

Pari-syanda  (with  water  '  flowing  around ')  in  two  passages 
of  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (ix.  2,  1,  19 ;  xiv.  3,  1,  14)  denotes 
a  sandbank  or  island  in  a  river. 

vol.  1.  32 


498 


ISLAND— INTOXICANT— TONGS— A  SEER     [  Parisaraka 


Pari-saraka  is  the  name  of  a  place,  an  island  formed  by  the 
Sarasvati  'flowing  around'  it,  according  to  a  story  in  the 
Aitareya  Brahmana  (ii.  19). 


Pari-srut  is  the  name  of  a  drink  which  is  mentioned  first  in 
the  Atharvaveda,1  and  which  was  distinct  from  both  Sura  and 
Soma,2  but  was  intoxicating.  According  to  Mahidhara,3  the 
liquor  was  made  from  flowers  (Puspa).  Zimmer4  thinks  that 
it  was  the  family  drink,  and  this  is  supported  by  the  fact  that 
in  the  Atharvaveda  it  twice  occurs  as  a  household  beverage.5 
Hillebrandt6  is  of  opinion  that  it  was  very  much  the  same  as 
Sura. 


1  iii.  12,  7 ;  xx.  127,  9.  Cf.  Hopkins, 
Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
17,  68. 

2  ^atapatha  Brahmana,  v.  1,  2,  14. 
Cf.  v.  5,  4,  10 ;  xi.  5,  5,  13  ;  xii.  7,  1,  7  ; 
8,  2,  15;  9,  1,  1. 

3  On  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  ii.  34. 

4  Altindisches  Leben,  281,  282. 


6  See  also  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xix.  15 ;  xx.  59 ;  xxi.  29  ;  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  iii.  11,  2.  Its  nature  is  more 
elaborately  explained  in  the  Katyayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  xiv.  1,  14  ;  xv.  10,  11  ; 
Weber,  Indische  Studien,  10,  349,  350. 

6  Vedische  Mythologies  1,  24,  8. 


i.  Pari-$ah  appears  to  denote  a  '  box '  or  something  similar 
in  the  Atharvaveda  (xix.  48,  1). 


2.  Papi-nah  is  the  name  of  a  place  in  Kupuksetpa  mentioned 
in  the  Pancavim^a  Brahmana,1  the  Taittiriya  Aranyaka,2  and 
the  Sutras.3 


1  xxv.  13,  I. 

2  V.   I,   I. 

3  Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  x.  19,  1 ; 


Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xxiv.  6,  34; 
6ahkhayana    Srauta    Sutra,   xiii.    29, 2 

W 


PaPi-£asa  is  the  name  of  an  instrument  of  the  nature  of 
tongs,  used  to  lift  the  sacrificial  kettle  off  the  fire.1 

1  £atapatha  Brahmana,  xiv.  1,  3,  1 ;  2,  1,  16;  2,  54;  3,  1,  20,  etc. 


Papuc-chepa  is  the  name  of  a  Rsi  to  whom  the  Anukramani 
(Index)  attributes  a  series  of  hymns1  in  the  Rigveda,  and  whose 

1  Rv.  i.  127-139. 


Paru§ni  ] 


REED— THE  RIVER  PARUSNl 


499 


authorship  is  asserted  in  the  Aitareya2  and  the  Kausitaki3 
Brahmanas,  as  well  as  in  the  Nirukta.4  In  the  Taittirlya 
Samhita5  he  appears  as  a  rival  of  Nrmedhas. 


2  v.  12.  13  (where  hymns  Rv.  i.  128, 
129,  130,  133,  135,  137,  139,  are  at- 
tributed to  him). 

3  xxiii.  4.  5. 

4  x.  42. 


6  »•  5,  8,  3. 

Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rig- 
veda,  3,  116.  Parucchepa's  claim  to 
authorship  is  very  doubtful. 


Parusa  seems  to  mean  *  reed '  in  the  Atharvaveda  (viii.  8,  4) 
and  'arrow'  in  the  Sankhayana  £rauta  Sutra  (xiv.  22,  20). 


Parusni  is  the  name  of  a  river  which  is  mentioned  in  the 
Nadi-stuti  ('Praise  of  Rivers'),1  and  in  the  song  of  Sudas' 
victory  over  the  ten  kings,2  which  seems  to  have  been  made 
decisive  by  the  rise  of  the  river  drowning  the  fugitives.3  In 
these  passages  and  one  of  the  eighth  book  of  the  Rigveda,4 
where  it  is  called  a  'great  stream'  (tnahenadi),  the  name  is 
certainly  that  of  the  river  later  called  Ravi  (Iravati),  as  recog- 
nized by  Yaska.6  Pischel6  sees  a  reference  to  it  in  two  other 
passages  of  the  Rigveda,7  where  'wool'  (urna)  is  connected 
with  the  word  parusni,  and  the  allusion  to  the  river  is  accepted 
by  Max  Miiller8  and  Oldenberg,9  though  they  are  not  fully 
agreed  as  to  the  exact  sense  of  the  passages  in  question. 
Pischel  suggests  that  the  name  is  derived  from  the  'flocks' 
(parus)  of  wool,  not  from  the  bends  of  the  river,  as  understood 
by  the  Nirukta,6  or  from  its  reeds,  as  Roth10  suggests. 


1  x.  75,  5. 

2  vii.  18,  8.  9. 

3  It  is  impossible  to  decide  precisely 
•what  part  the  river  played  in  the  battle. 
It  is  usually  held  that  the  enemies  of 
Sudas  tried  to  divert  the  stream,  but 
failed,  and  were  drowned  in  its  current. 
So  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  11  ; 
Macdonell,  Sanskrit  Literature,  154  ; 
Geldner,  Rigveda,  Kommentar,  103,  holds 
that  Sudas  was  caught  between  two 
opposing  armies,  and  had  to  escape 
over  the  Parusni,  that  his  enemies 
tried  to  divert  it  to  render  him  more 
accessible  to  their  attack,  but  failed, 


and  were  overwhelmed  in  the  river. 
Hopkins,  India,  Old  and  New,  52  et  seq. , 
may  be  right  in  rejecting  in  toto  the 
theory  of  the  attempted  diversion  of 
the  waters,  though  in  the  Journal  of  the 
American  Oriental  Society,  15,  261  et  scq., 
he  accepted  the  traditional  view. 

4  viii.  74,  15. 

5  Nirukta,  ix.  26. 

6  Vedische  Studien,  2,  208-210. 

7  iv.  22,  2 ;  v.  52,  9. 

8  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32,  315, 
323. 

9  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  348. 
10  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  5.1;.  4a. 

32—2 


500 


LIMB-WING-PARNA  TREE 


[  Parus 


The  mention  of  the  Parusnl  and  the  Yamuna  in  the  hymn 
celebrating  the  victory  of  Sudas  has  given  rise  to  the  conjectures 
of  Hopkins,11  that  the  Yamuna  in  that  hymn  is  merely  another 
name  for  the  Parusni,  and  of  Geldner,12  that  the  Parusni  there 
is  merely  a  tributary  of  the  Yamuna  (Jumna).  But  neither 
interpretation  is  either  essential  or  even  probable.  The  hymn 
is  a  condensed  one,  and  may  well  be  taken  as  celebrating  two 
great  victories  of  Sudas.  There  is  a  doubtful  reference  to  the 
Parusnl  in  the  Atharvaveda.13 


11  Op.  cit.,  52. 

12  Rgveda,  Glossar,  106. 

13  vi.  12,  3.     Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns 


of    the    Atharvaveda,    462 ;     "Whitney, 
Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  289. 


Parus  means  first  a  '  limb '  or  *  member '  of  the  body,1  and 
is  then  applied  metaphorically  to  the  divisions  of  the  sacrifice  2 
or  of  the  year3  (c/.  Parvan). 

1  Rv.  i.  162,  18 ;  x.  97,  12  ;  100,  5  ;    I       2  Rv.  x.  53,  1  ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana, 
Av.  i.  12,  3  ;  iv.  12,  2.  3,  etc.  |  i.  6,  9,  1. 

3  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  6,  1. 


1.  Parna  denotes  the  'wing'  of  a  bird  in  the  Rigveda1  and 
later.2  It  also  means  the  '  feather '  of  an  arrow  in  a  late  passage 
of  the  Rigveda,3  and  more  often  later  ;4  and  the  '  leaf  of  a  tree 
from  the  Rigveda  onwards.5 


1  i.  116,  15;  182,  7;  183,  1;  iv.  27, 
4,  etc. 

2  Av.  x.  1,  29;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
i-  6,  3,  5,  etc. 

3  x.   18,   14.     Cf.  Lanman,   Sanskrit 
Reader,  386. 


4  Av.  v.  25,   1 ;   Kathaka  Samhita. 
xxv.    1  ;    Aitareya    Brahmana,   i.    25 
iii.  26,  etc. 

5  Rv.  x.  68,  10  ;  Av.  viii.  7,  12 
Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  1,  7  ;  Vajc 
saneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  46,  etc. 


2.  Parna  denotes  the  tree  Butea  frondosa,  later  usually  callec 
PalaSa.  It  occurs  in  the  Rigveda1  in  connexion  with  the 
Asvattha,  and  with  that  tree  as  well  as  the  Nyagrodha  in  the 
Atharvaveda,2  which  mentions  both  amulets3  and  the  cover  ol 
sacrificial  dishes4  as  made   from  its  wood.     Its  use   for   the 


x.  97,  5- 

v.  5,  5. 


iii.  5,  4.  8. 
xviii.  4,  53. 


Parnaya  ]    HILLMAN— FEATHERED  END  OF  ARROW 


501 


making  of  sacrificial  implements  like  the  ladle  (juhu),5  or 
sacrificial  posts,6  or  the  small  ladle  called  sruvat7  is  mentioned. 
The  Taittiriya  Samhita8  ascribes  its  origin  to  the  loss  of  a 
feather  by  the  Gayatri  when  winning  the  Soma.  The  tree  is 
also  often  mentioned  elsewhere.9  Reference  too  is  sometimes 
made  to  its  bark  (parna-valka) .10 


5  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  5,  7,  2. 
Cf.  Maitrayanl  Samhita,  iv.  1,  1. 

6  Pancavim£a  Brahmana,  xxi.  4,  13. 

7  Kathaka  Samhita,  xv.  2.  Cf.  viii.  2 ; 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  1,  3,  11 ;  7,  1,  9; 
8,7. 

8  Taittiriya  Samhita,  loc.  cit.,  and 
cf.  Kuhn,  Die  Herabkunft  des  Feuers  und 
des  G'dttertranks,  148,  192 ;  Bloomfield, 
Journal  of  the  A  merican  Oriental  Society, 
16,  20.  24;   Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 


33 1.  332  ;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  91. 

9  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii.  3,  4,  10 ; 
vi.  5,  1,  1;  xi.  1,  4,  2  ;  7,  28;  Panca- 
vimsa  Brahmana,  ix.  5,  4. 

10  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  5,  3,  5  ; 
Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  7,  4,  2.  18, 
etc. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  59; 
Weber,  Indische  Studien,  17,  194,  195. 


Parnaka  is  the  name  of  a  man  included  in  the  list  of  victims 
at  the  Purusamedha  ('  human  sacrifice ')  in  the  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita1  and  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana.2  According  to  Mahi- 
dhara,3  a  Bhilla  is  meant — i.e.,  presumably  a  wild  hillman,  for 
he  glosses  Nisada  in  the  same  way.4  Sayana5  explains  the 
word  as  meaning  '  one  who  catches  fish  by  putting  over  the 
water  a  parna  with  poison,'  but  this  is  apparently  a  mere 
etymological  guess.  Weber's6  rendering  of  the  term  as  refer- 
ring to  a  savage  '  wearing  feathers  '  is  ingenious,  but  uncertain. 

5  On  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  loc.  cit. 

6  Zeitschrift    der    Deutschen    Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  18,  281. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  119. 


1  xxx.  16. 

2  iii.  4.  12, 


3  On  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  loc.  cit. 

4  On  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  27. 


Parna-dhi  in  the  Atharvaveda1  denotes  the  part  of  the  shaft 
in  which  the  feather  of  the  arrow  is  fastened. 


1  iv.  6,  5.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches 
Leben,  300 ;    Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the 


A  tharvaveda,  375 ;  Whitney,  Translation 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  154. 


Pari^aya  is  the  name  in  two  passages  of  the  Rigveda1  either 
of  a  hero,  as  Ludwig2  thinks,  or  of  a  demon3  overcome  by  Indra. 


1  i.  53,8;  x.  48,/ 


2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  149. 


*fc     3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


502 


THRONE—  WOOF— MO  UNTA  IN 


[  Paryanka 


Pary-ahka  is  the  name  of  the  seat  of  the  Brahman  in  the 
Kausitaki  Upanisad.1  It  seems  to  correspond  to  what  is  else- 
where called  Asandi  ;2  as  used  in  the  Upanisad,  it  can,  how- 
ever, hardly  mean  a  long  seat  for  reclining  on,  but  rather  a 
throne.3 


M.5. 

8  Av.    xv.    3,    3.      Cf.    xiv.    2,    65  ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  5.  6.  12. 
3  Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  397, 


401 ;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  155  ; 
Lanman  in  Whitney,  Translation  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  765,  776. 


Pary-asa  is  used  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (iii.  1,  2,  18)  to 
denote  the  woof  of  cloth,  the  warp  being  called  anuchada. 


1.  Parvata  in  the  Rigveda1  and  the  Atharvaveda2  is  con- 
joined with  giri  in  the  sense  of  '  hill '  or  *  mountain.'  From 
the  Rigveda3  onwards4  it  is  common  in  this  sense  as  connected 
with  the  waters  of  rivers  which  flow  in  the  hills.6  The  legend 
of  the  mountains  having  wings  is  already  found  in  the 
Samhitas.6  In  the  Kausitaki  Upanisad7  are  mentioned  the 
southern  (daksina)  and  the  northern  (uttara)  mountains,  evidently 
in  allusion  to  the  Himalaya  and  the  Vindhya  ranges.  The 
plants  (osadhi)  and  aromatic  products  (afijana)  of  the  mountains 
are  referred  to  in  the  Atharvaveda,8  and  their  mineral  treasures 
in  the  Rigveda.9 


1  i.  37.  7 ;  v.  56,  4. 

2  Av.  iv.  6,  8;  vi.  12,  3;  17,  3;  ix.  1, 
18  ;  xii.  1,  11. 

3  i-  39.  5;  52.  2;  155,  1;  191,  9; 
ii.  12,  2.  3 ;  17,  5,  etc. 

4  Av.  i.  14,  1;  iii.  21,  10;  iv.  9,  8; 
viii.  7,  17;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  4, 
5,  1  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvii.  1 ; 
xviii.  13,  etc. 

5  Rv.  vii.  34,  23  ;  35,  8  ;  viii.  18,  16 ; 


31,  10;  x.  35,  2;  36,  1,  etc.;  Pischel, 
Vedische  Studien,  i.  80  ;  2,  66. 

6  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxxvi.  9  ;  Mai- 
trayani  Samhita,  i.  10,  13 ;  and  Rv. 
iv«  54-  5.  as  explained  by  Pischel, 
Vedische  Studien,  1,  174. 

7  ii.  13  ;  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1, 
407 ;  Keith,  Sankhayana  Ay  any  oka,  28, 
n.  1. 

8  xix.  44,  6;  45,  7.  9  x.  69,  6. 


2.  Parvata  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda1  denotes,  according 
to  Ludwig,2  a  sacrificer  whose  generosity  is  praised.  But  it  is 
probable  that  the  god  Parvata,  the  spirit  of  the  mountain,  is 
meant.3 

1  vii.  87,  8.  2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  159. 

3'St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Parsu  ]        A  SEER— JOINT— HOLLOW— RIB— SICKLE 


503 


3.  Parvata  is  mentioned  several  times  in  the  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana1 along  with  Narada.  The  Anukramani  (Index)  attri- 
butes to  him  the  authorship  of  several  hymns  of  the  Rigveda.2 


1  vii.  13,  34  ;  viii.  21 
Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  17,  4. 


Sankhayana 


2  viii.  12  ;  ix.  104  ;  105. 


Parvan  denotes  the  knots  of  the  reed  or  the  joints  of  a  plant,1 
and  more  generally  a  part  or  limb  of  the  body.2  It  also 
designates  a  period  of  time,  probably  with  reference  to  the 
breaks  in  the  month  at  new  and  full  moon.3  In  one  passage4 
Geldner6  thinks  the  word  indicates  a  song  section  of  the 
Samaveda. 


1  Av.  xii.  3,  31 ;  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
i.  1,  2,  1  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  vi.  3, 
1,  31,  and  cf.  Rv.  x.  68,  9. 

2  Rv.  i.  61,  12  ;  iv.  19,  9 ;  viii.  48,  5  ; 
x.  89,  8;  Av.  i.  11,  1;  12,  2 ;  ii.  9,  1; 
vi.  14,  1  ;  xi.  8,  12  ;  xii.  5,  71 ;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  iii.  31  ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, i.  6,  3,  35  et  seq.  ;  iii.  4,  4,  2 ; 
vi.  1,  2,  31 ;  x.  4,  5,  2,  etc. 

8  Rv.  i.  94,  4 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xiii.  43 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  6,  3, 
35  ;  vi.  2,  2,  34,  etc.  Cf.  M&sa.  In 
the  Sutras  the  days  of  the  four-monthly 
festivals   (caturmasya)    are    so    called : 


Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  v.  2,  13 ; 
xxii.  7,  1.  16.  17;  xxiv.  4,  30;  Sankh- 
ayana Srauta  Sutra,  xiv.  5,6;  10,  4.  18  ; 
AsValayana  Srauta  Sutra,  ix.  2,  3  ;  and 
more  often  the  periods  of  the  change 
of  moon:  Katyayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
xxiv.  6,  4.  25.  30 ;  Sankhayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  iii.  2,1;  3,1;  Latyayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  viii.  8,  46,  etc. 

4  vii.  103,  5. 

5  Rgveda,  Glossar,  107. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  364, 
who  quotes  Tacitus,  Germania,  11. 


ParSana,  '  hollow,'  is  mentioned  several  times  in  the  Rigveda 
(vii.  104,  5;  viii.  7,  34;  45,  41). 

1.  ParSu  denotes  'rib'  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  later.2    Cf. 
Sarira. 


1  ix.  7,  6 ;  x.  9,  20  ;  xi.  3,  12. 

2  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  5,  25,  1  ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxxi.  1  ;  Satapatha 


Brahmana,  viii.  6,  2,  10  ;  x.  6,  4,  1  : 
xii.  3,  1,  6;  Sadvimsa  Brahmana,  i.  3, 
etc 


2.  Parsu  seems  in  some  passages x  to  denote  a  '  sickle,'  being 
apparently  a  variant  of  ParaSu. 


1  Av.  xii.  3,  31  (Kauslka  Sutra,  i.  24. 
25;  viii.  11;  lxi.  38.  39);  perhaps 
vii.  28,  1  =  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  2, 
4,    1.      See  Whitney,   Translation    of 


the  Atharvaveda,  407,  408;  Brhad- 
aranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  4,  26  (where 
parsu  is  metrically  needed),  etc.  Cf. 
Bohtlingk,  Dictionary,  s.v. 


504 


THE  PARSU  TRIBE 


[  Par£u 


3.  Pargu  in  the  Nirukta1  is  explained  in  one  passage  of  the 
Rigveda2  as  meaning  the  sides  of  a  cistern  (kupa).3  But  the 
sense  of  *  ribs '  is  quite  adequate  there. 

3  Oldenberg,   Rgveda-Notent   1,   100 ; 
Geldner,  Rigveda,  Glossar,  107. 


1  iv.  6. 

2  i.  105,  8 ;  x.  33,  2. 


4.  Par£u  occurs  in  one  passage  in  a  Danastuti  ('  praise  of 
gifts ')  in  the  Rigveda1  as  the  name  of  a  man.  It  is  not  certain 
that  he  is  identical  with  Tirindira,  but  the  Sankhayana  Srauta 
Sutra 2  mentions  Tirindira  Parasavya  as  the  patron  of  Vatsa 
Kanva.  In  another  passage  occurring  in  the  Vrsakapi  hymn,3 
Parsu  Manavi  occurs,  apparently  as  a  woman,  daughter  of 
Manu,  but  who  is  meant  it  is  quite  impossible  to  say.  Excepting 
these  two,  there  are  no  other  occurrences  in  which  the  word  has 
with  any  probability  the  value  of  a  proper  name  in  the  Rigveda. 

Ludwig,4  however,  sees  in  several  other  places  an  allusion  to 
the  Parsus.  Thus  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda5  he  finds  a 
reference  to  the  defeat  of  KuruSravana  by  the  Parsus;  in 
another6  he  finds  a  reference  to  the  Prthus  and  Parsus — i.e.,  the 
Parthians  and  the  Persians.  He  also  sees  the  Parthians  in 
Parthava,  a  name  found  in  one  hymn.7  The  same  view  is 
taken  by  Weber,8  who  holds  that  historical  connexions  with  the 


1  viii.  6,  46.  2  xvi.  11,  20. 

3  x.  86,  23.  Apparently  Varttika  2, 
on  Panini,  iv.  1,  177,  where  Parsu  is 
explained  as  a  feminine,  Princess  of 
the  Parsus,  refers  to  this  passage.  On 
the  sense,  cf.  Geldner,  Vedische  Studien, 
2,  42 ;  Rigveda,  Glossar,  107 ;  and  Tait- 
tiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  2,  2,  2,  where  the 
expression  occurs,  but  where  the  sense 
is  very  dubious. 

4  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  196 
et  seq. 

5  x.  33,  2.  The  sense  here  is,  no 
doubt,  'ribs.'  See  Geldner,  op.  cit.,  2, 
184,  n.  3  ;  Bergaigne,  Religion  Vtdique, 
2,  362,  n. 

6  vii.  83,  1,  prthu-parlavah,  which 
really  means  either  '  with  large  ribs ' — 
i.e.,  'strong,'  as  Roth,  with  Sayana, 
inclines  to  take  it — or '  with  broad  axes,' 
according  to  Zimmer. 


7  vi.  27,  8. 

8  Indische  Studien,  4,  379  ;  Indian 
Literature,  4 ;  Episches  im  vedischen 
Ritual,  36  et  seq.  He  confines  his  view 
to  the  equation  of  Parsu  in  Rigveda, 
viii.  6,  46,  and  the  Persians.  Hille- 
brandt,  who  is  inclined  to  see  relations 
with  Iran  in  early  times  (see  Pani, 
Paravata,  Srnjaya),  does  not  in  this 
connexion  quote  ParSu  at  all,  and, 
though  he  mentions  Parthava,  does  not 
regard  it  as  probably  referring  to  a 
Parthian  (Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  105). 
Brunnhofer,  in  his  various  works  (Iran 
und  Turan,  1889 ;  vom  Pontus  bis  zum 
Indus,  1890,  etc.),  finds  constant  refer- 
ences in  the  Veda  to  events  in  Iran, 
but  his  theories  must  be  regarded  as 
definitely  unscientific.  See  also  Hop- 
kins, Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  15,  264,  n. 


Palava  ] 


SHEA  VES—THATCH—STRA  W— CHAFF 


5o5 


Persians  are  referred  to.  But  Zimmer9  points  out  that  this 
conclusion  is  not  justified;  the  Parous  were  known  to  Panini10 
as  a  warrior  tribe;  the  Para^avas  were  a  tribe  in  south-west 
MadhyadeSa;  and  the  Periplus11  knows  a  tribe  of  Parthoi  in 
north  India.  At  most  the  only  conclusion  to  be  drawn  is  that 
the  Indians  and  Iranians  were  early  connected,  as  was  of 
course  the  case.  Actual  historical  contact  cannot  be  asserted 
with  any  degree  of  probability. 

9  Altindisches  Leben,  134  et  seq.  ;  433.       and  Parsu  are  dialectical  forms  of  the 
Ibid.,  434,  435,  he  refutes  conclusively      same  word. 
Ludwig's  extraordinary  view  that  Prthu  10  v.  3,  117.  "  c.  38. 


Parsa  occurs  in  the  Rigveda,1  denoting  in  the  plural  '  sheaves ' 
strewn  over  the  threshing  floor.     Cf.  Khala. 

1  x.   48,    7;    Nirukta,   iii.    10.     Cf.      in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  4,2,  5, 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  238.     Per-      means 'having  a  bundle  (of  arrows).' 
haps  par  sin,  in  the  compound  isu-parsin 


Palada  occurs  twice  in  one  hymn  of  the  Atharvaveda1  in  the 
description  of  a  house.  It  seems  to  mean  bundles  of  straw  or 
reeds  used  to  thatch  the  house  and  render  the  sides  wind  and 
weather  proof. 

1  ix.  3,  5,  17.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  153  ;  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  194,  195. 

Palasti.     See  Palita. 

Palala  is  found  with  Anu-palala  in  the  Atharvaveda  (viii.  6, 2) 
as  the  name  of  a  demon.  The  meaning  of  the  word  is  '  straw,' 
in  which  sense  it  occurs  in  the  Kausika  Sutra  (lxxx.  27),  while  the 
feminine  form,  Palali,  is  found  in  the  Atharvaveda  itself  (ii.  8, 3) 
as  the  straw  of  barley  (Yava). 

Palava  is  found  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  the  Jaiminiya 
Upanisad  Brahmana2  in  the  sense  of '  chaff.' 


1  xii.  3,  19,  where  some  manuscripts  read  palava. 


506 


LEAF— GREY  HAIR— LYE 


[  PalaSa 


PalaSa,  like  Parna,  denotes  'leaf  in  the  Brahmanas.1  It 
also2  designates  the  tree  Butea  frondosa,  of  which  Parna  is  the 
early  name. 


1  Kausitaki  Brahmana,  x.  2 ;  £ata- 
patha  Brahmana,  i.  5,  4,  5  ;  v.  2,  1, 
17  etc. ;  Chandogya  Upanisad,  iv. 
14,3. 


2  Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  1  ;  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana,  i.  3,  3,  19  ;  ii.  6,  2,  8, 
etc. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  59. 


Palita,  'grey-haired,'  occurs  frequently  from  the  Rigveda1 
onwards.2  It  is  the  distinctive  sign  of  old  age.  Those  who, 
like  certain  descendants  of  Jamadagni,  do  not  grow  old,3  are 
said  not  to  become  grey-haired,  while  Bharadvaja  is  described 
as  having  in  his  old  age  become  thin  and  grey-haired.4  The 
Satapatha  Brahmana5  in  one  passage  observes  that  grey  hairs 
appear  first  on  the  head,  and  elsewhere6  alludes  to  the  hair  on 
the  arms  having  become  grey. 


1  1.  x44,  4;  164,  1;  iii.  55,9;  x.  4,5, 
etc. 

2  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  15,  etc. 

3  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  1,  9,  1  ; 
Paiicavimsa  Brahmana,  xxi.  10,  6.  Cf. 
Hopkins,  Transactions  of  the  Connecticut 


Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  15,  54,  and 
Rv.  iii.  53,  16,  where  palasti  seems  to 
mean  palita. 

4  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iii.  49. 

8  xi.  4,  1,6.  14. 

6  iii.  8,  2,  25. 


Palpulana  is  found  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  the  Taittiriya 
Samhita2  apparently  meaning,  properly,  'lye,'  or  water  impreg- 
nated with  some  biting  substance  for  washing  clothes.  In  the 
Atharvan  passage  urine  seems  to  be  meant.3  The  verb  palpu- 
laya,  'to  wash  with  alkaline  water,'  occurs  in  the  Taittiriya 
Samhita2  and  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana;4  and  the  Sutras  refer 
to  hides  {carman)5  and  garments6  so  washed.  Cf.  also  Vasah- 
palpull. 


1  xii.  4,  9.    Cf.  Kauslka  Sutra,  xi.  16. 

2  ii-  5.  5.  6. 

3  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Athar- 
vaveda, 695.  Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of 
the  Atharvaveda,  74,  175. 


*  1.  3.  5.  2.  3. 

5  KauSika  Sutra,  67. 

6  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  iii.  8, 
12.  Cf.  Baudhayana  Dharma  Sutra, 
i.  6,  13,  15  ;  Bohtlingk,  Dictionary,  s.v. 


Palli-grupta  Lauhitya  ('  descendant  of  Lohita ')  is  mentioned 
in  a  Vamsa  ('  list  of  teachers  ')  in  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad 
Brahmana  (iii.  42,  1)  as  a  pupil  of  Syamajayanta  Lauhitya. 


Pavi  ] 


SIEVE— SOMA— TIRE  OF  A   WHEEL 


507 


The  name  is  obviously  a  late  one,  for  Palli  is  not  found  in  the 
early  literature,  and  the  name  of  the  Lauhitya  family  is  other- 
wise known  in  post-Vedic  works  only. 

Pavana  ('purifier')  in  the  Atharvaveda1  denotes  an  instrument 
for  purifying  grain  from  husks,  etc. ;  either  a  '  sieve '  or  a 
'winnowing  basket'  may  be  meant.  In  the  Sutras2  it  is 
mentioned  as  used  for  cleaning  the  bones  of  the  dead  after 
cremation. 


iv.  34,  2  ;  xviii.  3,  11.    Cf.  Nirukta,    I       2  Asvalayana  Grhya  Sutra,  iv.  5,  7. 


vi.  g. 


Pavamana  is  a  term  very  frequently  applied  in  the  Rigveda 
to  the  Soma  'purifying  itself  by  running  through  the  sieve. 
Later  it  appears  in  a  few  passages1  in  the  sense  of '  wind '  (as  a. 
purifier). 

1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  5,  20,  1 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  vi.  17 ;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  i.  7. 


Pavasta  in   one   passage  of  the   Atharvaveda1   apparently 
denotes  '  covers.' 

1  iv.  5,  6.     Cf.  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  156. 


Pavi  denotes  the  '  tire '  of  the  wheel  of  a  chariot  in  the 
Rigveda1  and  later.2  Reference  is  made3  to  the  necessity  for 
fastening  it  on  firmly,  and  the  epithet  su-pavi,  '  having  a  good 
tire,'  is  found  in  the  Atharvaveda4  with  su-nabhi,  '  having  a  good 
nave,'  and  su-cakra,  '  having  a  good  wheel.'  The  tires  were,  of 
course,  of  metal,5  and  being  sharp,6  could  serve  on  occasion  as 
weapons.7     The  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  in  one  passage  of 


1  i.  34,   2 ;  88,  2  ;  139,  3 ;   166,   io, 
etc.  ;  Nirukta,  v.  5. 

2  Samaveda,  ii.  7,  1,  15,  3,  etc. 

3  Rv.  vi.  54,  3. 
*  Av.  iv.  12,  6. 


3  Of  gold  in  the  case  of  the  Asvins 
and  the  Maruts,  Rv.  i.  64,  11 ;  180,  1. 

6  Rv.  i.  166,  10. 

7  Rv.  v.   52,    9.     Cf.  vi.   8,   5,    and- 
x,  180,  2. 


5o8 


TIRE— SOMA  SIEVE 


[  Pavitra 


the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita8  takes  Pavi  to  mean  a  metal  rim  on  the 
stone  for  pounding  Soma,  but  this  seems  improbable,  because 
no  such  metal  attachment  is  elsewhere  alluded  to.  Hille- 
brandt9  seems  clearly  right  in  accepting  the  sense  of  '  sharp 
edge'  in  this  passage,  especially  as  the  stones  in  the  Rigveda10 
are,  in  allusion  to  their  rolling  action,  styled  *  rims  without 
horses  and  without  chariots'  (anasvdsah pavayo  Wathah). 

The  Nirukta11  ascribes  to  Pavi  the  sense  of  arrow  (salya),  but 
this  is  very  uncertain.  The  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  cites  for 
this  use  two  passages  of  the  Rigveda,12  but  in  one  the  secondary 
sense  of  sharp-edged  weapon  with  reference  to  the  bolt  of  Indra 
is  quite  likely,  and  in  the  other,  where  the  expression  vanasya 
pavi  occurs,  the  sharp-edged  pounding-stone  of  the  'reed,'13 
meaning  the  stalk  of  the  Soma  plant,  may  be  meant.  Hille- 
brandt14  thinks  a  reference  to  the  shape  of  the  Soma  plant  is 
intended.  Pavi-nasa,  the  name  of  a  demon  mentioned  in  the 
Atharvaveda,15  seems  to  throw  no  light  on  this  point,  for  while 
the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  takes  it  to  mean  '  whose  nose  is 
like  a  spearhead,'  it  is  translated  as  'rim-nosed'  (presumably  in 
allusion  to  the  curved  shape  of  the  nose)  by  Whitney.16 


8  vi.  30.  Cf.  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
iii.  9,  4,  5.  Mahidhara,  on  the  Vaja- 
saneyi Samhita,  takes  pavina  as  vajra- 
sadrsena,  '  like  a  thunderbolt, '  and 
Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  26, 
239,  240,  renders  pavi  by  '  bolt.' 

9  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  44. 

10  v.  31,5. 

11  xii.  30. 


ix.  50,  1 


i8o,  2. 


13  Cf.  Rv.  iv.  24,  9,  where  the  ex- 
pression vanam  duhanti,  *  they  milk  out 
the  reed,'  occurs. 

14  Op.cit.,  1,  43,44. 

15  viii.  6,  21. 

16  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda, 

497- 

Cf.  Zimmer,  A  Itindisches  Leben,  248  ; 
Geldner,  Vedische  Studien,  2,  12,  n.  1. 


Pavitra  denotes  in  the  Rigveda,1  and  later,2  the  sieve  used 
for  purifying  the  Soma,  the  only  mode  of  purifying  it  certainly3 
known  to  the  Rigveda.     It  seems  clearly4  to  have  been  made  of 


1  i.   28,   9 ;  iii.    36,   7 ;  viii.   33,   1 ; 
101,  9,  etc. 

2  Av.  vi.  124,  3  ;  ix.  6,  16 ;  xii.  i,  30 ; 
3,  3.  14.  25,  etc. 

3  Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie, 
1,  239,  240. 

4  Cf.  the  names    of    it :   anva,  Rv. 


ix.  16,  2 ;  anvani  mesyah,  86,  47 ;  107, 
11  ;  avayah,  ii.  36,  1  ;  ix.  86,  11 ;  91,  2  ; 
tvacwiih  avya  or  avyaya,  ix.  69, 3  ;  70,  7  ; 
mesyah,  ix.  8,  5  ;  rupa  avyaya,  ix.  16,  6  ; 
roman,  alone  or  with  avyaya;  vara, 
alone  or  with  avyaya,  etc. 


PaSu  ] 


SPEAR— A  PRINCE— ANIMAL 


509 


sheep's  wool,  whether  woven  or  plaited  is  not  certain,  for  the 
expressions  used  are  too  vague  to  be  decisive,  though  Zimmer6 
thinks  hvaramsi6  points  to  plaiting. 

5  Altindisches  Leben,  278,  n.  6  ix.  3,  2  ;  63,  4. 


Pavira,  according  to  the  Nirukta,1  denotes  a  '  lance.'  The 
epithet  derived  from  this  word,  pavlravant  or  pavirava,  which  is 
found  in  the  Atharvaveda2  and  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas,3  is  used 
of  the  plough,  apparently  in  the  sense  of  '  having  a  metal 
share.'  The  same  epithet  occurs  in  the  Rigveda4  applied  to  a 
man,  in  the  sense  of  '  having  a  goad '  or  '  having  a  spear.' 


1  xii.  30.     In  Rv.  i.  174,  4,  pavirava 
seems  to  mean  *  thunderbolt. ' 

2  iii-  17.  3- 

*  Pavlravant,    Vajasaneyi    Samhita, 
xii.   71 ;  pavirava,  Taittiriya  Samhita, 


10,  2,  5,  6  ;  Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  7, 
12;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xvi.  11. 

4  x.  60,  3. 

Cf.  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  116. 


Paviru  appears  in  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda1  as  a  RuSama, 
being  a  prince  or  at  least  a  wealthy  noble. 

1  viii.  51,  9  =  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxxiii.  82. 


Pa6u  means  '  animal '  generally,  including  man.  There  is 
frequent  mention1  of  the  five  sacrificial  animals — the  horse,  the 
cow,  the  sheep,  the  goat,  and  man.  Seven  such  domestic 
animals  are  spoken  of  in  the  Atharvaveda2  and  later  ;3  probably, 
as  Whitney4  observes,  merely  as  a  sacred  mystic  number,  not, 
as  the  commentator5  explains,  the  usual  five  with  the  ass  and 
the  camel  added.     Animals  are  also  referred  to  as  ubhayadant 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  2,  10,  1-4; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xvi.  17  ;  Maitrayani 
Samhita,  ii.  7,  17  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xiii.  47-51.  Cf.  Av.  xi.  2,  9;  Taittiriya 
Samhita,  iv.  3,  10,  1-3;  v.  5,  1,  1.  2; 
vi.  5,  10,  1  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xiv.  28-31,  etc.  ; 

2  Av.  iii.  io,  6. 

3  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  8,  4,  16 ; 
ix.  3,  1,  20;  xii.  8,  3,  13  (where  they 
are  called  jdgatah,  perhaps  as  number- 


ing   12) ;    Paiicavimsa   Brahmana,    x. 

4  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  103. 

5  On  Av.  iii.  10,  6.  The  St.  Peters- 
burg Dictionary  suggests  '  mule  '  and 
1  ass '  as  the  two  making  up  seven 
(cf.  Mahabharata,  vi.  165  et  seq.). 
Zimmer's  view  (Altindisches  Leben,  76) 
is  that  'goat,'  'sheep,'  'ox,'  'horse,' 
'dog,'  'ass,'  and  'camel'  or  'mule,' 
are  meant. 


5io 


CLASSIFICATION  OF  ANIMALS 


[  PaSu 


and  anyatodant.  They  are  further6  classified  as  those  which 
take  hold  with  the  hand  (hastadandh),  man  (purusa),  elephant 
(hastin),  and  ape  (markata),  and  those  which  grasp  by  the  mouth 
(mukhdddnah).  Another  division  is  that  of  biped  (dvipdd)  and 
quadruped  (catuspad).7  Man  is  a  biped;8  he  is  the  first  (pra- 
thama)  of  the  beasts  ;9  he  alone  of  animals  lives  a  hundred 
years  (satayus),10  and  he  is  king  of  the  animals.11  He  possesses 
speech  (vac)  in  conjunction  with  the  other  animals.12  In  the 
Aitareya  Aranyaka13  an  elaborate  distinction  is  drawn  between 
vegetables,  animals,  and  man  in  point  of  intellect. 

Of  animals  apart  from  man  a  threefold  division  is  offered  in 
the  Rigveda14 — into  those  of  the  air  (vdyavya),  those  of  the 
jungle  (aranya),  and  those  of  the  village  (grdrnya),  or  tame 
animals.  The  division  into  aranya  and  grdrnya  animals  is  quite 
common.15  In  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas16  is  found  a  division 
into  eka-sapha,  'whole-hoofed';  ksudra,  'small';  and  aranya, 
*  wild,'  the  two  former  classes  denoting  the  tame  animals.16 
The  horse  and  the  ass  are  eka-sapha  ;17  the  ksudra  are  the  sheep 
the  goat,  and  the  ox :  this  distinction  being  parallel  to  that  o; 
ubhayadant  and  anyatodant.18  Zimmer19  sees  in  a  passage  of  the 
Atharvaveda20  a  division  of  wild  animals  (aranya)  into  five 
classes :  (i)  those  of  the  jungle  described  as  the  '  dread  beasts 


6  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  4,  5,  7 ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iv.  5,  7  (where 
purusa  must  be  read  for  parusa). 

7  Rv.  iii.  62,  14;  Av.  iii.  34,  1,  etc. 
Zimmer,  73,  n.,  suggests  that  the 
division  is  Indo  -  European,  as  the 
Inguvenic  tables  make  a  distinction 
between  dupursus  and  peturpursus . 

8  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  2,  10,  1.  2 ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvii.  47.  48. 

9  £atapatha  Brahmana,  vi.  2,  1,  18; 
vii.  5,  2,  6. 

i°  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  2,  6,  3  ; 
£atapatha  Brahmana,  vii.  2,  5,  17. 

11  Kathaka  Samhita,  xx.  10;  Sata- 
patba  Brahmana,  iv.  5,  5,  7.  Cf. 
Weber,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  18,  274. 

12  Rv.  viii.  100,  11. 

13  ii.  3,  2,  with  Keith's  note. 


"  x.  90,  8. 

J6  Av.  iii.  31,  3.  Cf.  ii.  34,  1,  with 
Whitney's  note,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  78  ;  xi.  2,  24  ;  Maitrayan 
Samhita,  iii.  2,  3 ;  9,  7 ;  Kathaka 
Samhita,  xiii.  12  ;  Taittiriya  Aranyaka, 
iii.  2,  29.  32 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana 
ii.  7,  1,  8;  2,  8.  Cf.  xi.  8,  3,  2,  where 
there  is  reference  to  animals  being  tiec 
up  at  night  in  their  stalls. 

18  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  3,  10,  2 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xiv.  30. 

17  Zimmer,  74. 

18  Cf.  Av.  v.  31,  3 ;  Taittiriya  Sam 
hita,  ii.  2, 6,  3,  with  Taittiriya  Samhita 
ii.  1,  1,  5;  v.  1,  1,  3;  2,  6. 

18  Op.cit.,  77,  78. 
20  xi.  2,  24.  25,  compared  with  xii.  1 
49-  5i- 


Pastyasad  ] 


HERDSMA  N— OX— IN  MA  TE 


5" 


which  are  in  the  wood '  (mrga  bhirnd  vane  hitdh)  ;  (2)  winged 
creatures,  represented  by  the  Hamsa,  'gander,'  Suparna, 
'eagle,'  Sakuna,  'bird';  (3)  amphibia — Simsumara,  'alligator,' 
and  Ajagrara,  'crocodile'  (?) ;  (4)  'fish,'  Purlkaya,  Jasa, 
and  Matsya;  (5)  insects  and  worms  (described  as  rajasah). 
But  this  division  is  more  ingenious  than  probable,  and  it  is 
ignored  by  both  Bloomfield21  and  Whitney.22 


21  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  631. 

22  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
633>  634. 


Cf.   Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,   72- 


77- 


Pa&u-pa  denotes  '  herdsman '  in  the  Rigveda.1     Metaphori- 
cally the  term  is  applied  to  Ptisan.2 

1  i.    114,    9;     144,    6;     iv.    6,    4  ;   I       2  vi.  58, 2.    Cf.  of  Pusan  and  Revati, 
x.  142,  2.  I  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  1,  2,  12. 


I.  Pastha-vah  occurs  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas1  meaning 
an  ox,  four  years  old,  according  to  the  commentators.  This 
qualification  is,  however,  very  doubtful,  for  Pasthauhi,  '  cow,' 
a  word  occurring  quite  frequently,2  is  in  one  passage3  accom- 
panied by  the  adjective  prathama-garbhdh,. '  having  a  first  calf,' 
which  disproves  the  theory  of  the  age  adopted  by  the  com- 
mentators. 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iv.  3,  5,  2 ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xiv.  9  ;  xviii.  27  ; 
xxi.  17;  xxiv.  13.  28.  29,  etc. 

2  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  I,  6,  3 ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xi.  2  ;  xii.  8 ;  Vaja- 


saneyi Samhita,  xviii.  27 ;  Taittiriya 
Brahmana,  i.  7,  3,  3 ;  8,  3,  2;  ii.  7,  2, 
2,  etc. 

3  Satapatha    Brahmana,    iv.    6,    1, 
n. 


2.  Pastha-vah  is   mentioned  as  a  seer  of  Samans  in  the 
Pancavimsa  Brahmana.1 

1  xii.  5,  11.     Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  2,  160. 


Pastya-sad  ('  sitting  in  the  house ')  occurs  in  one  passage  of 
the  Rigveda,1  where  the  sense  seems  to  be  'inmate,'  'com- 
panion.' 

1  vi.  51,  9.  Cf.  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. ;  Pischel,  Vedische 
Studien,  2,  211. 


512 


DWELLING 


[  Pastya 


Pastya  (fern,  pi.)  is  a  word  occurring  in  several  passages  of 
the  Rigveda.1  Roth2  ascribes  to  it  the  meaning  of  *  house'  or 
*  dwelling,'  in  the  wide  sense  of  the  term,  as  well  as  that  of  the 
1  family '  living  in  the  house ;  and  this  view  is  accepted  by 
Zimmer.3  On  the  other  hand,  Pischel4  finds  in  two  of  the 
passages6  usually  referred  to  Pastya  the  neuter  Pastya,  which 
appears  in  Pastya-sad  and  in  Pastya-vant  (where  the  length 
of  the  second  syllable  is  not  primitive),  and  which  is  certainly 
found  in  the  Rigveda6  in  the  metaphorical  sense  of '  dwelling,' 
ascribed  to  it  in  the  Naighantuka.7  In  the  other  passages8  he 
thinks  the  word  means  '  rivers '  or  '  waters ';  in  particular, 
where  Soma  in  the  middle  of  the  Pastyas9  is  spoken  of,  he 
sees  a  reference  to  Kuruksetra,  with  its  several  rivers,10  Apaya, 
Drsadvati,  and  Sarasvati  (cf.  2.  Pastyavant).  In  some  passages11 
he  sees  in  Pastya  the  proper  name  of  a  stream,  just  as  Sindhu 
primarily  means  '  river,'  then  the  '  Indus.' 


1  Rv.  i.  25, 10  ;  40,  7  ;  164, 30  ;  iv.  1, 
11 ;  vi.  49,  9 ;  vii.  97,  5 ;  ix.  65,  23  ; 
x.  46,  6.  See  also  iv.  55,  3  ;  viii.  27,  5, 
where  Pastya  appears  as  a  goddess. 

a  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  Altindisches  Leben,  149.  Cf.  Weber, 
Uber  den  Rajasuya,  43,  n.  4  ;  63. 

*  Vedische  Studien,  2,  211-222.  So 
Geldner,  Rigveda,  Glossar,  107. 

6  vi.  49,  9 ;  vii.  97,  5,  where  the 
sense  is  '  householder  '  (grha-stha  or 
grhin,  as  Sayana  renders  it). 

6  x.  96,  10.  11.  In  x.  96,  10,  Roth 
takes  pastyoh  to  denote  the  two  parts  of 
the  Soma  press,  but  Pischel,  2,  211, 
accepts  Sayana's  rendering  '  heaven 
and  earth.'  In  the  compounds  tri- 
pastya  of  Agni,  Rv.  viii.  39,  8 ;  vaja- 
pastya  of  Pusan,  vi.   58,   2,   of  Soma, 


ix.  98,  12  ;  and  vlra-pastya,  v.  50,  4,  the 
primitive  word  may  very  well  be  pastya, 
not  pastya. 

7  iii.  4,  misquoted  by  Sayana  on 
Rv.  i.  151,  2,  as  applying  to  pastya, 
whereas  it  really  refers  to  pastya. 

8  Rv.  i.  25,  10  =  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
i.  8,  16,  1  =Maitrayani  Samhita,  i.  6,  2 ; 
ii.  6,  12  ;  7,  16 ;  iv.  4,  6  =  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  x.  27;  Rv.  i.  40,  7;  164,  30 
(used  of  Agni's  home) ;  iv.  1,  11  ; 
ix.  65,  23  ;  x.  46,  6  ;  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
i.  8,  12,  i  =  Maitrayani  Samhita,  ii.  6,  8 
=  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  x.  7. 

9  Rv.  ix.  65,  23. 

10  Rv.  iii.  23,  4. 

11  Rv.  iv.  55,  3 ;  viii.  27,  5  ;  and  in 
pastyavant  in  ix.  97,  18. 


i.  Pastya-vant,  explained  in  the  Pada  text  as  Pastya-vant, 
occurs  in  several  passages  of  the  Rigveda.     In  two  of  them1 


1  i.  151,  2 ;  ix.  97,  18  ;  but  the  latter 
passage  is  explained  by  Pischel  as 
referring  to  Pastya,  the  river,  and  by 


Bohtlingk,  Dictionary,  s.v.,  as  'kept  in 
the  stall.' 


Pakadurva  ] 


DUST— EDIBLE  MILLET 


513 


a  rich  householder  seems  meant,  and  in  the  two  others  reference 
to  a  ■  house '  is  clear.2 

2  Barkis,    Rv.    ii.    11,    16,    'of    the  house';    ksaydn  pastydvatah,   iv.    54,   5, 
•  abodes  having  (fixed)  habitations.' 
Cf.  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  2,  212. 


2.  Pastya-vant  occurs  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda1  in  the 
locative  parallel  with  Susoma,  Saryanavant,  and  Arjika.  It 
must  apparently  denote  a  place,  as  Pischel2  argues,  probably 
corresponding  to  the  locality  'in  the  middle  of  the  streams' 
(madhye  pastyandtn),  elsewhere3  referred  to  as  the  home  of  Soma. 
Pischel4  suggests  that  Patiala  is  meant,  though  he  does  not  lay 
any  stress  on  the  similarity  of  name.  In  the  north  of  Patiala 
there  are  hills  where  the  Soma  might  have  grown.  Roth5 
thought  that  something  connected  with  the  Soma  press  was 
meant. 


1  vni.  7,  29. 

2  Vedische  Studien,  2, 


209. 


3  Rv.  ix.  65,  23. 

4  Op.  cit.,  2,  219. 

5  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  2. 
Max  Muller,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East, 


32,  260,  398,  399,  takes  Pastyavant 
as  a  place-name,  but  thinks  that  pastyd 
denotes  'hamlet,'  or,  as  an  epithet  of 
Aditi,  refers  to  her  as  a  '  housewife ' 
(Rv.  iv.  55,  3 ;  viii.  27,  5). 


Pamsu  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  later2  denotes  'dust'  or 
'  sand,'  usually  in  the  plural.  Among  the  portents  enumerated 
in  the  Adbhuta  Brahmana3  is  a  rain  of  dust  or  sand  (pdmsu- 
varsa),  a  phenomenon  not  rare  in  India.4 


1  vii.  109,  2  ;  xii.  i,  26. 

2  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  ii.  6,  io,  2 ; 
Nirukta,  xii.  19,  etc. 

3  vi.  8  (Indische  Studien,  r,  40).     Cf. 
Varahamihira,  Brhatsamhita,  xxii.  6. 


4  The  adjective  pdmsura  is  found  in 
Rv.  i.  22,  17,  with  a  variant,  pamsula, 
Samaveda,  i.  3,  1,  3,  9.  Cf.  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  iv.  5,  1,  9. 


Paka-durva  is,  in  a  verse  of  the  Rigveda,1  included  with 
Kiyambu  and  VyalkaSa  among  the  plants  used  for  growing  on 
the  spot  where  the  corpse  of  the  dead  man  has  been  consumed 
with  fire.2    The  verse  is  repeated  in  the  Taittiriya  Aranyaka3 

1  x.  16,  13.  I   of  Philology,  11,  342-350;  Journal  of  the 

2  See  Bloomfield,   American  Journal  \   American  Oriental  Society,  15,  xxxix. 

3  vi.  4,  i,  2. 

VOL.  I.  33 


514      ULCER— FIELD-RAT—KING  OF  PAftCALA    [  Pakasthaman 

with  the  variant  Kyambu.  In  the  Atharvaveda4  the  word  is 
read  6andadurva.  Pakadurva  is  probably,  as  Sayana  under- 
stands it,  paripakva-durvd,  '  ripe  or  edible  millet.'  Sandadurva 
is  explained  by  the  commentator5  in  various  ways,  as  millet 
'  having  egg-shaped  roots '  (i.e.,  sanda,  not  sanda),  or  as  '  having 
long  joints,'  with  the  additional  remark  that  it  was  called  brhad- 
durva, '  large  millet.'  In  the  Taittirlya  Aranyaka,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  commentary  explains  Pakadurva  as  small  millet. 

4  xviii.  3,  6.  5  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  850. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  70. 

Paka-sthaman  Kaurayana  is  celebrated  as  a  generous  don< 
in  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda.1     Ludwig2  suggests,  without  much 
reason,  that  he  may  have  been  a  king  of  the  Anus. 

1  viii.  3,  21.  24.  2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  160. 

Pakaru  is  mentioned  as  a  disease,  together  with  Visucika 
and  Argas,  'haemorrhoids,'  in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita.1  Its 
nature  is  unknown;  the  etymology2  points  to  the  sense  of 
*  developed  sores,'  '  ulcers.' 

1  xii.  97.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  I  2  From  paka>  'maturity,'  and  aru  = 
Leben,  393.  |  arus,  '  sore. ' 

Pahktra  is  the  name  of  an  animal  mentioned  in  the  list  of 
victims  at  the  Asvamedha,  or  *  horse-sacrifice,'  in  the  Yajurveda 
Samhitas.1    The  *  field-rat '  seems  to  be  meant. 

1  Maitrayani  Samhita,  Hi.  14,  7  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  26.  Cf.  Zimmer, 
A  Itindisches  Leben,  85. 

Panca-janya,  'relating  to  the  five  peoples.'  See  Paiicajanah. 

Pancala  means  a  '  king  of  the  Pancala  people,'  and  is  applied 
to  Durmukha  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana1  and  to  Sona  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana.2  The  term  is  also  found  in  the  Jaiminiya 
Upanisad  Brahmana.3     See  also  Pancala. 

1  viii.  23.  I       3  iii.  29,  1.   Cf.  Kathaka  Anukramani 

a  xiii.  5,  4,  /.  1  £  J  in  Indische  Studien,  3  460. 


Patalya  ]        PATRONYMICS— A  PLANT— GARMENT  515 

Paiici,  '  descendant  of  Pancan,'  is  the  name  of  a  teacher 
mentioned  with  disapproval  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana.1 

1  i.  2,  5,  9;  ii.  1,  4,  27.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  434. 

Patava,  '  descendant  of  Patu,'  is  a  patronymic  of  Cakra  in 
the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (xii.  8,  1,  17;  9,  3,  1). 


Pata  is  mentioned  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  in  the  Kausika 
Sutra.2  It  is  assumed  by  the  commentator  to  be  identical 
with  the  later  Patha,  the  plant  Clypea  hernandifolia,  which  was 
much  used  medicinally,  and  is  still  so  used  at  the  present  day 
according  to  Roth.3  Very  possibly  the  word  should  be  read  as 
Patha. 


1  11.  27,  4. 

2  xxxvii.  1 ;    xxxviii.  18.     Cf.  Rgvi- 
dhana,  iv.  12,  1. 

3  Quoted    in  Whitney,   Translation 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  68.     Cf.  Weber, 


Indische  Studien,  13,  190 ;  17,  266 ; 
Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda, 
305,  n.  1 ;  Proceedings  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  May,  1885,  xlii-xliv. 


Pani-g'hna,  *  hand-clapper,'  is  enumerated  among  the  list  of 
victims  at  the  Purusamedha  ('  human  sacrifice ')  in  the  Yajur- 
veda.1  Presumably  a  man  who  drives  away  birds  from  the 
fields  by  making  a  noise  is  intended. 

1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  20  ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  15,  1. 

Pandva  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (v.  3,  5,  21)  denotes  an 
uncoloured  woollen  garment. 


Patalya  is  found  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda1  meaning 
some  part  of  the  chariot  What  it  was  is  quite  uncertain. 
Hopkins2  suggests  that,  as  in  the  Epic,  it  was  possibly  a  piece 
of  wood  on  the  axle  to  hold  the  pole  of  the  car. 

1  iii.  53,  17.  1   mer,  Altindisches  Leben,  251;  Geldner, 

3  Journal    of   the    American    Oriental   |  Rigveda,  Glossar,  108. 
Society,  13,  242,  243  ;  20,  224.     Cf.  Zim-   | 

33—2 


5i6 


DRINKING  VESSEL— FOOT 


[  Patra 


Patra,  primarily  a  *  drinking  vessel '  (from  pa,  i  to  drink ') 
denotes  a  vessel  generally  both  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later.2  It 
was  made  either  of  wood3  or  clay.4  In  some  passages5  the 
word  is,  according  to  Roth,  used  to  indicate  a  measure.  The 
feminine  Patri  occasionally  occurs6  in  the  sense  of  '  vessel.' 


1  i.  82,  4;  no,  5;  162,  13  (to  hold 
the  broth  from  the  flesh  of  the  horse)  ; 
175.  1 ;  "•  37,  4 1  vi-  27>  6,  etc. 

2  Av.  iv.  17,  4 ;  vi.  142,  1 ;  ix.  6,  17 ; 
xii.  3,  25.  36;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  1, 
6,  2  ;  vi.  3,  4,  1 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xvi.  62 ;  xix.  86,  etc. 

3  Rv.  i.  175,  3. 

4  Av.  iv.  17,  4. 


5  Av.  x.  10,  9 ;  xii.  3,  30 ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  xiii.  4,  1,  5;  Sankhayana 
Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  1,  7,  etc. 

6  Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  17  ;  Sata- 
patha Brahmana,  i.  1,  2,  8 ;  ii.  5,  3,  6  ; 
6,  2,  7 ;  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
v.  8,  2. 

Cf.  Zimmer.  Altindisches  Leben,  271. 


Pathya,  a  word  occurring  only  once  in  the  Rigveda,1  is 
either  an  epithet  meaning  '  being  in  heaven  '  (pathas),  or  a 
patronymic,  as  Sayana  interprets  it,  of  Vrsan. 

1  vi.  16,  15.     Cf.  Satapatha  Brahmana,  vi.  4,  2,  4;  Max  Miiller,  Sacred  Books 
of  the  East,  32,  153. 

i.  Pada  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  later2  denotes  the  '  foot ' 
an  animal,  a  bird,  and  other  creatures. 

1  xiv.  1,  60.  I   Satapatha  Brahmana,  xii.  8,  3,  6,  etc 

2  Aitareya   Brahmana,   viii.    5.    12 ;   I  Kausitaki  Upanisad,  i.  5. 

2.  Pada,  as  a  measure  of  length,  denotes  '  foot '  in  the  Sa 
patha  Brahmana.1  The  term  is  occasionally2  used  to  expre 
a  measure  of  weight.  As  a  fraction  it  means  a  '  quarter,'  a 
sense  derived  from  that  of  '  foot '  of  a  quadruped  (just  as  sapha, 
the  divided  hoof,  comes  to  mean  an  *  eighth '). 


1  vi.  5,  3,  2;  vii.  2,  1,  7;  viii.  7,  2, 
17 ;  Asvalayana  Srauta  Sutra,  vi.  10, 
etc. 


2  Nirukta,     ii.     7 ;     Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad,  iii.  1,  2. 

3  Rv.  x.  90,  3.  4. 


3.  Pada  is  the  regular  expression  for  a  '  quarter  verse '  in  the 
Brahmanas.1  This  sense  is  merely  a  limitation  of  '  quarter '  = 
the  *  foot '  of  a  quadruped. 

1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iv.  4  ;  Kausi-   I  xi.  6;  Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  i.  2,  1  ; 
taki  Brahmana,  xxvi.  5;  Nirukta,  vii.  9;    |  x.  6,  9,  etc. 


Payu  ]  DRINK— FOOT-BATH— BAD  SEASON— SCAB— GUARD  517 


Pana,  *  drink,'  occurs  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  and  the 

Upanisads.2 


1  xiii.  4,  2,  17. 


2  Brhadaranyaka    Upanisad,    iv.    1,    |  etc 


43  ;    Chandogya   Upanisad,  viii.  2,  7, 


Panta  occurs  several  times  in  the  Rigveda,1  apparently2 
meaning  '  drink,'  *  beverage  '  (cf.  Pana).  Geldner,3  however, 
thinks  that  in  one  passage4  Panta  is  the  name  of  a  prince. 


1  1.  122,  1 ;  155,  1 ;  viii.  92,  1 ;  ix. 
65,  28  (a  very  doubtful  passage);  x. 
88,  1. 

2  So    Nirukta,    vii.    25  ;    Roth,    St. 


Petersburg    Dictionary,    s.v.  ;    Olden- 
berg,  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  122,  123. 

3  Vedische  Studien,   2,  139 ;  Rigveda, 
Glossar,  108, 


Pan-nejana  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  denotes  a  'vessel 
for  washing  the  feet.' 

1  iii.  8,  2,  1  ;  9,  3,  27 ;  xiii.  5,  2,  1. 


Papa-yaksma.    See  Yaksma. 

Papa-sama,  a  'bad  season,'  is  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita1 
opposed  to  Punya-sama,  a  '  good  season.' 

1  iii.  3,  8,  4.     Cf.  Weber,  Naxatra,  2,  342. 

Paman  occurs  in  the  Atharvaveda1  as  the  name  of  a  skin 
disease.  The  derivative  adjective,  Pamana,  '  suffering  from 
skin  disease,'  is  found  in  the  later  Samhitas  and  the  Brahmanas.2 
Since  it  is  mentioned  as  an  accompaniment  of  fever,  probably 
a  cutaneous  eruption  or  scab  consequent  on  fever  is  meant. 


1  v.  22,  12.  Cf.  for  the  reading, 
Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, 261.  See  also  Chandogya  Upani- 
sad, iv.  1,  8. 

2  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  1,  3,  8 ; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxiii.  4  ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  iii.  2,  1,  31. 


Cf.  Grohmann,  Indische  Studien,  9, 
401  et  seq.  ;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben, 
388  ;  Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities, 
421,  n.  ;  Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  450,  451  ;  Atharvaveda, 
63. 


i.  Payu,  meaning  'guard,'  'protector,'  occurs  several  times 
in  the  Rigveda.1 

1  i.  147,  3  ;  ii.  1,  7 ;  iv.  2,  6 ;  4,  3.  12 ;  vi.  15,  8 ;  viii.  18,  2  ;  60,  19  ;  x.  100,  9. 


5i8 


A  POET— RIVER  BANK— DOVE— A  PEOPLE        [  Payu 


2.  Payu  is  found  in  the  Rigveda1  as  the  name  of  a  poet,  a 
Bharadvaja.  In  the  Brhaddevata2  he  is  credited  with  assisting 
Abhyavartin  Cayamana  and  Prastoka  Sarnjaya  by  conse- 
crating their  weapons  with  a  hymn.3 


1  vi.  47,  24.    Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation 
of  the  Rigveda,  3,  128. 


2  v.  124  et  seq.,  with  Macdonell's  notes. 

3  vi.  75  (the  'battle  '  hymn). 


Para,  in  accordance  with  its  derivation  (pr,  *  bring  across'), 
denotes  the  '  farther  bank '  of  a  river  or  stream,  in  which  sense1 
it  occurs  in  the  Rigveda2  and  later.3 


1  It  also  often  has  the  generalized 
snse  of  'extreme  limit'  or  'end,'  as 

in  i.  92,  6   (tamasas,   •  of  darkness ') ; 

v.  54,  10  (adhvanah,  '  of  a  road '). 

a  i.  121,  13  (navyandm,  '  of  streams ') ; 

viii.  96,  11  (nadindm)  ;  i.  167,  2  (samud- 

rasya);  x.  155,  3  (sindhoh),  etc. 


3  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vii.  5,  1,  2.  3; 
Kathaka  Samhita,  xxxiii.  5  ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  iii.  6,  2,  4  (salilasya)  ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  viii.  21  {para-hama, 
*  desiring  the  farther  bank  '),  etc. 


Para£avya,  'descendant  of  Parasu,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
Tipindipa  in  the  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra  (xvi.  n,  20).  Cf. 
Par£u. 

1.  Paravata  occurs  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the  Asvamedha 
('horse  sacrifice'),  in  the  Yajurveda,1  meaning  'turtle-dove.' 

1  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  6 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  25. 


2.  Paravata  occurs  in  several  passages  of  the  Rigveda. 
Roth1  thinks  that  in  most  places2  it  means  'coming  from  a 
distance,'  but  in  two  passages3  he  regards  it  as  the  proper 
name  of  a  people  on  the  Yamuna  (Jumna).  It  is  certain  that 
in  the  Pancavim^a  Brahmana  the  Paravatas  are  a  people  on 
that  river  (cf.  TuraSravas).  Hillebrandt4  sees  in  all  the 
passages5  the  name  of  a  people,  comparing  the  Uapvrjrat  of 


1  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

a  Rv.  v.  52,  II;  viii.  100,  6;  Av. 
xx.  135,  14;  paravata  - ghrii  of  the 
Sarasvati,  Rv.  vi.  61,  2. 

3  Rv.  viii.  34, 18 ;  Pancavimsa  Brah- 
mana, ix.  4,  11.    Cf.  Hopkins,  Transac- 


tions of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of  Arts 
and  Sciences,  15,  53. 

*  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  97  et  seq.: 
3,  310,  following  Brunnhofer,  Iran  und 
Turan,  99. 

5  See  notes  2  and  3. 


Paraiarya  ] 


METRONYMICS—PA  TRONYMIC 


519 


Ptolemy,0  who  apparently  were  settled  on  the  northern  border 
of  Gedrosia,  or  the  Hapovrcu,  who  were  found  in  Apeta*  He 
suggests  that  they  were  originally  *  mountaineers '  (cf.  Parvata). 
Ludwig8  holds  a  similar  view,  and  Geldner9  recognizes  a  people 
as  meant.  The  mention  of  the  Sarasvati  in  connexion  with 
the  Paravatas2  in  the  Rigveda  accords  generally  with  their 
position  on  the  Yamuna  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana.3 


6  vi.  20,  3.  It  is  suggested  by  Hille- 
brandt  that  the  'Avap^rat  of  Herodotus, 
iii.  91,  may  be  the  same. 

7  Ptolemy,  vi.  17. 

8  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  162, 
197. 


9  Rigveda,  Glossar,  109. 

Cf.  Hopkins,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  17,  91 ;  Max  Miiller, 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32,  316. 


ParaSari-kaundini-putra  is  mentioned  in  the  last  Vamsa 
(list  of  teachers)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad  (vi.  4,  30), 
in  the  Madhyamdina  recension,  as  a  pupil  of  Gargiputra. 


Para£ari-putra,  '  son  of  a  female  descendant  of  Paraiara,'  is 
mentioned  in  the  last  Vams'a  (list  of  teachers)  in  the  Brhad- 
aranyaka Upanisad  as  a  pupil  of  Katyayaniputra,1  of  Aupasva- 
tiputra,1  of  Vatsiputra,2  of  Varkaruniputra,3  and  of  Gargl- 
putra.4     Different  men  are  no  doubt  meant. 


1  vi.  5,  1,  Kanva. 
3  vi.  5,  2,  Kanva. 


3  vi.  4,  31,  Madhyamdina. 
*  vi.  4,  30,  Madhyamdina. 


Paraiarya,  'descendant  of  ParaSapa,'  is  mentioned  in  the 
first  two  Vamsas  (lists  of  teachers)  of  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad  as  a  pupil  of  Jatukarnya1  or  of  Bharadvaja.2  A 
Paraiarya  is  also  mentioned  as  a  pupil  of  Baijavapayana,3  and 
Vyasa  Paraiarya  is  the  pupil  of  Visvaksena  according  to  the 
Vamsa  at  the  end  of  the  Samavidhana  Brahmana.4  See  also 
Asadha,  Jayanta,  VipaScit,  Sudatta. 


1  ii.  6,  3 ;  iv.  6,  3,  Kanva ;  ii.  5,  21 ; 
iv.  5,  27,  Madhyamdina. 

2  ii.  5,  20;  iv.  5,  26,  Madhyamdina; 
ii.  6,  2 ;  iv.  6,  2.  3,  Kanva. 


3  ii.  6,  2,  Kanva. 

Cf.  Taittiriya  Aranyaka,  i.  9,  2. 

4  Jaiminiya     Upanisad     Brahmana, 
iii.  41    1. 


520  PATRONYMICS— CYCLIC  TALE    [  Parasaryayana 

Parasaryayana  is  mentioned  in  the  first  two  Vamsas  (lists 
of  teachers)  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad1  as  a  pupil  of 
Parasarya. 

1  ii.  5,  21 ;  iv.  5,  27  (Madhyamdina  =  ii.  6,  3  ;  iv.  6,  3,  Kanva). 

Parikuta  is  an  obscure  word — probably  corrupt — occurring 
in  a  verse  cited  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana  (viii.  22,  7),  and 
apparently  meaning  *  attendant.' 


Pariksita,  'descendant  of  Pariksit,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
Janamejaya  in  the  Aitareya  Brahmana1  and  the  Satapatha 
Brahmana.2  The  Pariksitiyas  appear  in  the  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana3 and  the  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra4  as  performers  of  the 
horse  sacrifice.  In  a  Gatha  there  cited  they  are  called  Pari- 
ksitas.  Apparently  they  were  the  brothers  of  Janamejaya,  named 
Ugrasena,  Bhimasena,  and  Srutasena.  In  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad6  the  question  whither  they  have  gone  is  made  the 
subject  of  a  philosophical  discussion.  It  is  clear  that  the  family 
had  passed  away  before  the  time  of  the  Upanisad,  and  it  is  also 
clear  that  there  had  been  some  serious  scandal  mingled  with 
their  greatness  which  they  had,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Brahmins, 
atoned  for  by  their  horse  sacrifice  with  its  boundless  gifts  to 
the  priests.  Weber6  sees  in  this  the  germ  of  the  Epic  stories 
which  are  recorded  in  the  Mahabharata. 

The  verses  relating  to  Pariksit  in  the  Atharvaveda7  are  calle< 
Pariksityah  in  the  Brahmanas.8 


1  vii.  27  and  34  ;  viii.  11. 

2  xiii.  5,  4,  1.  Cf.  Gopatha  Brah- 
mana, i.  2,  6;  ii.  6,  12. 

3  xiii.  5,  4,  3. 

4  xvi.  9,  7.  5  iii.  3,  1. 

6  Indian  Literature,  125, 126  ;  135,  136. 
The  later  legend  of  the  Pariksitas  and 
Vamadeva's  mares  is  dealt  with  by 
Weber  in  Vedische  Beitrdge  (1894). 


7  xx.  127,  7-10 ;  ^ankhayana  Sraut 
Sutra,     xii.     17  ;     Scheftelowitz, 
Apokryphen  des  Rgveda,  156,  157. 

8  Aitareya    Brahmana,   vi.   32,    10 
Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xxx.  5  ;  Gopaths 
Brahmana,  ii.  6,  12  ;  Weber,  op.  cit., 
136,  n.  144. 


Pari-plava,  '  cyclic,'  is  a  term  applied  to  the  Akhyana,  01 
'tale/   which   is   to   be    recited    at    the    AsVamedha   ('  hors< 


Parthava  ]  HOUSEHOLD  UTENSILS— PATRONYMICS  521 

sacrifice'),  and  to  be  repeated  at  intervals  throughout  the  year. 
It  is  mentioned  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  and  in  the 
Sutras.2 

1  xiii.  4,  3,  2.  15.  I   Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xvi.  1,  26; 

2  Asvalayana    Srauta  Sutra,    x.   6  ;    I  2,36;  Latyayana  Srauta  Sutra,  ix.  9, 11. 


Parl-nahya  denotes  '  household  utensils '  in  the  Taittiriya 
Samhita,1  where  it  is  said  that  the  wife  (patni),  as  mistress  of 
the  house,  has  charge  of  all  these.2 

1  vi.  2,  1,  1.  I  variant   form  of  pari-nahya  in  Manu, 

2  The    word    occurs    later    in    the   |  ix.  11. 


Parusna,  occurring  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the  Asvamedha 
('  horse  sacrifice ')  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas,1  appears  to 
mean  some  kind  of  bird. 

1  MaitrayanI  Samhita,  iii.  14,  4 ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  24. 


Parovarya-vid  in  the  Nirukta  (xiii.  12)  denotes  '  knowers  of 
tradition.' 


Parna-valki,  *  descendant  of  Parnavalka,'  is  the  patronymic 
of  Nig*ada  in  the  Vam£a  Brahmana.1 

1  Indische  Studien,  4,  372  ;  Max  Miiller,  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  443. 


Parthava,  'descendant  of  Prthu,'  occurs  once  in  the  Rig- 
veda,1  where  the  Parthavas  are  mentioned  as  generous  donors. 
The  passage  is  somewhat  obscure,  as  there  is  a  reference2  to  a 
defeat  of  the  TurvaSas  and  the  Vrcivants  by  Srfijaya  Daiva- 
vata,  followed  in  the  next  verse  by  the  praise  of  the  bounty  to 
the  singer  of  Abhyavartin  Cayamana,  who  was  clearly  a 
Parthava,  and  who,  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  hymn,  has  been 
referred  to  as  victorious  over  Vara£ikha.  It  is  uncertain 
whether,  as  Zimmer3  suggests,  the  two  princes,  Abhyavartin 

1  vi.  27,  8.  2  vi.  27,  7.  3  Altindisches  Leben,  133,  134. 


522      PATRONYMICS— TEXTBOOK— MESSENGER  [ParthaSrava 

Cayamana  and  Srnjaya  Daivavata,  are  identical  or  not.4  That 
Parthava  has  any  direct  connexion  with  the  Parthians,  as  held 
by  Brunnhofer,  is  most  improbable.5    Cf.  ParSu. 


- 


*  Cf.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie, 
I,  105. 
5  Cf.    Ludwig,   Translation    of    the 


Rigveda,   3,    196  et  seq.      Herodotos, 
iii.  93,  mentions  the  Il&pdoc. 


Partha-Sravasa,  'descendant  of  Prthu-sravas,'  is  found  as 
the  name  of  a  demon  in  the  Jaiminiya  Upanisad  Brahmana.1 

1  iv.  26,  15.  This  form  of  the  name  I  Kauslka  Sutra,  ix.  10  ;  xvii.  27.  But 
is  supported  by  its  occurrence  in  the  |  Parthu-  is  also  possible. 

Parthya,  ■  descendant  of  Prthi,'  is  the  patronymic  of  some 
donor  in  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda.1  The  form  of  the  name  in 
the  Asvalayana  Srauta  Sutra2  is  Partha. 

1  x«  93.  15.  a  xii.  10.     Cf  the  AnukramanI  on  Rv.  x.  93. 

Parvati,  'descendant  of  Parvata,'  is  the  patronymic  of 
Daksa  in  the  Satapatha  (ii.  4,  4,  6)  and  the  Kausltaki  (iv.  4) 
Brahmanas. 


Parsada,  which  first  appears  in  the  Nirukta,1  denotes  a  text- 
book recognized  by  a  school  of  grammarians. 

1  i.    17.     Cf.   Max   Miiller,   Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,    128  et  seq. ;    Weber, 
Studien,  3,  269  ;  4,  217. 

Parsad-vana,  '  descendant  of  Prsadvana,'  is  mentioned  as  a 
wonder-worker  in  the  Rigveda.1 

1  viii.  51,2.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  139. 

Parsna  Sailana  is  mentioned  as  a  teacher  in  the  Jaiminiya 
Upanisad  Brahmana  (ii.  4,  8). 

Palagala  occurs  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana1  apparently  in 
the  sense  of  '  messenger,'  or  *  bearer  of  false  news.' 

1  v.  3,  1,  n.    Eggeling,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  26,  64,  renders  it  *  courier. 


Pa§ya  ]    SOMA   VERSES— ROPE— A  KING— BULWARKS  523 

Palagfali  is  the  name  of  the  fourth  and  least  respected  wife  of 
the  king.1    See  Pati. 

1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  4,  1,  8;  5,  2,  8,  etc. 

Pavamani  means  the  verses  (rcas)  in  the  ninth  Mandala  of 
the  Rigveda  'relating  to  Soma  Pavamana'  ('purifying  itself). 
The  name  is  found  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  later,2  possibly 
even  in  one  hymn  of  the  Rigveda  itself.3 


1  xix.  71,  I. 

2  Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  20;  ii.  37; 
Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xv.  1 ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  xii.  8,  1,  10;  Nirukta, 
xi.   2  ;    xii.    31  ;    Aitareya    Aranyaka, 


ii.  2,  2,  etc.  ;  Maitrayani  Grhya  Sutra, 
ii.  14. 

3  ix.  67,   31.  32  ;    Geldner,   Vedische 
Studien,  3,  99,  n.  3. 


Paia  denotes  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  a  'rope'  used  for 
fastening  or  tying  up.  Rope  and  knot  (granthi)  are  mentioned 
together  in  the  Atharvaveda.3  Pasa  is  in  the  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana4 used  of  the  rope  by  which  Manu's  ship  was  fastened  to 
the  mountain.  It  is  often  employed  metaphorically  of  the 
'  fetter '  of  Varuna.5 


1  i.  24,  13.  15  ;  ii.  27,  16 ;  29,  5,  etc. 

2  Av.  ii.  12,  2 ;  ix.  3,  2 ;  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,  vi.  8.  45,  etc. 


4  i.  8,  1,  5. 

5  Rv.  vi.  74,  4;  vii.  88,  7;  x.  85,  24; 
Av.  iv.  16,  6;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  ii.  2, 


4  ix.  3,  2.  5,  1,  etc. 

Pasin,  'having  a  noose,'  denotes  a  'hunter'  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  in  the  Atharvaveda.2 

1  iii.  45,  1 ;  ix.  73,  4.     So  of  Nirrti  in  Aitareya  Brahmana,  iv.  10. 

2  xvii.  i,  8. 

PaSa-dyumna  Vayata  is  the  name  of  a  king  to  whom  the 
Vasisthas  claim  to  have  been  preferred  by  Indra  in  one  hymn 
of  the  Rigveda.1  Apparently  he  was,  as  Sayana  says,  son  of 
Vayat,  who  may  be  compared  with  the  Vyalt  of  another  passage 
of  the  Rigveda.2  Ludwig3  sees  in  him  a  priest  of  the  Prthus 
and  Parsus,  but  this  is  most  improbable.4 

1  vii.  33,  2.  I       3  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  173. 

2  i.  122,  4.  4  Geldner,  Vedische  Studien,  2, 130, 139. 

Pasya  occurs  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda1  with  reference 
to  the  defeat  of  Vrtra,  and  apparently  denotes  '  stone  bulwarks.' 

1  i.  56,  6. 


524 


CUCKOO— BOWSTRING— GRASS— FLOUR  BALL      [  Pika 


In  another  passage2  the  word  may  mean  the  stones  used  for 
pressing  Soma. 

2  ix.  102,  2.    Cf,  Macdonell,  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1893,  457,  458. 


Pika,  the  Indian  ■  cuckoo,'  is  mentioned  in  the  list  of  victims 
at  the  Asvamedha  ('  horse  sacrifice ')  in  the  Yajurveda  Sam- 
hitas.1    Cf.  Anyavapa,  Koka. 

1  Taittiriya  Samhita,   v.    5,    15,    1  ;   I  saneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  39.     Cf.  Zimmer, 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  20;  Vaja-   I  Altindisches  Leben,  92. 


Ping*a  is  found  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda,1  where  it  is 
explained  by  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  with  Sayana  as 
'bowstring,'  but  where  Hillebrandt2  thinks  that  a  musical 
instrument  of  some  kind  is  meant. 


1  viii.  69,  9. 


2  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  144,  n. 


Pijavana  is  the  name  of  the  father  of  Sudas  according  to  the 
Nirukta.1  Probably  this  statement  is  based  on  a  mere  con- 
jecture from  the  epithet  Paijavana  used  of  Sudas  in  a  verse  of 
the  Rigveda,2  but  may  very  well  be  correct. 

1  ii.  24.  2  vii.  18,  19.     So  Aitareya  Brahman  a,  viii.  21. 

Piiijula  denotes  a  '  bundle '  of  grass  or  stalks,  especially  of 
Darbha.     The  word  is  only  found  in  the  Brahmana  style.1 


1  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxiii.  1 ;  Aitareya 
Brahmana,  i.  3  ;  Kausitaki  Brahmana, 
xviii.  8.  It  appears  in  the  form  of 
pinjula  in  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iv.  8,  7  ; 


Paraskara  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  15  ;  of  Pun- 
jila  in  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  1,  i,  7; 
2,  4,  3  ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  7,  6,  4  ; 
".  7.  9.  5- 


Pithinas  is  the  name  of  a  man,  a  friend  of  Indra,  in  the 
Rigveda.1 

1  vi.  26,  6.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  156. 


Pinda,  denoting  specifically  a  ball  of  flour  offered  to  the 
Manes,  especially  on  the  evening  of  new  moon,  occurs  in  the 
Nirukta,1  and  repeatedly  in  the  Sutras.2 

1  iii.  4.  J  Latyayana  £rauta  Sutra,  ii.  10,  4,  etc. 


Pitamaha  ]      FATHER  AND  SON— GRANDFATHER 


525 


Pita-putra,  'father  and  son,'  is  a  compound  of  rare  occur- 


rence. 


1  Av.  vi.  112,  2 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xiii.  2,  4,  4. 


Pita-putriya  ('relating  to  father  and  son'),  used  with  Sam- 
pradana  ('  handing  over ')  means  the  ceremony  by  which  a 
father,  when  about  to  die,  bequeathes  his  bodily  and  mental 
powers  to  his  son.     It  is  described  in  the  Kausitaki  Upanisad.1 

1  ii.  15.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  408. 


Pita-maha,  beside  Tatamaha,  denotes  from  the  Atharvaveda 
onwards1  the  'paternal  grandfather,'  apparently  as  a  '  father  in 
a  higher  sense.'2  The  great-grandfather  is  Prapitamaha  and 
Pratatamaha.3  It  is  significant  that  there  are  no  corresponding 
Vedic  words  for  maternal  grandparents,  and  that  the  words 
used  in  the  latter  language,  such  as  Matamaha,  are  imitations 
of  the  terms  for  paternal  relations. 

In  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda4  Delbriick5  suggests  that 
make  pitre  means  '  grandfather,'  a  sense  which  would  well  suit 
the  napatarn,  '  grandson,'  following,  but  the  sense  of  the  whole 
passage  is  uncertain.6 

We  learn  very  little  from  the  texts  of  the  position  of  grand- 
parents. No  doubt  they  were  entitled  to  marks  of  respect 
similar  to  those  shown  to  parents,7  as  the  epic  expressly 
testifies.  A  grandfather  might  easily  be  the  head  of  the  family, 
or  be  living  with  his  eldest  son,  after  he  ceased  to  be  able  to 
control  the  family. 

The  grandmother  (Pitamahi)  is  not  mentioned  in  the  extant 
Vedic  literature. 


1  Av.  v.  5,  1  ;  ix.  5,  30  ;  xi.  1,  19  ; 
xviii.  4,  35  ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  i.  8, 
5,  1  ;  vii.  2,  7,  3  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
xix.   36 ;    Satapatha   Brahmana,   v.   5, 

5.4- 

2  Delbriick,  Die  indogermanischen  Ver- 
wandtschaftsnamen,  474. 

3  Av.  xviii.  4,  75. 

4  vi.  20,  11. 


5  Ibid.,  473. 

6  See  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien,  2,  128, 
n.  1.  Roth,  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary, 
s.v.,  also  doubts  the  view  which  is 
accepted  by  Delbriick,  and  denies 
that  in  Rv.  i.  71,  5,  the  sense  of 
*  grandfather  '  can  be  found. 

7  Delbriick,  op.  cit.,  480,  citing 
Maha.bha.rata,  ii.  1634. 


526 


N  UTRIMENT—FA  THER 


[  Pitu 


Pitu  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  has  the  general  sense  of 
nutriment,'  whether  food  or  drink. 


1  i.  61,  7;  132,  6;  187,  1 ;  vi.  20,  4, 
etc. 

2  Av.  iv.  6,  3 ;  Taittiriya  Samhita, 


v.  7,  2,  4  ;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  ii.  20 ; 
xii.  65  ;  Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  13. 


Pitr,  common  from  the  Rigveda  onwards,  denotes  'father,' 
not  so  much  as  the  '  begetter  '  (janitr),1  but  rather  as  the  pro- 
tector of  the  child,  this  being  probably  also  the  etymological 
sense  of  the  word.2  The  father  in  the  Rigveda3  stands  for  all 
that  is  good  and  kind.  Hence  Agni  is  compared  with  a  father,4 
while  Indra  is  even  dearer  than  a  father.5  The  father  carries 
his  son  in  his  arms,6  and  places  him  on  his  lap,7  while  the  child 
pulls  his  garment  to  attract  attention.8  In  later  years  the  son 
depends  on  his  father  for  help  in  trouble,9  and  greets  him 
with  joy.10 

It  is  difficult  to  ascertain  precisely  how  far  the  son  was 
subject  to  parental  control,  and  how  long  such  control  con- 
tinued. Reference  is  made  in  the  Rigveda11  to  a  father's 
chastising  his  son  for  gambling,  and  RjraSva  is  said  to  have 
been  blinded  by  his  father.12  From  the  latter  statement 
Zimmer13  infers  the  existence  of  a  developed  patria  potestas,  but 
to  lay  stress  on  this  isolated  and  semi-mythical  incident  would 
be  unwise.  It  is,  however,  quite  likely  that  the  patria  potestas 
was  originally  strong,  for  we  have  other  support  for  the  thesis 
in  the  Roman  patria  potestas.     If  there  is  no  proof  that  a  father 


1  Pita  janitd  is  used  of  gods  in  the 
Rigveda — e.g.,  iv.  17,  12. 

a  As  derived  from  pa,  'protect.' 
But,  as  Bohtlingk  and  Roth,  St.  Peters- 
burg Dictionary,  s.v.  Matar,  footnote, 
suggest,  pa  and  ma  were  probably  the 
much  older  original  onomatopoetic 
names  for  '  father '  and  '  mother,'  which 
in  a  later  reflective  age  influenced  the 
formation  of  pitr  and  matr  (which  them- 
selves go  back  to  the  Indo-European 
period) . 

•  See,  e.g.,  iv.  17,  17;  viii.  86,  4. 

4  Rv.  x.  7,  3. 


5  Rv.  vii.  32,  19 ;  viii.  I,  6. 

6  Rv.  i.  38,  1. 

7  Rv.  v.  43,  7. 

8  Rv.  iii.  53,  2. 

9  In  Rv.  x.  48, 1,  the  jantavah  possibly 
are  the  sons. 

10  Rv.  vii.  103,  3.     Cf.  i.  24,  l. 

11  Rv.  ii.  29,  5. 

12  Rv.  i.  116,  16;  117,  17.  There  is 
also  the  case  of  the  sale  of  Sunahsepa, 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  12-18 ;  and 
cf.  Jaatapatha  Brahmana,  v.  3,  3,  3. 

13  Altindisches  Leben,  316. 


Pitr  ] 


PATERNAL  AUTHORITY 


527 


legally  controlled  his  son's  wedding,14  and  not  much  that  he 
controlled  his  daughter's,15  the  fact  is  in  itself  not  im- 
probable. 

There  is  again  no  evidence  to  show  whether  a  son,  when 
grown  up,  normally  continued  to  stay  with  his  father,  his  wife 
becoming  a  member  of  the  father's  household,  or  whether  he 
set  up  a  house  of  his  own :  probably  the  custom  varied.  Nor 
do  we  know  whether  the  son  was  granted  a  special  plot  of  land 
on  marriage  or  otherwise,  or  whether  he  only  came  into  such 
property  after  his  father's  death.  But  any  excessive  estimate 
of  the  father's  powers  over  a  son  who  was  no  longer  a  minor 
and  naturally  under  his  control,  must  be  qualified  by  the  fact 
that  in  his  old  age  the  sons  might  divide  their  father's  property,16 
or  he  might  divide  it  amongst  them,17  and  that  when  the 
father-in-law  became  aged  he  fell  under  the  control  of  his  son's 
wife.18  There  are  also  obscure  traces  that  in  old  age  a  father 
might  be  exposed,  though  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that 
this  was  usual  in  Vedic  India.19 

Normally  the  son  was  bound  to  give  his  father  full  obedience.20 
The  later  Sutras  show  in  detail  the  acts  of  courtesy  which  he 
owed  his  father,  and  they  allow  him  to  eat  the  remnants  of  his 
father's  food.21  On  the  other  hand,  the  father  was  expected 
to  be  kind.     The  story  of  Sunahgepa  in  the  Aitareya  Brah- 


u  Cf.  Delbriick,  Die  indogermanischen 
Verwandtschaftsnamen,  576.  Ibid.,  582, 
he  quotes  Mahabharata,  xii.  6108  et  seq., 
which  refers  in  one  line  to  the  control 
of  the  marriage  of  the  son  by  the  father, 
and  in  the  next  to  a  case  of  free  marriage. 
The  fact  is,  no  doubt,  that  the  son 
could  marry  freely,  unless  his  father 
had  arranged  matters  for  him  when  he 
was  too  young  to  object. 

is  Zimmer,  op.  cit.,  309,  assumes  this 
as  certain,  but  it  is  far  from  proved. 
See,  however,  Jaiminiya  Upanisad 
Brahmana,  iii.  12,  2,  which  is  in 
favour  of  Zimmer's  view.  Cf.  Kaegi, 
Der  Rigveda,  15,  and  Pati. 

16  Rv.  i.  70,  10  ;  Aitareya  Brahmana, 
v.    14 ;    Jaiminiya  Brahmana,   iii.   156 


(Journal  of  the  American  Oriental  Society, 
26,  61,  62). 

17  Taittiriya  Samhita,  iii.  1,  9,  4-6. 
Cf.  the  handing  over  from  father  to 
son  in  the  Kausitaki  Upanisad,  ii.  15. 
If  the  father  recovered,  he  lived  subject 
to  his  son. 

is  RV.  x.  85,  46. 

19  Cf.  Rv.  viii.  51,  2  ;  Av.  xviii.  2,  34. 
The  first  passage  need  not  refer  to 
exposure,  and  the  second  merely  refers 
to  the  exposure  of  a  dead  body;  but 
Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  326  -  328, 
thinks  that  they  prove  exposure.  Cf. 
Dharma. 

20  RV.  i.  68,  5. 

2i  Apastamba  Dharma  Sutra,  i.  1, 
4.  «. 


528  ADOPTION  [  Pitr 

mana22  emphasizes  the  horror  with  which  the  father's  heartless 
treatment  of  his  son  was  viewed.  The  Upanisads  23  insist  on  the 
spiritual  succession  from  father  to  son.  The  kissing  of  a  son  M 
was  a  frequent  and  usual  token  of  affection,  even  in  mature 
years. 

On  the  failure  of  natural  children,  adoption  was  possible.25 
It  was  even  resorted  to  when  natural  children  existed,  but 
when  it  was  desired  to  secure  the  presence  in  the  family  of  a 
person  of  specially  high  qualifications,  as  in  Visvamitra's 
adoption  of  Sunahsepa.26  It  is  not  clear  that  adoption  from 
one  caste  into  another  was  possible,  for  there  is  no  good 
evidence  that  Visvamitra  was,  as  Weber27  holds,  a  Ksatriya 
who  adopted  a  Brahmana.  Adoption  was  also  not  always  in 
high  favour :  it  may  be  accidental  or  not  that  a  hymn  of  the 
Vasistha  book  of  the  Rigveda28  condemns  the  usage.  It  was 
also  possible  for  the  father  who  had  a  daughter,  but  no  sons, 
to  appoint  her  to  bear  a  son  for  him.  At  any  rate  the  practice 
appears  to  be  referred  to  in  an  obscure  verse  of  the  Rigveda29 
as  interpreted  by  Yaska.30  Moreover,  it  is  possible  that  the 
difficulty  of  a  brotherless  maiden  finding  a  husband31  may  have 
been  due  in  part  to  the  possibility  of  her  father  desiring  to 
make  her  a  Putrika,  the  later  technical  name  for  a  daughter 
whose  son  is  to  belong  to  her  father's  family. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  a  family  the  father  took 
precedence  of  the  mother.32  Delbriick33  explains  away  the 
apparent  cases  to  the  contrary.34    There  is  no  trace  of  the 

22  vii.  12  et  seq. ;  Sankhayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  xv.  17  et  seq. 

23  E.g.,  Kausitaki  Upanisad,  ii.  15  ; 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  i.  5,  25 
(Madhyamdina  =  i.  5,  17,  Kanva). 

24  See  Hopkins,  Journal  oj the  American 
Oriental  Society,  28,  120-134;  Keith, 
Sankhayana  Aranyaka,  26,  n.  3. 

25  Cf.  Zimmer,  A  Itindisches  Leben,  318; 
Mayr,  Indisches  Erbrecht,  73 ;  Jolly,  Die 
Adoption  in  Indien  (Wiirzburg,  1910), 
7  et  seq. 

26  Aitareya  Brahmana,  vii.  17  et  seq. ; 
Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra,  xv.  17.  Cf. 
Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  2,  157. 

27  Episches  im  vedischen  Ritual,  33,  34. 


™  Vll.  4,  7.  8. 

29  iii.  31,  1. 

30  iii.  5  ad  fin.  Cf.  Weber,  Indische 
Studien,  5, 343 ;  Geldner,  Vedische  Studien, 
3,  34;  Oldenberg,  Rgveda-Noten,  1, 
239-241. 

31  Cf.  Bhratr. 

32  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  5,  1,  18 ; 
a  citation  in  Sankhayana  Grhya  Sutra, 
i.  9;  Chandogya  Upanisad  vii.  15,  2. 

33  Die  indogermanischen  Verwandt- 
schaftsnamen,  577. 

34  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad,  iv.  7, 
5.  Some  passages  in  the  Sutras  present 
difficulties,  but  they  are  of  no  im- 
portance for  Vedic  times  proper. 


Pitryana  ] 


WAY  OF  THE  FATHERS 


529 


family  as  a  land-owning  corporation.35     The  dual  form  Pitarau 
regularly  means  'father  and  mother,'  'parents.'36 


35  Baden  Powell,  whose  various 
works  (Indian  Village  Community,  1896 ; 
Village  Communities  in  India,  1899,  etc. ) 
have  done  most  to  combat  the  view  of 
the  village  community  in  India  as  a 
land-holding  institution,  is  prepared  to 
recognize  the  family  as  a  land-owning 
unit,  considering  that  the  patria  potestas 
is  a  later  growth,  and  not  Indian  (see, 
e.g.,  Village  Communities  in  India,  128 
et  seq.).  Hopkins,  India,  Old  and  New, 
218  et  seq.,  adopts  a  theory  which  allows 
of  individual  and  joint  family  owner- 
ship side  by  side,  the  latter  being 
apparently  the  earlier  but  the  decadent 
stage.  He  expressly  considers  (p.  222) 
that  the  son  had  an  indefeasible  right  to 
prevent  the  father  from  alienating  the 
hereditary  land,  which  could  only  be 
parted  with  by  the  consent  of  the  village 
if  it  were  a  case  of  joint  ownership 
(cf.  the  verse  cited  by  Jolly,  Recht  und 
Sitte,  94).  But  it  must  be  remembered 
that,  as  is  very  clearly  shown  in  the 
case  of  English  law  by  Pollock  and 
Maitland  (History  of  English  Law,  2, 
337-352),  the  recognition  of  the  rights 


of  sons  may  well  be,  not  a  sign  of 
original  joint  or  family  ownership,  but 
a  development  from  the  existence  of 
intestate  succession,  and  as  in  England, 
so  in  India,  there  is  no  trace  of  a 
corporate  joint  family  in  the  early 
books.  And,  as  Jolly  (op.  cit.,  76,  80) 
shows,  there  are  clear  traces,  both  in 
old  and  modern  times,  of  a  despotic 
control  of  the  family  by  the  father  even 
after  his  sons  grew  up,  provided  only 
that  he  was  physically  able  to  control 
them.  The  same  state  of  affairs  seems 
proved  for  early  English  law,  as  it  is 
beyond  question  for  Roman  law  (see 
Smith's  Dictionary  of  Antiquities,  2,  351 
et  seq.).  In  Greece  also,  which  is  some- 
times contrasted  with  Rome,  there  is 
the  clearest  trace  of  both  a  real  patria 
potestas,  and  of  the  absolute  ownership 
of  the  land  by  the  father  as  against 
the  son,  especially  in  the  archaic  laws 
of  Gortyn  (see  Gardner  and  Jevons, 
Greek  Antiquities,  404,  405,  563,  566). 

36  Rv.  i.  20,  4  ;  160,  3  ;  ii.  17,  7  ; 
vii.  67,  1 ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxiii  10  ; 
Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xix.  11,  etc. 


Pitr-yana,  the  '  way  of  the  fathers,'  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  later,2  is  opposed  to  the  Deva-yana,  or  '  way  of  the  gods.' 
Tilak3  considers  that  the  Devayana  corresponds  with  the 
Uttarayana,  'northern  journey'  of  the  sun,  and  the  Pitryana 
with  the  Daksinayana,  its  '  southern  journey.'  He  concludes 
from  a  passage  of  the  Satapatha  Brahmana,4  where  three  of 
the  seasons — spring,  summer,  and  the  rains — are  ascribed  to 
the  gods,  but  the  others  to  the  Pitrs,  or  Fathers,  that  the 
Devayana  began  with  the  vernal  equinox,  and  the  Pitryana 
with  the  autumnal  equinox.    With  this  he  connects  the  curious 


1  x.  2,  7.  Cf.  the  allusion  to  it  in 
x.  18,  1,  as  other  than  the  Devayana, 
which  appears  in  x.  98,  11. 

2  Av.  viii.  10,  19;  xii.  2,  10,  etc.  ; 

VOL.  I. 


Vajasaneyi  Samhita,   xix.  45;    Chan- 
dogya  Upanisad,  v.  3,  2,  etc. 
3  Orion,  22  et  seq. 


11.  1,  3.  !"3. 


34 


53° 


PARRICIDE— CLUB— ANT 


[  Pitrhan 


distinction  of  Deva-  and  Yama-Naksatras  in  the  Taittiriya 
Brahmana.5  These  conclusions  are,  however,  very  improbable. 
Cf.  Naksatpa  and  Surya. 

5  i-  5,  2,  6. 

Pitr-han,  '  parricide/  is  found  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  Paippa- 
lada  recension. 

1  ix.  4,  3.     Cf.  Bohtlingk,  Dictionary,  s.v. 

Pitrya  occurs  in  the  list  of  sciences  given  in  the  Chandogya 
Upanisad.1  Apparently  it  is  to  be  taken  as  the  science  relating 
to  the  cult  of  the  Manes,  as  explained  by  Sankara  in  his 
commentary.  As  it  is  in  that  list  followed  by  Ra£i,  the 
St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  is  inclined  to  take  Pitrya  Rasi  as  one 
expression,  but  in  what  exact  sense  does  not  appear. 

1  vii.  1,  2.  4;  2,  1 ;  7,  1.  Cf.  "Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  267;  Little,  Gram- 
matical  Index,  98. 

Pitva1  or  Pidva2  is  the  name  of  an  animal  included  in 
the  list  of  victims  at  the  AsVamedha  ('  horse  sacrifice ')  in  the 
Yajurveda  Samhitas.  According  to  the  commentator  on  the 
Taittiriya  Samhita1  it  means  'lion.'  But  it  may  be  identical 
with  Petva. 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.  5,  17,  1. 

2  Maitrayanl  Samhita,   iii.    14,    13 ; 
Vajasaneyi    Samhita,    xxiv.    32.      Cf. 


Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  79  ;  Bloom 
field,  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  29,  290. 


Pinaka,  'club,'  is  found  in  the  Atharvaveda.1     Later2  it  is 
used  to  denote  the  club  of  Rudra-Siva. 


1  1.  27,  2. 

2  Taittiriya    Samhita, 


Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  iii.  61;   xvi.   51, 
8,    6,    2;   I  etc. 


Pinvana  occurs  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (xiv.  1,  2,  17 ; 
2,  1,  11 ;  3,  1,  22)  as  the  name  of  a  vessel  used  in  the  ritual. 

Pipila,  '  ant,'  is  mentioned  in  the  Rigveda  (x.  16,  6)  as  eating 
the  flesh  of  the  dead. 


Pippala  ] 


ANT— A  BIRD—BERRY 


53i 


Pipilika  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  later2  denotes  an  'ant/ 
the  form  of  the  word  referring  doubtless  not  so  much  to  the 
small  species  of  ant,  as  it  is  taken  in  the  later  lexicons,3  but 
rather  to  the  insect's  tiny  size,  which  would  naturally  be 
expressed  by  a  diminutive  formation  of  the  name.  The  form 
Pipllaka4  is  found  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad.6 


1  vii.  56,  7.     Cf.  xx.  134,  6. 

2  Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  6,  7 ; 
PancavimSa  Brahmana,  v.  6,  10 ; 
xv.  17,  8 ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad, 
i.  4,  9.  29  (Madhyamdina  =  i.  4,  4,  16 
Kanva) ;  Nirukta,  vii.  13 ;  Aitareya 
Aranyaka,  i.  3,  8  ;  ii.  1,  6. 


3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

4  Cf.  kaninaka  beside  kaninikd,  '  pupil 
of  the  eye. ' 

6  vii.  2,  1 ;  7,  1 ;  8,  1 ;  10,  1. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  97  ; 
Edgerton,  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  31,  128. 


Pippaka  is  mentioned  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the  Asvamedha 
('horse  sacrifice')  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas.1  Some  bird 
seems  to  be  meant. 


1  Taittiriya  Samhita,  v.    5,    19,    1  ; 
Maitrayani  Samhita,  iii.  14,  21 ;  Vaja- 


saneyi  Samhita,  xxiv.  40.    Cf.  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  93. 


Pippala,  n.,  is  found  in  two  passages  of  the  Rigveda1  meaning 
'  berry,'  used  with  a  mystic  signification,  and  in  neither  case 
with  any  certain  reference  to  the  berry  of  the  fig-tree.2  In  the 
Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad3  the  general  sense  of  'berry*  is  not 
necessary,  and  the  special  sense  of  '  berry '  of  the  Peepal  is 
quite  possible :  the  latter  meaning  is  perhaps  intended  in  the 
Satapatha  Brahmana.4  In  the  Atharvaveda6  the  feminine 
form  of  the  word,  Pippali,  appears  denoting  berries  used  as  a 
remedy  for  wounds,  like  Arundhati.0 


1  i.  164,  20  =  Mundaka  Upanisad, 
iii.  1,  1 ;  SvetaSvatara  Upanisad,  iv.  6, 
22  ;  v.  54,  12  (the  '  berry  '  of  heaven, 
ndka). 

2  The  word  Pippala  appears  in  the 
later  literature  as  a  masculine,  denoting 
the  Ficus  religiosa  (A£vattha  in  Vedic 
literature) . 

3  iv.  1,  41. 


*  111.  7,  1,  12. 

5  vi.  109,  1.  2. 

6  Bloomfield,  Atharvaveda, 61;  Hymns 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  516;  Whitney, 
Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  359, 
360;  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  389; 
Max  Muller,  Sacred  Boohs  of  the  East, 
32,  33i- 

34—2 


532 


A  VEDIC  SCHOOL— A  DASA—DEER      [  Pippalada 


Pippalada  ('  eater  of  berries ')  is  the  name  of  a  teacher 
mentioned  in  the  Prasna  Upanisad.1  In  the  plural  the  name 
denotes  a  school  of  the  Atharvaveda.2  Their  (Paippalada) 
recension  of  the  text  of  the  Samhita  has  been  reproduced  in 
facsimile  by  Garbe  and  Bloomfield,3  and  in  part  published.4 


1  1. 1. 

2  Weber,   Indische    Studien,   3,   277 ; 
Indian  Literature,  153,  159,  160,  164. 

3  Baltimore,  1901. 

4  The  variants  of  the  Paippalada  are 
given  in  part  in  Whitney's  Translation 


of  the  Atharvaveda,  and  the  text  of 
books  i.  and  ii.  has  been  edited  by 
Barret  in  the  Journal  of  the  American 
Oriental  Society,  26,  197-295  ;  30,  187  et 
seq.  Cf.  also  Lanman  in  Whitney's 
Translation,  lxxix  et  seq. 


Pipru  is  the  name  of  a  foe  of  Indra  in  the  Rigveda.  He 
was  repeatedly  defeated  by  Indra  for  Rji&van.1  Mentioned  as 
possessing  forts,2  he  is  called  a  Dasa3  as  well  as  an  Asura.4 
He  is  described  as  having  a  black  brood,5  and  as  being  allied 
with  blacks.6  It  is  uncertain  whether  he  was  a  demon,  accord- 
ing to  Roth's7  view,  which  is  favoured  by  the  use  of  the  word 
Asura,  or  a  human  foe,  as  Ludwig,8  01denberg,9and  Hillebrandt10 
believe.     The  name  may  mean  *  resister,'  from  the  root  pr. 


1  i.  101,  1.  2;  iv.  16,  13;  v.  29,  11; 
vi.  20,  7  ;  viii.  49, 10 ;  x.  99, 11 ;  138,  3. 
In  i.  103,  8 ;  ii.  14,  5 ;  vi.  18,  8,  the 
reference  is  general  to  a  defeat  of  Pipru 
by  Indra. 

2  Rv.  i.  51,  5  ;  vi.  20,  7. 

3  Rv.  viii.  32,  2. 

4  Rv.  x.  138,  3. 


5  Rv.  i.  101,  1. 

6  iv.  16,  13. 

7  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

8  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  149. 

9  Religion  des  Veda,  155. 

10  Vedische  Mythologie,  3,  273. 
Cf.     Macdonell,      Vedic     Mythology, 
p.  161  (C). 


Pisa  is  found  in  one  passage  of  the  Rigveda,1  where  Sayana 
takes  it  to  mean  a  deer  (rum). 

1  i.    64,    8.     Cf.    Av.    xix.    49,    4;    j  Miiller,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32, 
Zimmer,   Altindisches  Leben,  83;    Max  |   118;  Geldner,  Rigveda,  Glossar,  no. 


PiSahga  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  two  Unnetr  priests 
officiating  at  the  snake  festival  mentioned  in  the  Pancavimsa 
Brahmana.1    Cf.  Caka. 


1  xxv.  15,  3.     Cf.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  35. 


Pi&la  ]  GHOUL— RAW  FLESH— WOODEN  DISH 


533 


Pi&Lca  is  the  name  of  a  class  of  demon  mentioned  in  the 
Atharvaveda1  and  later.2  In  the  Taittiriya  Samhita3  they  are 
associated  with  Raksases  and  Asuras,  while  opposed  to  gods, 
men,  and  fathers.  In  the  Atharvaveda4  they  are  described  as 
kravyad,  '  eaters  of  raw  flesh,'  which  may  be  the  etymological 
sense  of  the  word  Pisaca  itself.5  It  is  possible  that  the  Pisacas 
were,  as  suggested  by  Grierson,0  really  human  foes,  like  the 
north-western  tribes,  who  even  in  later  times  were  reputed 
eaters  of  raw  flesh  (not  necessarily  as  cannibals,  but  rather  as 
eaters  of  human  flesh  in  ritual).  This  is,  however,  not  at  all 
likely,  the  Pisacas  having  in  all  probability  only  meant '  ghouls ' 
originally :  when  they  appear  as  human  tribes,  they  were 
presumably  thus  designated  in  scorn.  A  science  called  Pisaca- 
veda7  or  Pisaca- vidya8  is  known  in  the  later  Vedic  period. 


1  ii.  18,  4 ;  iv.  20,  6.  9  ;  36,  4 ;  37, 
10 ;  v.  29,  4.  5.  14 ;  vi.  32,  2 ;  viii.  2, 
12 ;  xii.  1,  50.  The  word  occurs  once 
in  the  Rv.  (i.  133,  5)  in  the  form  of 
Pisaci. 

2  See  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

3  ii.  4,  i,  1  ;  Kathaka  Samhita, 
xxxvii.  14. 


4  v.  25,  9. 

5  Cf.  Oldenberg,  Religion  des  Veda, 
264,  n. 

6  Cf.  Grierson,  Journal  of  the  Royal 
Asiatic  Society,  1905,  285-288.  Cf.  Mac- 
donell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p.  164  (B). 

7  Gopatha  Brahmana,  i.  1,  10. 

8  AsValayana  Srauta  Sutra,  x.  7,  6. 


Pi&ta  in  the  Atharvaveda1  and  later2  denotes  raw  flesh 
(cf,  Pisaca).  In  one  passage  of  the  Atharvaveda3  the  sense 
seems  to  be  '  small  piece,'  *  bit,'  but  the  St.  Petersburg 
Dictionary  suggests  that  Pisita  here  stands  for  pisita,  equivalent 
to  pista  (what  is  '  pounded,'  then  '  particle  '). 


1  v.  19,  5. 

2  Ai tarey a  Brahmana,  ii.  11 ;  Kausika 
Sutra,  xii.  8 ;  xxxv.  18 ;  xxxix.  14,  etc. 


3  vi.  127,  1.  Cf.  Bloomfield,  Hymns 
of  the  Atharvaveda,  531  ;  Whitney, 
Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  376. 


Pigfla  is  found  in  the  Satapatha  Brahmana  (ii.  5,  3,  6)  as  the 
name  of  a  wooden  vessel  or  dish.  In  the  Latyayana  Srauta 
Sutra  (iv.  2,  4.  5)  a  Pisila-vina  is  mentioned,  which  seems  to 
have  been  a  kind  of  guitar,  with  strings  stretched  over  a  body 
of  wood. 


534 


TRAITOR— FLOUR— DEODAR— BIE  STINGS     [  PiSuna 


Pisuna,  'traitor,'  is  mentioned  in  the   Rigveda1  and  occa- 
sionally later.2 

1  vii/104,  20.  I  dogya  Upanisad,  vii.  6,  1  ;  Taittiriya 

a  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xxx.  13;  Chan-   |  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  7,  1. 


Pista  ('pounded'),  n.,  'meal,'  'flour,'  is  mentioned  in  the 
Brahmanas.1  In  the  Atharvaveda2  reference  is  made  to 
pounded  beans  (masah). 

1  Aitareya  Brahmana,  ii.  9;   Satapatha  Brahmana,  i.  1,  4,  3;    2,  1,  2  ;   vi. 


5,  1,  6,  etc. 


xii.  2,  53. 


PItha,  'stool,'  does  not  occur  as  an  uncompounded  word 
before  the  Sutras,  but  the  compound  pUha-sarpin  ('  moving 
about  in  a  little  cart ')  is  found  as  the  designation  of  a  '  cripple ' 
in  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita  (xxx.  21)  and  the  Taittiriya  Brah- 
mana (iii.  4,  17,  1)  in  the  list  of  victims  at  the  Purusamedha 
('  human  sacrifice '). 


Pitu-daru  is  found  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita1  and  later2 
denoting  the  Deodar  (deva-ddru)  tree,  or,  according  to  others, 
the  Khadira  or  Udumbara  tree.3    Cf.  Putadru. 


1  Kathaka  Samhita,  xxv.  6. 

2  Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii.  5,  2,  15 ; 
xiii.  4,  4,  5.  17 ;  Paficavimsa  Brahmana, 
xxiv.  13,  5. 


3  Mahidharaon  Vajasaneyi  Samhita, 
v.  14  ;  Sayana  on  Aitareya  Brahmana, 
i.  28. 


Plyusa  is  found  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  in  the  sense  of 
the  first  milk  of  the  cow  after  calving,  'biestings.'  Usually 
the  term  is  applied  metaphorically  to  the  sap  of  the  Soma 
plant.3 


1  Cf.   ii.  35,  5,   where  it  is  applied 
figuratively  to  the  mothers  of  Agni. 

2  KauSika   Sutra,   xix.   15.    Cf.   Av. 
viii.  9,  24. 


3  Rv.  ii.  13,  1 ;  iii.  48,  2 ;  vi.  47,  4 
x.  94,  8,  etc. 

Cf.  Geldner,  Rigveda,  Glossar,  no. 


Pila  occurs  once  in  the  Atharvaveda1  as  the  name  of  an 
Apsaras,  being  no  doubt  originally  a  name  of  some  fragrant 

1  lv-  37>  3«     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  69;  Whitney,  Translation  of  the 
Atharvaveda,  211. 


Punjistfia  ]  A  TREE—A  HEAVEN— HARLOT— MALE-BIRTH  535 

plant,  like  Naladi  and  Gugfgrilu,  two  other  names  of  Apsarases 
given  in  the  same  verse. 


Pflu  is  the  name  in  the  Atharvaveda1  of  a  tree  (Careya  arborea 
or  Salvadora  persica)  on  the  fruit  of  which  doves  fed. 

1  xx.  135,  12.  Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  62;  Weber,  Transactions  of 
the  Berlin  Academy,  1895,  861. 

Pilumati  is  in  the  Atharvaveda  (xviii.  2,  48)  the  name  of  the 
intermediate  heaven  lying  between  the  udanvati,  '  watery,'  and 
the  pra-dyauh,  '  farthest  heaven.'  It  presumably  means  '  rich 
in  Pilu.'     Cf.  Div. 

Pums-call  ('  running  after  men  ')  is  found  in  the  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,1  the  Atharvaveda,2  and  later,3  to  denote  a  '  wanton 
woman.'  In  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita4  also  occurs  the  form 
Pumscalu.    See  also  Dharma  and  Pati. 


1  xxx.  22.  2  xv.  2,  i  ^  seq. 

3  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  viii.  I,  10  ; 
Kausitaki  Brahmana,  xxvii.  1  ;  Laty- 
ayana  Srauta  Sutra,  iv.  3,  9,  11. 


4 
iii. 


xxx.  5.  20;  Taittirlya  Brahmana, 
4,  1,  1;  15,  1;  Katyayana  Srauta 
Sutra,  xiii.  3,  6. 


Pum-savana  (*  male-production '  ceremony)  is  found  in  the 
Atharvaveda1  in  a  hymn  which  is  obviously  intended  to  accom- 
pany a  rite  aiming  at  securing  the  birth  of  a  male  child,  and 
which  is  so  applied  in  the  ritual.2 


1  VI.   II,   I. 

2  Kausika  Sutra,  xxxv.  8.  Cf.  Bloom- 
field,  Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  460; 
Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharva- 
veda,   288.     The    later    Grhya   ritual 


knows  a  special  rite  called  Pumsavana. 
See  AsValayana  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  13 ; 
Sankhayana  Grhya  Sutra,  i.  20 ; 
Gobhila  Grhya  Sutra,  ii.  6,  1  et  seq.  ; 
Hillebrandt,  Rituallitteratur,  41. 


Puklaka.    See  Paulkasa. 


Pufiji-stha  is  found  in  the  Yajurveda  Samhitas1  and  later,2 
apparently  meaning  '  fisherman,'  though  Mahidhara3  explains 
it  as  '  bird-catcher.'     Cf.  Paunjistha. 

2  Asvalayana   Srauta    Sutra,    x.    7 ; 
Panini,  viii.  3,  97. 


1  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  27  ;  Tait- 
tiriya  Samhita,  iv.  5,  4,  2  ;  MaitrayanI 
Samhita,  ii.  9,  5 ;  Kathaka  Samhita, 
xvii.  13. 


3  On  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  xvi.  27. 


536 


GRASS  BUNDLE— LOTUS— OUTCAST—SON     [  Punji 


Punjila  is  found  in  the  Taittiriya  Samhita1  and  the  Taittiriy; 
Brahmana2  in  the  sense  of  a  '  bundle '  of  grass,  being  a  variant 
of  Pinjula. 


vi.  r,  1,7;  2,  4,  3. 


i.  7,  6,  4  ;  ii.  7,  9.  5- 


Pundarika  denotes  the  blossom  of  the  lotus  in  the  Rigveda1 
and  later.2  The  Pancavimsa  Brahmana3  states  that  the  lotus 
flower  is  born  of  the  light  of  the  Naksatras,  and  the  Atharva- 
veda4  compares  the  human  heart  to  the  lotus.6 


1  x.  142,  8. 

2  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  8,  2,  1 ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  v.  5,  5,  6;  Brhad- 
aranyaka  Upanisad,  ii.  3, 10  ;  vi.  3,  14  ; 
Chandogya  Upanisad,  i.  6,  7  ;  Aitareya 
Aranyaka,  iii.  2,  4. 

3  xviii.  9,  6. 


4  x.  8,  43 ;  Chandogya  Upanisad, 
viii.  1,  1. 

6  In  the  Taittiriya  Samhita,  i.  8, 
18,  1 ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  8,  2,  1, 
pundari-sraja  denotes  a  '  wreath  of  lotus 
leaves.' 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  71. 


Pundra  is  the  name  of  a  people  regarded  as  outcasts  in  the 
Aitareya  Brahmana.1  Their  name  occurs  in  the  Sutras  also.2 
In  the  Epic  their  country  corresponds  with  Bengal  and  Bihar. 


1  vii.  18 ;  Sankhayana  Srauta  Sutra, 
xv.  26. 

2  Baudhayana  Dharma  Sutra,  i.  2, 
14.  Cf.  Caland,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft,    56,   553  ; 


Biihler,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,   14, 
148  ;  Oldenberg,  Buddha,  394,  n.     Fc 
the  later  geographical  position  of  the 
Pundras,  cf.  the  map  in  Paxgiter,  J oumc 
of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1908,  333. 


Putra  is,  with  Sunu,  the  usual  name  for  '  son '  from  th< 
Rigveda  onwards.1  The  original  sense  of  the  word  was 
apparently  '  small,'  or  something  analogous.2  The  form 
Putraka3  is  often  used  with  the  distinct  intention  of  an  affec- 
tionate address  to  a  younger  man,  not  merely  a  son  proper. 
Reference  is  frequently  made  to  the  desire  for  a  son.4    Cf.  Pati. 


1  Rv.  ii.  29,  5;  v.  47,  6;  vi.  9,  2, 
etc. ;  Av.  iii.  30,  2,  etc. 

2  Delbriick,  Die  indogermanischen  Ver- 
wandtschaftsnamen,  454. 

3  Rv.  viii.  69,  8 ;  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana, v.  14  ;  vi.  33  (here  the  narrative 
uses  Putra;  the  reported  words  have 


Putraka) ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  6, 
1,  2;  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,  xiii.  3, 
21,  etc. 

*  Rv.    x.    183,    1  ;    Av.   vi.    81,   3 
xi.  1,  1 ;  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  5,  6,  1 
vii.  1,  8,  1 ;  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  1, 
9,  1. 


Punarvasu  ]  INHERITING  DA  UGHTER— REMARRIED  WIDOW  537 

Putra-sena  is  the  name  of  a  man  in  the  MaitrayanI  Samhita 
(iv.  6,  6). 


Putrika  in  the  later  literature1  has  the  technical  sense  of  the 
daughter  of  a  man  without  sons,  whom  he  gives  in  marriage  on 
the  express  terms  that  her  son  shall  perform  the  funeral  rites 
for  him,  and  be  counted  as  his.  The  thing  as  well  as  the  name 
is  recognized  by  Yaska  in  the  Nirukta,2  and  traced  to  the 
Rigveda.3  But  the  passages  in  the  Rigveda  are  of  very 
uncertain  meaning,4  and  in  all  probability  do  not  refer  to  this 
custom  at  all. 


1  Manava  Dharma  Sastra,  ix.  127  et 
seq.  ;  Gautama  Dharma  Sutra,  xxviii. 
20 ;  Vasistha  Dharma  Sutra,  xvii.  17. 

2  iii.  5  ad  fin. 

3  i.  124,  7.    Cf.  iii.  31,  1. 

*  Cf.  Geldner,  Vedische  Studien,  3,  34  ; 
Rigveda,  Kommentar,  48,  49  ;  Olden  berg, 


Rgveda-Noten,  1,  239  et  seq.;  Roth, 
Nirukta," Erlautevungen,  27  ;  Jolly,  Recht 
und  Sitte,  72,  73  ;  Brhaddevata,  iv.  no. 
in,  with  Macdonell's  note ;  Keith, 
Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  1910, 
924,  925  ;  Jolly,  Die  Adoption  in  Indient 
32. 


Punar-datta  ('  given  again ')  is  the  name  of  a  teacher  in  the 
6arikhayana  Aranyaka  (viii.  8). 

Punar-bhu  is  found  in  the  Atharvaveda1  meaning  a  wife  who 
marries  again,  a  rite  being  mentioned  by  which  she  can  ensure 
reunion  with  her  second  (not  her  first)  husband  in  the  next 
world. 

1  ix.  5,  28.    Cf.  Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharvaveda,  537. 


Punar-vasu  (' bringing  goods  again'),  used  in  the  dual, 
denotes  the  fifth  in  the  series  of  the  Vedic  Naksatras,  or 
1  Lunar  Mansions.'  Roth1  takes  the  word  to  have  this  sense 
in  its  only  occurrence  in  the  Rigveda,2  but  this  must  be  regarded 
as  decidedly  doubtful.  The  term  is,  however,  found  in  the 
ordinary  lists  of  the  Naksatras  in  the  later  Samhitas  and  the 
Brahmanas.3 


1  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

2  x.  19,  1. 

3  Av.  xix.  7,  1 ;  Taittiriya  Samhita, 
i.  5,  1,  4 ;  iv.  4,  10,  1  ;  Taittiriya 
Brahmana,  i.  1,  2,  3  ;  Kausitaki  Brah- 


mana,  i.  3  ;  Kathaka  Samhita,  viii.  15  ; 
xxxix.  13  ;  Satapatha  Brahmana,  ii.  1, 
2,  10,  etc. 

Cf.  Weber,    Naxatra,   2,   289,   290; 
Zimmer,  Aliindisches  Leben,  355. 


/ 


538 


BARKING  DOG— MAN— FORT 


[  Punahsara 


Punah-sara,  '  recurrent,'  is  the  epithet  of  the  barking  dog  in 
the  Rigveda,1  which  is  told  to  bark  at  the  thief.  It  refers,  no 
doubt,  to  the  dog's  practice  of  running  to  and  fro  when  it 
barks.  It  is  also  applied  to  a  plant,  Apamargu  (Achyranthes 
aspera),  in  the  Atharvaveda,2  with  the  sense  of  *  having  revertent 
leaves.5 


1  vii.  55,  3  ;  Pischel,  Vedische  Studien, 
2,  56,  n.  1. 

2  iv.  17,  2 ;  vi.  129,  3 ;  x.  1,  9.  Cf. 
Whitney,  Translation  of  the  Atharva- 
veda, 179.     Bloomfield,  Hymns  of  the 


Atharvaveda,  394,  prefers  the  sense  of 
'  attacking,'  which  is  the  meaning  of 
prati-sara,  Av.  viii.  5,  5.  Cf.  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  v.  2,  4,  20. 


Pumams  denotes  in  the  Rigveda1  and  later2  man  as  the 
1  male.'  It  has  no  special  reference  to  marriage  like  Pati,  or  to 
heroism  like  Nr  or  Nara.  In  grammar  it  denotes  the  masculine 
gender.3 


1  i.  124,  7  ;  162,  22  ;  iii.  29,  13  ;  iv.  3, 
10,  etc. 

2  Av.  iii.  6,  1  ;  23,  3  ;  iv.  4,  4  ; 
vi.  11,  2;  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  viii.  5, 
etc. 


3  Nirukta,  iii.  8  ;  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana, x.  1,  1,  8;  5,  1,  3.  Cf.  iv.  5,  2, 
10,  and  pumsa  naksatrena,  '  a  Naksatra 
with  a  masculine  name,'  in  the  Brhad- 
aranyaka  Upanisad,  vi.  3,  1. 


Pup  is  a  word  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  Rigveda1  and 
later,2  meaning  '  rampart,'  ■  foft,'  or  *  stronghold.'  Such  fortifi- 
cations must  have  been  occasionally  of  considerable  size,  as 
one  is  called  *  broad '  (prthvi)  and  'wide'  (urvT).3  Elsewhere4 
a  fort  '  made  of  stone '  (asmamayt)  is  mentioned.  Sometimes 
strongholds  '  of  iron '  (ayasl)  are  referred  to,5  but  these  are 
probably  only  metaphorical.  A  fort  '  full  of  kine '  {gomati)  is 
mentioned,6  showing  that  strongholds  were  used  to  hold  cattle. 
'  Autumnal '  (saradi)  forts  are  named,  apparently  as  belonging 
to  the  Dasas :  this  may  refer  to  the  forts  in  that  season  being 


1  i-  53.  7  I  58.  8  ;  131,  4  ;  166,  8  ; 
iii.  15,  4;  iv.  27,  1,  etc. 

2  Taittiriya  Brahmana,  i.  7,  7,  5  ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  23 ;  ii.  11  ; 
Satapatha  Brahmana,  iii.  4,  4,  3  ;  vi.  3, 
3,  25;  xi.  1,  1,  2.  3;  Chandogya 
Upanisad,  viii.  5,  3,  etc. 

3  i.  189,  2. 


4  Rv.  iv.  30,  20.  Perhaps  sun-dried 
bricks  are  alluded  to  by  dma  (lit.  '  raw,' 
'  unbaked ')  in  Rv.  ii.  35,  6. 

5  Rv.  i.  58,  8;  ii.  20,  8;  iv.  27,  1  ; 
vii.  3,7;  15,  4  ;  95,  1  ;  x.  101,  8.  See 
Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  22,  378  et  seq. 

6  Av.  viii.  6,  23. 


Pur  ] 


FORTS  AS  PLACES  OF  REFUGE 


539 


occupied  against  Aryan  attacks  or  against  inundations  caused 
by  overflowing  rivers.  Forts  'with  a  hundred  walls'  (sata- 
bhuji)  are  spoken  of.7 

It  would  probably  be  a  mistake  to  regard  these  forts  as 
permanently  occupied  fortified  places  like  the  fortresses  of  the 
mediaeval  barony.  They  were  probably  merely  places  of  refuge 
against  attack,  ramparts  of  hardened  earth  with  palisades  and 
a  ditch  (cf.  Dehi).  Pischel  and  Geldner,8  however,  think  that 
there  were  towns  with  wooden  walls  and  ditches  (irepiftoXos  and 
rafypos)  like  the  Indian  town  of  Pataliputra  known  to  Megas- 
thenes9  and  the  Pali  texts.10  This  is  possible,  but  hardly 
susceptible  of  proof,  and  it  is  not  without  significance  that  the 
word  Nagara  is  of  late  occurrence.  On  the  whole  it  is  hardly 
likely  that  in  early  Vedic  times  city  life  was  much  developed. 
In  the  Epic,  according  to  Hopkins,11  there  are  found  the 
Nagara,  '  city ';  Grama,  '  village ';  and  Ghosa,  '  ranch.'  Vedic 
literature  hardly  seems  to  go  beyond  the  village,  no  doubt  with 
modifications  in  its  later  period. 

The  siege  of  forts  is  mentioned  in  the  Samhitas  and  Brah- 
According  to  the  Rigveda,13  fire  was  used. 


manas. 


12 


7  Rv.  i.  166,  8 ;  vii.  15,  14. 

8  Vedische  Studien,  1,  xxii,  xxiii,  where 
ksiti  dhruvd,  i.  73,  4,  is  compared. 

9  Strabo,  p.  702  ;  Arrian,  Indica,  10. 

10  Mahaparinibbanasutta,  p.  12.  Cf. 
Rhys  Davids,  Buddhist  India,  262. 

11  Journal  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  13,  77  ;   174  et  seq. 

12  Taittiriya  Samhita,  vi.  2,  3,  1 ; 
Aitareya  Brahmana,  i.  23 ;  Satapatha 
Brahmana,  iii.  4,  4,  3-5 ;  Gopatha 
Brahmana,  ii.  2,  7,  etc. 

13  vii.  5,  3.  Possibly,  in  some  cases, 
the  palisade  was  no  more  than  a  hedge 
of  thorn  or  a  row  of  stakes  (cf.  Rv. 
x.  101,  8),  as  suggested  by  Zimmer, 
Altindisches  Leben,  143,  145  ;  and  cf. 
Rv.  viii.  53,  5,  as  corrected  by  Roth, 
Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenldndischen 
Gesellschaft,  48,  109. 

Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  142- 
148,  who  compares  the  fact  that  neither 
the   Germans    (Tacitus,  Germania,   16) 


nor  the  Slavs  (Procoprus,  Debello  Gotico, 
iii.  14)  lived  in  towns,  but,  like  the 
ancient  Indians,  were  scattered  in 
villages,  each  consisting  of  the  houses 
and  steadings  of  the  several  families 
living  in  the  village.  The  evidence 
seems  pretty  convincing.  It  is  true 
that  the  Greeks,  when  we  first  find 
them,  evidently  knew  castles  and  for- 
tresses of  the  mediaeval  type ;  but  the 
Greeks  were  clearly  an  invading  race, 
superimposed  on  an  older  and  in 
civilization  more  advanced  people  (see, 
e.g.,  Burrows,  Discoveries  in  Crete).  But 
the  Pur  may,  as  Zimmer  allows,  have 
sometimes  been  built  within  the  limits 
of  the  village.  Whether,  as  he  urges 
(144),  the  saradl  pur  was  a  protection 
against  the  floods  of  autumn  is  un- 
certain. Cf.  Rv.  i.  131,  4;  174,  2; 
vi.  20,  10.  In  particular,  it  is  not 
legitimate  to  connect  the  mention  of 
those  forts  with  the  fact  that  the  Piirus 


54o 


NAMES— ANCIENT  TALES 


[  Puramdhi 


lived  on  either  side  of  the  Sindhu 
(Indus),  and  to  assume  that  Purukutsa's 
attack  on  the  aborigines  was  directed 
against  the  forts  in  which  they  normally 
protected  themselves  on  the  rising  of 
the  river.  No  argument  for  the  large 
size  of  cities  can  be  drawn  from  the 
mention  in  the  Kathaka  Upanisad,  v.  I, 
of  ekadaia-dvara  as  an  epithet  of  Pura 
{cf.  sVetasvatara  Upanisad,  iii.  18 : 
nava-dvara  pura,  '  the  citadel  of  nine 
doors '),    because    it    is    used    meta- 


phorically of  the  body,  and  the  number 
of  doors  depends  on  the  nature  of  the 
body  (Keith,  Aitareya  Aranyaka,  185). 
The  evidence  of  the  ^atapatha  Brah- 
mana, xi.  1,  1,  2.  3,  seems  rather  to 
point  to  only  one  gate  in  a  city. 

Cf.  Schrader,  Prehistoric  Antiquities, 
412 ;  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  5,  451  ; 
Weber,  Indische  Studien,  1,  229;  Ludwig, 
Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  203,  and 
Mahapur. 


Puram-dhi  occurs  in  the  Rigveda,1  possibly  as  the  name  of  a 
woman,  a  prot£g£e  of  the  Asvins,  who  gave  her  a  son,  Hiranya- 
hasta. 

1  i.  u6,  13.     Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  398. 

Puraya  is  the  name  of  a  patron  celebrated  in  a  Danastuti 
('  Praise  of  Gifts  ')  in  the  Rigveda.1 

1  vi.  63,  9.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  158. 


i.  Purana,  denoting  a  tale  'of  olden  times,'  is  often  found1 
in  the  combination  Itihasa-Purana,  which  is  probably  a 
Dvandva  compound  meaning  '  Itihasa  and  Purana.'  It  some- 
times2 occurs  as  a  separate  word,  but  beside  Itihasa,  no  doubt 
with  the  same  sense  as  in  the  Dvandva.  Sayana3  defines  a 
Purana  as  a  tale  which  deals  with  the  primitive  condition  of 
the  universe  and  the  creation  of  the  world,  but  there  is  no 
ground  for  supposing  that  this  view  is  correct,  or  for  clearly 
distinguishing  Itihasa  and  Purana.     See  Itihasa. 


1  Satapatha  Brahmana,  xi.  5,  6,  8 ; 
Chandogya  Upanisad,  iii.  4, 1.  2 ;  vii.  1, 
2.  4  ;  2,  1 ;  7,  1. 

2  Av.  xv.  6, 4 ;  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
xiii.  4,  3, 13  ;  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisad, 
ii  4,  10;  iv.  1,  2;  5,  11;  Taittirlya 
Aranyaka,  ii.  9;  Jaiminiya  Upanisad 


Brahmana,  i.  53  ;  Purana-veda :  Sankh- 
ayana  sVauta  Sutra,  xvi.  2,  27  ;  Purana- 
vidya:  ASvalayana  Srauta  Sutra,  x.  7, 
etc. 

3  Introduction  to  Aitareya  Brah- 
mana, cited  by  St.  Petersburg  Dic- 
tionary, s.v. 


2.  Puraria  is  the  name  of  a  Esi  in  the  Kathaka  Samhita 
(xxxix.  7). 


Pumkutsa  ]  A    WATER  ANIMAL— A   VICTORIOUS  KING 


54i 


Purikaya  is  the  name  of  a  water  animal  in  the  Atharvaveda,1 
being  clearly  a  variant  of  the  name  that  appears  as  Pulikaya  in 
the  Maitrayani  Samhita,2  and  as  Kulipaya  in  the  Vajasaneyi 
Samhita,3  and  as  Kulikaya  in  the  Taittiriya  Brahmana.4  What 
animal  is  meant  is  quite  unknown. 


1  XI.   2,  25. 

2  iii.   14,   2.     Pulika, 
variant  of  Kulika. 

3  xxiv.  21.  35. 

4  v.  5,  13,  1. 


ibid. 


Cf.  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  96; 
Bloomfield,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft,  48,  557 ; 
Hymns  of  the  Atharvaveda,  621. 


Purisini  is  found  in  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda1  apparently 
either  as  the  name  of  a  river,2  or  much  more  probably  as  an 
epithet  of  the  Sarayu,3  meaning,  perhaps,  '  abounding  in 
water,' '  swollen,'4  or  *  carrying  rubble.'5 


1  v-  53>  9«  '       3  Zimmer,    Altindisches    Leben, 

2  An  alternative  suggested  by  Roth,      Geldner,  Rigveda,  Glossar,  in. 
St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v.  4  Geldner,  loc.  cit. 

6  Roth,  loc.  cit. 


17; 


Puru-kutsa  is  the  name  of  a  king  who  is  mentioned  several 
times  in  the  Rigveda.  In  one  passage1  he  is  mentioned  as  a 
contemporary  of  Sudas,  but  whether  as  a  foe,  according  to 
Ludwig,2  or  merely  as  a  contemporary,  according  to  Hille- 
brandt,3  is  uncertain.  In  two  other  passages4  he  is  mentioned 
as  victorious  by  divine  favour,  and  in  another  6  he  appears  as  a 
king  of  the  Pupus  and  a  conqueror  of  the  Dasas.  His  son  was 
Tpasadasyu,6  who  is  accordingly  called  Paupukutsya7  or 
Paupukutsi.8  Different  conclusions  have  been  drawn  from  one 
hymn  of  the  Rigveda9  in  which  the  birth  of  Purukutsa's  son, 


1  i.  63,  7. 

2  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  174, 
emending  sudase  in  the  text  to  sudasam, 
plausibly,  but  not,  of  course,  con- 
vincingly. 

3  Vedische  Mythologie,  1,  115.  Cf. 
Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen 
Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft,  42,  204, 
205,  219. 

4  i.  112,  7.  14 ;  174,  2. 

5  vi.    20,    10.     Cf.   i.   63,   7,   where 


Puru  also  is  mentioned.  Ludwig  sug- 
gests reading  in  vi.  20,  10,  saudasih  for 
dasih,  referring  to  the  forts  of  Sudas ; 
but  this  must  be  regarded  as  illegiti- 
mate. Cf.  Oldenberg,  Zeitschrift,  55, 
33o. 

6  Rv.  iv.  42,  8.  9. 

7  Rv.  v.  33,  8  ;  viii.  19,  36. 

8  Rv.  vii.  19,  3. 

9  Rv.   iv.   42,   8.  9,   with   Sayana's 
note  ;  Muir,  Sanskrit  Texts,  i2,  266,  267. 


542  A  QUEEN— A  SACRIFICER  [Purukutsani 

Trasadasyu,  is  mentioned.  The  usual  interpretation  is  that 
Purukutsa  was  killed  in  battle  or  captured,  whereupon  his 
wife  secured  a  son  to  restore  the  fortunes  of  the  Purus.  But 
Sieg10  offers  a  completely  different  interpretation.  According 
to  him  the  word  daurgahe,  which  occurs  in  the  hymn,  and 
which  in  the  ordinary  view  is  rendered  '  descendant  of  Durgaha,' 
an  ancestor  of  Purukutsa,  is  the  name  of  a  horse,  the  hymn 
recording  the  success  of  an  Asvamedha  (' horse  sacrifice') 
undertaken  by  Purukutsa  for  his  wife,  as  by  kings  in  later 
times,  to  secure  a  son.  This  interpretation  is  supported  by  the 
version  of  daurgahe  given  in  the  ^atapatha,11  but  is  by  no 
means  certain.  Moreover,  if  Purukutsa  was  a  contemporary  of 
Sudas,  the  defeat  of  the  Purus  by  Sudas  in  the  Dasarajna12 
might  well  have  been  the  cause  of  the  troubles  from  which 
Purukutsani,  by  the  birth  of  Trasadasyu,  rescued  the  family. 
In  the  Satapatha  Brahmana13  Purukutsa  is  called  an  Aiksvaka. 


10  Die  Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  96-102. 

11  xiii.  5,  4,  5. 

12  vii.  18.     Cf.  also  the  reference  to 
a  Puru  defeat  in  vii.  8,  4. 


13  xiii.  5,4,  5.  Cf.  Iksvaku,  Tryaruna 
and  Oldenberg,  Buddha,  403. 


Purukutsani,  'wife  of  Purukutsa,'  is  mentioned  as  the 
mother  of  Trasadasyu  in  one  hymn  of  the  Rigveda  (iv.  42,  9). 

Puru-nitha  Sata-vaneya  ('  descendant  of  Satavani ')  is  the 
name  of  a  sacrificer,  or  perhaps  a  priest,  a  Bharadvaja,  in  the 
Rigveda.1  It  is  doubtful  whether  he  is  also  mentioned  as  a 
singer  in  another  passage  of  the  Rigveda.2  In  both  places 
Roth3  sees  in  Puru-nitha  merely  a  word  meaning  'choral  song.' 

1  i.  59.  7-  I  of  the   Rigveda,   3,    160 ;    Oldenberg, 

2  vii.  9,  6.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation   |  Rgveda-Noten,  x,  60. 

3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  s.v. 

Puru-dama  occurs  in  the  plural  in  the  Atharvaveda,1  where, 
according  to  Ludwig,2  it  is  probably  the  proper  name  of  the 
singers,  but  by  Roth3  and  Whitney4  is  understood  as  merely 
an  adjective  meaning  '  possessed  of  many  houses.' 


1  vii.  73,  1. 

2  Translation    of    the    Rigveda,    3, 

XXV. 


3  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary,  S.v. 
*  Translation   of   the   Atharvaveda, 
437- 


NAMES— AN  ANCIENT  SAGE 


543 


Purumilha  ] 

Puru-pantha  is  mentioned  as  a  generous  donor  to  a  Bharad- 
vaja  in  one  hymn  of  the  Rigveda  (vi.  63,  10). 


Puru-mayya  occurs  in  one  hymn  of  the  Rigveda1  as  a 
protege"  of  Indra.  It  is  quite  possible  that  he  was  the  father  of, 
or  at  least  connected  with,  Atithigra,  Rksa,  and  ASvamedha, 
who  are  celebrated  in  the  hymn. 

1  viii.  68,  10.     Cf.  Ludwig,  Translation  of  the  Rigveda,  3,  163. 

Puru-mitra  is  mentioned  twice  in  the  Rigveda  (i.  117,  20; 
x.  39,  7)  as  the  father  of  a  maiden  who  wedded  Vimada, 
apparently  against  her  father's  will. 


Puru-milha  is  mentioned  twice  in  the  Rigveda1  as  an  ancient 
sage,  in  which  capacity  he  appears  in  the  Atharvaveda2  also. 
Perhaps  the  same3  Purumilha  is  intended  in  an  obscure  hymn 
in  the  Rigveda,4  where,  according  to  the  legends  reported  in 
the  Brhaddevata5  and  by  Sadgurusisya  in  his  commentary  on 
the  SarvanukramanI,6  and  by  Sayana  in  his  commentary  on  the 
Rigveda,4  he  as  well  as  Taranta  was  a  son  of  Vidadasva,  and 
a  patron  of  the  singer  Syavaiva.  The  correctness  of  the  legend 
has  been  shown  to  be  most  improbable  by  Oldenberg,7  who 
points  out8  that  the  legend  misinterprets  the  Rigveda  by 
making  Purumilha  a  Vaidadasvi,  for  he  is  there  only  compared 
in  generosity  to  one. 

In  another  legend  found  in  the  Pancavimsa  Brahmana,9  and 
based  on  a  hymn  of  the  Rigveda,10  Purumilha  and  Taranta 
appear  as  persons  who  received  gifts  from  Dhvasra  and  Puru- 
santi,  and  as  sons  of  Vidadasva.  The  legend,  which  also 
occurs  in  the  Satyayanaka,11  is  apparently  best  explained  by 


1  i.  151,  2  ;   183,  5. 

2  iv.  29,  4  ;  xviii.  3,  15. 

3  See,  however,  Weber,  Episches  im 
vediscken  Ritual,  27,  n.  3 ;  Sieg,  Die 
Sagenstoffe  des  Rgveda,  62,  n.  3. 

*  v.  61,  9. 

6  v.  49  et  seq.,  with  Macdonell's  notes. 

8  Edition  Macdonell,  pp.  118  et  seq. 


7  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  353,  354.    Cf.  Max 
Miiller,   Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  32, 

359- 

8  Op.  cit.,  354,  n.  1. 

9  xiii.  7,  12. 

10  ix.  58,  3- 

11  Cited  by  Sayana  on  Rv.,  loc.  cit. 


544 


LEGEND  OF  PURUMlLHA 


Sieg,12  who  says  that  as  the  two  were  kings  they  could  not 
under  the  rules  of  caste  accept  gifts,  unless  for  the  nonce  they 
became  singers.  The  legend  has  no  claim  at  all,  as  Oldenberg13 
shows,  to  validity. 


12  Op.  Cit.,  63. 

13  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgen- 
landischen  Gesellschaft,  42,  232,  n.  1.  He 
points  out,  Rgveda-Noten,  1,  354,  that 


the  legend  is  not  accepted  by  the 
Anukramanl  (Index),  since  its  list  of 
authors  gives  Avatsara  as  the  Rsi,  not 
the  two  Taranta  and  Purumilba. 


END   OF  VO]L.   I. 


BILLING  AND   SONS,    LTD.,  PRINTERS,   GUILDFORD 


Q 


BJNDWG  DEFT.  JUL  28  1960 


CO 


rH      • 

^     i 


i 


p 

nj 

s 


i 

**       ©: 

rl      »d 


53 

6       o 

3     > 


o 

1  3    8 


University  of  Toronto 
Library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  limited 


ill  iwWiiiiii'™ 

ImS  i  st  ihhIi  1  i  i  i  I  1    ill 

VVM 


VtiK 

■  '•■"■•' 


\M\m\ 


111 

tint 


