===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.196045.The-White-Yajurveda_djvu.txt =====

THE  WHITE  YAJURVEDA 


.ANSLATED  WITH  A POPULAR  COUSfEIifT^BY 


BY 

RALPH  T,  H.  GRIFFim 

f^'RMERLY  PRINCIPAL  OF  BENARES  COLLEGE,  AND  SOMETIME 
DIRECTOR  OF  PUBLIC  INSTRUCTION,  NORTH-WEST  PROVINCES 
AND  OUDH. 


BENARES: 

^ PRINTED  AND  PUBLISHED  BY  E.  J.  LAZARUS  AND  CO. 


1899. 

All  rights  reserved. 


f3r.  R.  C. 


Preface 


Page 


BOOKI'  I.'  ' 

N^sw  and  Full  Moon  sacrifices  ...  .f. 

Kemoval  of  the  calves  ‘ • ... 

Tb<»  milking  ...  ...  . 

P'nrification  of  the  milk 

The  Vow  of  Abstinence  ...  . 

Preparation  of  the  rice  - 

Rice-cake  offered  to  Agni  ^ 

Rice-cake  to  Agni-Som^ 

Bringing  forward  the  sacrificial  waters  ... 
Purification  of  the  waters  • - ...  ^ .f. 

Sipreading  the  black-antelope’s  skin 
Pounding  the  rice  ... 

Putting  potsherds  on  the  fire  ... 

Placing  the  nether  press-stone  on  the  skin 
Division  of  the  dough : one  lump  fw^ni 
for  Agni-Soma  ...  ^ "••• 

Exorcism  of  the  fiend  Araru^ ' 

Drawing  of  lines  on  three  sides  of  the  altar 

Exorcism  of  evil  spirits 

Girding  the  Sacrifioer’s  wife  as  his  associate 


.j.  i*'**'' 


. 7 


bne 


1 

1 

2 

2 

2 

3 

3 

3 

4 
4 

4 

5 

5 

6 

6 

7 

7 

8 
8 


BOOK  II. 

Sprinkling  of  fuel,  altar,  and  sacred  grass 
Placing  of  the  Prastara  or  Grass-bunch  on  the  cover- , 

ing  grass  

Laying  the  enclosing -sticks  round  the  sacrificial  fire 
Kindling  the  fire 
Exorcism  ctf  fiends  ... 

Spreading  of  the  Prastara 

laying  down  the  three  offering-spoons  ... 

Election  of  Agni  as  Hotar 


9 

9 

9 

9 

10 

10 

10 

11 


17 


CONTENTS. 


Anointing  the  encloeing-sticks  ...  ...  ...  12 

Throwing  the  sticks  into  the  fire  ...  ..  12 

The  Sacrificer’s  wife  unties  the  Veda  or  sacred  Grass- 
bunch  ...  ....  ...  ^ ^ 

Holy  water  poured  on  the  altar  ...  ...  U 

Portion  of  oblation  allotted  to  Bakshasas  ... 

The  three  Vishnn-strides 

Completion  of  the  Vow  of  Abstinence  ...  ...  14 

Pindapitriyajna  or  Obsequial  Offetings  to  Ancestral 

...  ..  ...  ... 

Line  drawn  to  keep  off  evil  spirits  ...  ...  15 

Threads,  wool,  or  hair  as  raiment  for  the  Manes  ...  15 

Formula  recited  by  the  Sacrificer’s  wife  to  obtain 

^ ...  ...  ...  ...  15 

Water  poured  on  the  obsequial  cakes  ...  ...  Ig 


BOOK  III. 

Agnyddhana  or  Establishment  of  Sacrificial  Fires  ...  17 

The  Abavaniya  Fire  ...  ...  ... 

The  Dukshin^gni  or  Southern  Fire  ...  ...  17 

Agnihotra,  morning  and  evening  milk-oblations  ...  ISi 


The  Gdrhapatya  Fire 

38,1^ 

Worship  of  Agni 

18,19 

Address  to  the  Cows  ... 

19 

The  Savitri  .. 

21 

Worship  of  the  GAi  hapatya  and  Abavaniya  Fires 

21 

Worship  of  Agni  Purisliya 

21 

Four-monthly  Sacrifices 

22 

Purificatory  Baptism  of  the  Sacrificer  and  his  Wife 

..  22 

The  Sakamedha  Offerings 

23 

Worship,  with  ohlation,  of  Rudra  Tryambaka 

24 

Ceremonial  Shaving  of  the  Sacrificer's  head 

25 

BOOK  IV. 

Soma  Sacrifice 

Apsu-Diksha,  Consecration  by  Water,  Baptism 

26 

Andgrabhana  or  Uplifting  Ceremonies  ...  .t. 

27 

Putting  on  the  Sacrificial  Girdle 

27,28 

COKTENTS. 


Tying  on  a black-buck’s  hotn  ... 

Preparation  of  Vow-food  ... 

Iliranyavati'-ihuti,  Offering  with  Gold  ... 

P,everenc0  to  the  Soma  purchasing  Cow  ... 

Purchase  of  Soma  plants 
introduction  of  Soma... 

BOOK  V. 

Atithya,  or  Ceremonial  Reception  of  Soma 
Tindnaptra,  or  Invocation  of  Agni  TanAnap^t 
Minor  Consecration  ... 

ApyAyaua,  Sprinkling  of  the  Soma  plants 
Upasads,  Reverential  Services  ... 

Marking  out  the  lines  of  the  Soma  altar...  ... 
Providing  earth  for  the  High  Altar 
Anointing  of  the  four  corners  of  the  Altar  place  ... 
Construction  of  Havirdhanas  or  Soma  cart  sheds  ... 
Construction  of  the  Priests’  Slied,  the  Pressing-place, 
and  Dhishnyas  .. 

Preparation  of  the  Uparavas  or  sound-holes 
Erection  of  the  Udunibam  Post  in  the  Priests’  Shed 
Enclosing  of  the  Priests’  Shed  with  mats 
Consecration  of  the  Dhishnyas  .. 

Laying  are  on  the  Agnidhra  hearth 
Deposition  of  Pressing-stones,  Soma  trough,  and 
Soma  vessels 

Deposition  of  the  Soma  plant  on  a black-antelope’s 
skin 

Animal  Sacrifice  ...  •••  •••  ••• 

Preparation  of  the  YApa  or  Sacrificial  Stake  ••• 

BOOK  VI, 

Erection  of  the  Stake 

Binding  and  Slaughtering  of  the  Victim... 

Boasting  and  oflfering  Cf  the  omentum  and  flesh  ... 
Symbolical  re-uniting  of  the  separated  portions  ... 
Dismissal  of  the  re-united  Victim  to  Heaven 
Soma  Sacrifice  ...  ••• 


Pagt 

28 

28 

21 

29 

51 

33 


34 

34 
3^ 

35 

35 

36 
36 

36 

37 

37 

38 

39 

40 
40 
43 

42 

42 

42 


44 

45 
i1 

47 

48 
48 


^IDONTENTS. 


The  Vasativari  water,  to  be  used  in  the  Soma-pressing 

Pa^e 

48 

Taking  the  Soma  plants  from  the  cart  and  laying 
them  on  the  pressing-stones 

48 

The  Morning  Pressing 

... 

49 

The  Upamsu  Press  stone  ... 

... 

49 

The  NigrabhyS,  Water 

... 

49 

Beating  the  Soma 

... 

50 

BOOK  VII. 

Grahagrahana,  Drawing  Cups  of  Soma  ... 

51 

Upamsu  Graha 

51 

Antaryama  Graha 

51 

Aindra-Vayava  Graha 

52 

Maitiil-Varuna  Graha  ...  ... 

52 

Asvina  Graha  ... 

52 

Sukra  Graha 

• •• 

53 

Manthin  Graha 

• •• 

53 

Agrayana  Graha 

54 

Ukthya  Graha 

51 

Dliruva  Graha 

55 

Viprud-Homa,  or  Drop  Oblation 

55 

Avakdsa  Formulas  ...  ...  .„ 

56 

Ritu  Grahas,  Libations  to  the  Seasons  ... 

56 

.Aindragna  Cup 

57 

Vaisvadeva  Cup  ' 

57 

The  Midday  Pressing... 

57 

Mariitvatiya  Cups 

57 

Mahendra  Graha,  Cup  for  Mahendra 

, 58 

Dakshina-U^ma,  Oblation  in  the  Southern  Fire 

58 

Address  to  the  Guerdon-Cows  ... 

... 

59 

BOOK  VIII. 

The  Third  or  Evening  Pressing 

«»• 

60 

Aditya  Graha  or  Libation  to  the  Adityas 

... 

60 

Savitra  Graha,  or  Libation  to  Savitar  ... 

... 

60 

Mah&vaisvadeva  Cup,  or  Libation  to  the  Great  All* 
Gods  ... 


61 


CONTENTS. 


vii 

Pa^t 


P^tnfvata  Cup,  or  Libation  to  Soma  ...  ...  61 

P&tnivata  Cup,  or  Libation  to  Agni  ...  ...  61 

HUriyojana  Cup,  a Libation  to  Indra  ...  ...  Cl 

Splinters  of  the  Sacrificial  Stake  thrown  on  the  fire  62 
Samishtayaj us  Ceremonies  ..  ...  ...  62 

Aisabhritha,  or  Purifying  Bath ...  ...  ...  64 

Offering  of  the  Va^  or  Saorifioial  Cow  ...  ...  64 

Offering  of  the  Embryo  Calf  ...  ...  ...  64 

Additional  Soma  Sacrifices  .*• 

Shodasl  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  65 

DvAdasaha  ...  ...  ...  ...  65 

Atigrahyas  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  65 

Gavamayana  ...  ...  ...  ...  66 

GargatrirAtra  ...  ...  ...  ...  66 

MahAvratiya  Graha  ...  ...  ...  ...  67 

Adabhya  Graha  ...  ...  ...  ...  67 

Sattrotthana,  or  Rising  from  a Sacrificial  Session  ...  68 

Rectifying  and  Expiatory  Formulas  ...  ...  68 

BOOK  IX. 

The  VAjapeya,  or  Draught  of  Strength  ...  ...  71 

Cups  of  Soma  ...  ...  ...  ...  71 

Cup  of  SurA  ...  ...  71 

Chariot-race  ...  ,.  ...  ...  72 

Sprinkling  and  harnessing  the  horses  ...  ...  72 

Beating  the  Drum  ...  ...  ...  ...  73 

Address  to  the  Horses  ...  ...  ...  74 

Twelve  Oblations,  one  for  each  Month  ...  ..  74 

Six  Oblations,  one  for  each  Season  ...  ...  75 

Enthronement  of  the  Sacrifioer...  ...  ...  75 

Vajaprasavaniya,  or  Strength-furthering,  Oblations  75 

Ujjitis,  or  Victory  Formulas  ...  ...  ...  76 

The  RAjasfiya,  or  King’s  Inauguration  ...  ...  77 

Preliminary  Oblations  ...  ...  ...  77 

ApAmArga,  or  Exorcising,  Oblation  ...  ...  77 

Oblations  to  the  Eight  DevasAs  or  Furthering  Gods  78 

Presentation  of  the  King  to  the  People  ...  ...  78 


CO^TBKTS. 


BOOK  X. 

The  Abhisheka,  Aspersion,  or  Consecration 

Collection  of  the  Consecrating  Waters  ... 

Spreading  the  Tiger-skin 

Robing  with  the  Conaeoration  Garments... 

Presentation  of  the  Three  Arrows 

Formulas  announcing  and  introducing  the  King  ... 

Ascending  the  Quarters 

Sprinkling  with  Holy  Water  ... 

The  Capture  of  the  Cows 

Rathavimochaniya,  or  Car-unharnessing,  Oblations 

The  Throwing  of  the  Dice 

The  Dasapeya  Libations  ... 

Sanisrip,  or  Creeping,  Oblation,.. 

The  Sautramani  ...  ...  ... 

BOOK  XL 

Agnichayana,  Building  of  the  Fire  Altar... 

Taking  up  the  Spade... 

Address  to  the  Victims  ...  ... 

The  Clay  Lump,  representing  Agni 
Digging  round  the  Clay  Lump  ... 

The  Lotus-leaf 

Forming  the  Fire-pan 

Address  to  the  Fire-pan 

Placing  the  Fire-pan  on  the  Abavaniya  Fire 

Address  to  Agui  Puwshya 

BOOK  XII. 

Raising  the  Ukhya,  or  Fire-p^,  Agni,  and  setting  it 
on  a seat 

The  Sling  in  which  the  tJkhya  Agni  is  to  be  carried 
about  ... 

The  Vishnu -strides  ... 

The  Vatsapra  Rite  ... 

Vaniva  haniiba,  or  Driving  Hither  and  Thither  of  Agni 
Construction  of  the  Cirhapatya  Hearth... 
Preparation  Of  the  Giroucd  ...  ^ 


cosiAots. 


iM 


Laying  the  bricks 

Page 

...  106 

Throwing  the  Ukhya  Agni  on  th0  Hearth 

...  107 

Thd  Altar  of  Nirfiti 

...  lo7 

Preparation  of  the  Site  of  the  Piri  Aftar 

109 

Ploughing  the  Ground  ... 

...  l09 

Watering  and  Sowing 

...  109 

Address  to  the  Plants 

...  109 

The  first  Layer  of  Bricks 

...  112 

Spreading  Sand  on  the  Altar  ... 

...  Ill 

Address  to  the  Fires  ... 

...  113 

BOOK  XID. 

The  Lotus  Leaf 

...  114 

The  Piece  of  Gold 

...  114 

The  Golden  Man 

...  114 

The  Porous  Brick 

116 

The  Durva  Grass 

...  116 

The  Dviyajus  Bricks  ... 

117 

The  Retahsich  Bricks...  ...  ' 

117 

The  RitavyA  Bricks  ...  ... 

...  117 

The  Aahadhi  or  Invincible  Brick 

...  117 

The  Tortoise  ... 

...  118 

The  Pestle  and  Mortar 

...  118 

The  Fire-pan  ...  ... 

119 

The  Victims’  Heads  ... 

...  119 

The  Gold  Splinters  ... 

...  119 

Vorship  of  the  Unfinished  Altar 

131 

^pasy^  Bricks 

...  12J 

^hhandasya  Bricks  ... 

...  122 

Vapabhrit  Bricks  ... 

122 

’be  Second  Layer  ... 

124 

[.svini  Bricks  ...  ...  ...  . 

...  124 

h>avy&s  ...  

124 

aisvadevis...  ...  ... 

125 

'linabhfitas 

...  125 

‘^jasyas 

125 

he  Third  Layer  ;.. 

126 

X 


coOTEirrs. 


Central  Porous  Brick... 

•is 

Pagt 

126 

126 

Diayas 

126 

Visvajyotia  ... 

RitavySLs  (Nabhas  and  Nabtasya) 

... 

126 

127 

Ritaf  yits  (Isha  and  tJ^^rja) 

127 

PrSlnabhritaa 

127 

Chhandasyas 

127 

V^akhily^B 

128 

The  Fourth  Layer  ... 

128 

Stomas 

129 

Spritas 

129 

Ritavyis  ••• 

129 

Sriahtia  ...  •••  **•  ** 

131 

The  Fifth  Layer  

131 

Asapatnas  ...  •••  ••• 

131 

Virajas  ... 

• •• 

132 

Stoma-bh^gas 

132 

K&kasadaa  ...  ••• 

• •t 

133 

PaiichachddSls  ... 

134 

OhhaudaayEla 

... 

133 

Garhapatya  Hearth  ... 

... 

138 

Punaschiti  ... 

139 

Ritavyas  ... 

139 

Visvajyotis ... 

139 

Lokampfinas  •••  *** 

139 

Vikarni  ... 

139 

Porous  Brick  .••  ••• 

139 

Scattering  Bits  of  Gold  on  the  Altar  ... 

• at 

BOOK.  XVI. 

The  Satarudriya 

• •• 

BOOK  XVII. 

Taking  Possession  of  the  Altar .. . 

... 

14 

14 

Frog,  Avaka,  and  Bamboo-shoot 

... 

14 

Mounting  the  Altar  ...  ••• 

... 

14 

Oblation  to  Agni  on  the  chief  Porous  Brick 

... 

CONTENTS. 


XI 


sprinkling  the  Altar  with  curds,  honey  and  butter  150 


)bIation8  in  the  Hall  Door  Fire  ...  150 

^rayer  to  Indra  as  God  of  Battles  ...  152 

iirection  of  the  Variegated  Stone  ...  ,,,  155 

lounting  the  Altar  ...  ...  ^ 

)blation  of  Milk  from  a Black  Cow  with  a White  Calf  157 
-laying  three  Logs  on  the  Fire ...  ...  ...  I57 

)blation8  to  Agni  ...  ...  ...  J5g 

Iffedng  of  Seven  Rice  Cakes  to  the  Maruts  ...  158 

Culogy  of  Ghfita  ...  ...  ...  ...  159 

BOOK  XVIII. 

onsecration  Service  for  Agni  as  King  ...  162 

'^asordhAiA,  or  Stream  of  Riches  ...  ...  162 

Ltdhendra,  or  Half-lndra,  Oblations  ...  163 

hree  sets  of  Grahas ...  ...  164 

ajfiakratus,  or  Sacrificial  Rites  ...  ...  164 

numeration  of  Stomas  or  Hymns  of  Praise  ...  165 

ge  Libations  ...  ...  ...  ...  165 

ame  Libation  ...  ...  ...  ...  165 

alpa,  or  Success,  Libation  ...  ...  ...  165 

Ijaprasaviya,  or  Strength-furthering,  Libations  166 

ishtrabhrit,  or  Kingdom-supporting,  Libation  ...  166 

jlations  on  the  Head  of  the  War-chariot  ...  167 

ind  Oblations  ...  ...  167 

istrous  Oblations  ...  ...  ...  ...  167 

“kAavamedha-santati  Oblations  ...  ...  168 

;niyojaua,  or  Equipment  of  Agni  ...  ...  168 

miahtayajus,  or  Final  Sacrificial,  Oblations  ...  169 

►mage  to  the  completed  Fire  Altar  ...  ...  170 

tnbolical  Meaning  of  the  Construction  of  the  Fire 

^Itar  ...  ...  ...  „ 171 

BOOK  XIX. 

SautrAmani  ...  ...  ...  ...  172 

Libations  to  the  Afvlns,  Saraavati,  and  Indra  173 
ification  of  the  Sacrificer  ...  ...  173 


co^^m'rs. 


Pa^ 

The  Identification  of  the  S&utdmani  with  Somfc 


Sacrifice  ...  ...  ...  ...  17 

Transubstatotiarion  of  the  Sur4  or  Wine  ...  17 

Libations  of  Sura  in  the  Southern  h'ite  17 

Oblation  and  Pmyer  to  the  bothers  ...  .k,  17 

The  Hundtred-holed  Jar  of  Suii  ...  17' 

Oblations  to  the  Fathers  ...  17I 

Residue  drunk  by  the  Sacrifieer  ...  ...  17< 

Formulas  addressed  to  the  Somavat  Fathers  ...  171 

Formulas  addressed  to  the  Barhishads  ...  ...  I8( 

Formulas  addressed  to  the  Agnishvattas  ...  ...  18( 

Prayer  to  Fathers  of  all  Classes  ...  181 

Address  to  Agni  ...  Ig^ 

Address  to  Iiidm  ...  ...  ...  ...  |gj 

Verses  illustrative  of  Separation  and  Rejection  ...  183 

Thirty-two  Oblations  of  Fat  or  Marrow  ...  18S 

Re-creation  of  ludra  ...  ...  184 

BOOK  XX. 

The  Asandi  or  Sacrificer’s  Seat...  ...  ,,,  188 

Sprinkling  of  the  Sacrificer  with  Libation-fet  ...  186 

The  Sacrificer’s  Benediction  on  all  Parts  of  his  Body  186 

Further  Self-lienedictory  Formulas  ...  187 

The  Avabhfitha  or  Purificatory  Ceremony  ...  *187 

Prayers  for  Remission  of  Sin  ...  ...  ...  187 

Laying  Fuel  on  the  Ahavaniya  Fire  ...  ...  188 

Mixing  Sura  with  Soma  ...  ...  189 

Offering  of  a Rice  Cake  to  Indra  ...  ...  189 

The  Thirty- third  Oblation  of  Fat  or  Marrow  ...  189 

Inhaling  the  Odour  of  the  Remains  ofihe  Oblatioa  190 

Apr!  Hymn _ 190 

Invitation  of  Indra  to  the  Sacrifice  ...  ...  190 

Further  Address  to  Indra  ...  ...  191 

Praise  of  the  Alvins  and  Sarasvati  ...  „ 192 

FrayertoAgni  ...  ...  ...  19^ 

Fraiseof  Sarasratt  ...  ...  ...  I95 

Invitation  to  Indra  and  the  Asvins  I95 


BOOK  XXL 

Offering  of  a Rice  Cake  and  prayer  to  Yarupa 

Prayer  to  A gni  as  Mediator 

Prayer  and  Oblation  to  Aditi 

Oblations  to  Mitra  and  Varu^ia  as  Rain^Gods 

A Propitiatory  Hymn  in  honour  of  Indra 

Benedictions  on  ludra 

Directions  to  the  Hotar  to  worship  various  Deities 
and  Sacred  Objects 
Benedictions  on  Indra 
Conclusion  of  the  SantraraaiiJ  Ceremony.., 

BOOK  XXIL 

The  Asvamedha  or  Horse^Sacrifioe 

Investing  the  Sacrificer  with  the  Gold  Ornament  ... 

Address  to  the  Ornament 

Girding  and  Sprinkling  of  the  Horse 

Symbolical  Slaughter  of  a Dog... 

Offering  of  Oblations  to  Ten  Deities 
Homage  to  the  Horse  ...  ... 

Prayers  and  OblaHons  to  Savitar 
Inviting  Verses  to  Agni 
Eulogy  of  the  Horse  ...  ... 

Protection  invoked  for  the  Horse 
Ohjatioiis  and  Homage  to  Prajapati  and  Other  Deities 
The  King’s  Prayer  for  Blessings  on  his  Kingdom 
Homage  and  Oblations  to  Gods  and  deified  Objects 
Homage  to  the  Genii  of  Numbers 

BOOK  XXIIL 

Ceremonies  after  return  of  the  Horse 
Offering  of  two  Mahiman  Libations 
Harnessing  the  Horse  " 

Bathing  the  Horse  ... 

Anointing  and  Decking  the  Horse 
A Brahmodyam 

Binding  the  Horse  to  the  Stake 
Slauiirhter  of  the  Horse  ... 


196 

196 

196 

196 

197 

198 

199 

m 

m 


205 

205 

205 

205 

205 

205 

205 

206 
206 
206 

207 

208 
208 
209 


210 

210 

210 

211 

211 

211 

212 


XIV 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

Circumambulation  of  the  Horse  ...  ...  213 

Ceremony  performed  by  the  Chief  Queen...  213 

Marking  the  lines  of  dissection...  ...  ...  213 

A Brahmodyara  ...  ...  ...  ...  213 

Mahiman  Libation  to  Prajdpati  ...  217 

BOOK  XXIV. 

Enumeration  of  Animals  to  be  tied  up  ...  ...  218 

BOOK  XXV. 

Continuation  of  the  Horse  Sacrifice 

Oblations  of  the  roasted  flesh  ...  ...  ...  224 

Inviting  and  Offering  Verses  to  Prajapati  ...  226 

Inviting  and  Oflfering  Verses  to  the  All-Gods  ...  226 

The  Eulogy  of  the  Horse  ...  ...  22'^ 

Conclusion  of  the  Sacrifice  ...  ...  ...  2301 

BOOK  XXVI. 

Supplenaentary  Texts  and  Formulas  connected  with 

various  sacrifices...  ...  ...  ...  231 

BOOK  XXVII. 

Supplementary  Texts  and  Formulas  continued  235 

book  XXVIII. 

Texts  and  Formulas  of  the  Sautrimanl  Ceremony, 

supplementary  to  Books  XIX— XXI.  ...  J40 

An  Apr!  hymn  ...  ...  _ _ ___ 

BOOK  XXIX. 

Supplementary  Texts  and  Formulas  of  the  Asvame- 

dha  or  Horse-Sacrifice  ...  ...  ’ 247 

Praise  of  the  Horse  as  identified  with  the  Sun  ...  218 

An  Aprt  hymn  ..  250 

Eulogy  of  toe  Bow  and  Implements  of  War  ...  251 

Supplement  to  the  List  of  Victims  in  Book  XXIV....  254 

Book  XXX. 

The  Purushamedha  or  Human  Sacrifice  ...  ...  255 

Enumeration  of  Victims,  men  and  women,  to  be  de- 
dicated to  various  Deities  and  Abstractions  ...  255j' 


CONtENTSi 


BOOK  XXXL 

The  Purushamedha  continued  ...  ...  ^ 

The  Purushasukta  ... 

Glorification  of  the  First  Performer  of  the  Purusha- 
. medha... 

BOOK  XXXII. 

Texts  and  Formulas  of  the  Sarvamedha  or  Sacrifico 
for  Universal  Success  and  Prosperity 
Eulogy  of  the  Sacrificer  ...  ...  ... 

Prayer  for  Wisdom  and  GI017  ... 

BOOK  XXXIII. 

Continuation  of  the  Sarvamedha  Formulae 
A Litany  addressed  to  Agni  ...  ... 

Glorification  of  Indra ... 

Glorification,  with  Libations,  of  Surya  ... 
Unconnected  verses  in  praise  of  various  Deities  ... 

BOOK  XXXIV. 

The  Sivasahkalpa  Upanishad  ... 

Miscellaneous  Texts  suitable  for  the  General  Sacrifice 
Prayer  to  Bhaga 
Praise  of  Pushan 

Investiture  with  a Golden  Ornament 
Prayer  to  Brahmanaspati 

BOOK  XXXV. 

Formulas,  connected  with  the  Pitriyajfla  or  Sacrifice 
to  the  Fathers  or  Ancestral  Manes,  to  be  used 
at  funeral  ceremonies 

Purificatory  and  benedictive  Formulas  ...  ... 

BOOK  XXXVI. 

Preliminary  Formulas  of  the  Pravargya  Ceremony... 

BOOK  XXXVII. 

Formulas  to  be  used  at  the  performance  of  the  Pra- 
vargya... 

Fumigation  of,  and  addresses  to,  the  three  Caldrons 


ivi 


COKTtNTa 


Circumambulation  of  the  Mahavfra 

Fagt 

295 

The  Bauhina  Oblation 

296 

BOOK  XXXVIII. 

Continuation  of  the  Pravargy  a Formulas ... 

297 

Calling  and  milking  of  the  Cow 

297 

Anointing  of  the  Mahavim 

299 

Address  to  Agni  represented  by  the  Mah^vira 

299 

Remains  of  the  contents  drunk  by  Sacrifioer  and 

Priests.,. 

300 

BOOK  XXXIX. 

Expiatory  Formulas  to  remedy  any  defect  in  the  per- 
formance of  the  Pravargy  a Ceremony  ...  3^'l 

Various  Deities  represented  by  the  Mah^vtra  ...  301 


Names  of  seven  Maruts  or  Storm-Gods  ...  302 

Propitiation  of  various  Deities  ...  ...  . . , 302 

The  Object  of  the  Pravargya  ...  ...  ...  302 

BOOK  Xh. 

The  Isav^syam  or  fsopanishad  ...  ...  ... 

Is,  Lord,  Soul  of  All,  the  only  Absolute  Reality  ...  304 

Renunciation  and  Religious  Works  or  Karma  ,..  804 

The  Atroil  or  Self  ...  ...  ...  ...  305 

Sambhuti  and  Asambhuti  ...  ...  ...  306 

Sambhava  and  Asambhava  ...  ...  ...  306 

Sambh<iti  and  Vinisa...  ...  ^ ...  306 

Nescience  apd  Science  ...  ...  307 

The  prayer  of  the  dying  Devotee  ...  ...  307 

Excursus  on  the  isQpanisbad  ...  ...  ...  308 


ApppDioBS 

I.  Index  of  Hymns  and  Verses  reproduced  from 

the  Rigveda  and  the  Atharva-veda  ...  313 

11.  Index  of  Names,  Etc.  ...  ...  ...  318 

in.  Corrigenda  ...  ...  ...  ...  345 


PREFACE. 


The  Yajurveda— derived  from  the  roots  yq;,  to  sacrifice  or 
worship,  a»d  vid,  to  know,— is  the  Knowledge  of  Sacrifice  or 
Sacrificial  Texts  and  Formulas  as  distinguished  from  the  Big- 
veda  or  Knowledge  of  Recited  Praise,  the  Sdmaveda  or  Know- 
ledge of  Chanted  Hymns,  and  the  Atharva  or  Brahmaveda 
which  is  the  Knowledge  of  Prayer,  Charm,  and  Spells.  Though 
ranking  second  in  the  Indian  enumeration  of  the  Vedas  and 
containing  much  that  is  of  very  ancient  origin,  its  compilation 
in  its  present  form,  exhibiting  as  it  does  the  almost  complete 
development  of  castes  and  mixt  castes  and  considerable  advance 
in  arts  and  sciences,  trades,  handicrafts  and  occupations,  is 
evidently  of  later  date  than  that  even  of  the  Atharva.  The 
Saiphiti  or  Collection  of  its  hymns,  texts,  and  formulas,  con- 
stituting the  hymn-book  and  prayer-book  of  the  Adhvarytt 
priests  as  distinguished  from  the  Hotar,  the  Udg&tar,  and  the 
Brahman,  the  special  priests,  respectively,  of  the  three  othet 
Vedas,  owes  its  origin  to  the  increasing  multiformity  and  com^ 
plication  of  the  Indian  ritual  and  the  recognized  insufficiencj 
of  the  simple  and  unsystematically  arranged  Collection  of 
vcda  Hymns  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  performers  of 
Tarious  essentially  important  rites  and  ceremonies. 

The  Yajurveda,  owing  to  a schism  among  its  earliest 
chers  and  their  followers,  was  divided  into  two  distinct  Saip- 
hitis  or  Collections  called— probably  from  the  names  of  the 
Rishis  or  inspired  Seers  who  are  respectively  their  reputed 
compilers— the  Taittiriya  and  the  V&jasaneya  or  Vijasaneyi ; the 
former  and  older  being  known  also  by  the  title  Kyishna  .mr 
Black— probably  from  its  dark  or  obscure  appearance,  ^ col- 
lection of  sacrificial  texts  and  formulas  be^g 


PREFACE. 


xviii 

intermingled  with  the  Brahmana  or  exegetical  portion  whicfi 
explains  them  and  teaches  their  ritual  application — , and  th^ 
latter  being  called  Sukla  or  White,  the  revised,  systematic  and 
clear  collection,  containing  the  texts  and  formulas  by  them- 
selves with  a totally  distinct  Brahmana,  the  Satapatha^  as  an 
appendix.  In  the  two  divisions,  besides  these  essential  points 
of  difference,  are  found  occasional  verbal  and  orthoepic  varia- 
tions which  are  generally  of  little  importance.  The  order  of 
rites  and  ceremonies  is  substantially  identical,  but  the  White 
contains  a few  more  texts  than  the  Black. 

The  Samhita  of  the  White  Yajurveda  consists  of  forty 
Adhyayas  or  Books  containing,  with  frequent  repetitions  of 
the  same  text,  about  two  thousand  verses.  A large  portion  of 
these  are  Richaa  or  Strophes  borrowed — frequently  with  varia- 
tions—from  the  Rigveda,  and  sometimes  from  the  Atharva ; 
these,  of  course,  are  metrical.  Nearly  equal  in  quantity  are 
the  Yajus  texts  or  sacrificial  formulas — the  most  characteristic 
portion,  from  which  the  Veda  derives  its  name— composed  in 
measured  prose  ‘ which  rises  now  and  tlien,'  as  Professor  Weber 
observes,  ‘ to  a true  rhythmical  swing,’  and  long  passages,  sucli 
as  the  lists  of  victims  to  be  tied  up  and  dedicated  at  the  Asva- 
medha  and  the  Purushamedha,  which  are  necessarily  in  the 
jsimplest  prose. 

For  further  information  with  regard  to  this  Veda  the  reader 
should  consult  Professor  Weber’s  History  of  Indian  Literature 
(English  Translation  by  John  Mann  and  Theodor  Zachariae  i 
Triibner’a  Oriental  Series);  Professor  Max  Muller’s  History  of 
.Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature ; Professor  J.  Eggeling’s  Introduc- 
tion, Vol.  XII.  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  or,  for  a briefer 
account,  Mrs.  Manning’s  Ancient  and  Mediaeval  India,  Vol,  I, 
pp.  107—109. 

My  translation  follows  the  fine  edition  of  the  White  Yajur- 
veda or  V^asaneyi-SanhitS,  in  the  two  recensions- the  M4db> 


preface. 


xix 

yandina  and  the  Kanva— , with  Mahidhara’s  Commentary,  the 
Vedadipa,  or  Lamp  of  Knowledge,  written  towards  the  close  of 
the  sixteenth  century,  published  under  the  patronage  of  the 
Honourable  Court  of  Directors  of  the  East  India  Company 
in  1849  at  Berlin  by  Dr.  Albrecht  Weber,  at  that  time  Docent 
of  the  Sanskrit  language  at  that  University.  This  excellent 
edition  consisting  of  three  Parts  the  latter  two  of  which  con- 
tain the  Satapatha-Brahmana  in  the  Madhyandina  recension 
with  extracts  from  the  Commentaries  of  Suyana,  Harisvilmin, 
and  Dvivedaganga,  and  the  Srautra-Sdtra  of  Katydyana  witli 
extracts  from  the  Commentaries  of  Karka  and  Yajfiikadeva,  has 
not  been  reprinted  and  is  now  practically  unobtainable.  In 
India  the  text  of  the  Madhyandina  recension  with  Mahidhura's 
Commentary  has  been  issued  in  a cheap  form  at  Calcutta  by 
Pandit  Jibananda  Vidyas4gara,  B.  A.,  Superintendent  of  the 
Free  Sanskrit  College,  of  which  a second  edition  appeared  in 
1892;  and  a lithographed  edition  of  the  text  with  a Hindi 
translation  of  Mahidhara's  Commentary  was  published  in  1874, 
at  Besma  in  the  North-Western  Provinces,  by  Raja  Giriprasada- 
varraan  of  that  place.  A cheap  edition  of  the  text,  in  unbound 
MS.  form,  has  been  published  at  Bombay. 

No  separate  translation  of  the  whole  Samhita  or  Collection 
of  Texts  and  Formulas  has  appeared  in  any  European  language. 

It  wm  Professor  Weber’s  intention,  as  signified  in  his  History 
of  Indian  Literature,  to  bring  out  a translation  giving  the  cere- 
monial belonging  to  each  verse,  together  with  a full  glossary, 
but  ‘this  promise  has  not  been  fulfilled,  owing  to  the  pressure 
of  other  labours.’  This  scholar  had  previously  published  a 
Latin  translation,  with  annotations  in  the  same  language,  of 
Books  IX.  and  X in  his  V^jasaneya-Sanhitae  Specimen  (Breslau, 
1846),  nnd  more  recently  a German  version  of  Book  XVI.  in 
Indische  Studien  II.  pp.  U ff.,  and  of  the  list  of  men  and 
women  to  be  dedicated  at  the  Purushamedha  in  his  treatise 
w Human  Sacrifice  among  Indiana  of  the  Yedic  Age  reprinted 


XX 


PREFACE. 


in  his  Indische  Streifen  L pp.  76-84.  Of  Book  XL.  as  an  Upa- 
nishad  there  are  several  translations  into  English. 

Moreover,  nearly  the  v^hole  of  the  first  eighteen  Books  has 
been  incorporated — dissected  and  explained  clause  by  clause  in 
the  first  nine  Books  of  the  Satapatha-Brahmana ; and  an  admir- 
able translation  of  this  vast  work  by  Professor  Julius  Eggeling 
is  now  nearly  completed  in  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  four 
volumes  (XII,  XXVL,  XLL,  XLIIL  of  that  series)  having  al- 
ready  appeared,  and  the  concluding  volume  (XLV)  being  in  the 
press.  From  this  translation — which,  but  for  its  bulk  and 
costliness  would  make  half  of  my  work  superfluous— and  from 
Professor  Eggeling.’s  annotations,  I have  derived  the  greatest 
assistance,  and  most  gratefully  record  my  obligations. 

All  that  I have  attempted  to  do  is  to  give  a faithful  trans- 
lation, to  the  best  of  my  ability,  of  the  texts  and  sacrificial  for^ 
nmlas  of  the  Veda,  with  just  sufficient  commentary,  chiefly 
from  Mahidhara,  to  make  them  intelligible.  Much  additional 
information  may  be  found  in  Professor  A.  Hillebrandt’s  Ritual- 
Litteratur,  Vedisohe  Opfer  und  Zauber  (Grundriss  der  Indo- 
Arischen  Philologie  und  Altertumskunde),  Strassburg  : 1897  ; 
and  further  minute  details  of  the  various  sacrifices,  rites  and 
ceremonies  are  given  in  the  Satapatha-Brahmana  as  already 
mentioned,  and  in  various  articles,  referred  to  in  my  notes, 
by  Professor  A.  Weber,  the  great  authority  on  the  Yajurveda 
and  all  that  is  connected  with  it. 

R.  T.  H.  GRIFFITH. 

Kotaguri,  Nilgirib: 

May,  1S99, 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  WHITE  YAJURVEDA 

OR  vAjasaneya-samhitA. 

BOOK  THE  FIRST. 


Thee  for  food.  Thee  for  vigour.  Ye  are  breezes. 

To  noblest  work  God  Savitar  impel  you.  Inviolable ! swell 
hia  share  for  Indra. 

No  thief,  no  evil-minded  man  shall  master  you  rich  in  ofi- 
spring,  free  from  pain  and  sickness. 

Be  constant,  numerous  to  this  lord  of  cattle.  Guard  thou 
the  cattle  of  the  Sacrificer. 


Books  I.  and  II.  contain  the  texts  and  formulas  required  at  the  New  and 
Full  Moon  sacrifices,  the  regular  performance  of  which  is  obligatory  on  tho 
Br&hmanical  householder  during  thirty  years  from  bis  Agnyddhdna  or 
ceremouial  establishment  of  bis  own  sacrificial  fires  ; or,  according  to  some 
authorities,  during  his  whole  remaining  life.  Each  of  these  sacrifices  usually 
requires  two  days  for  its  performance,  the  work  of  the  first  day  consisting 
in  introductory  ceremonies  such  as  the  preparation  of  the  Abavaniya  and 
DakshinAgni,  or  Eastern  and  Southern  fire-places,  for  the  reception  of  fire 
from  the  Western  fire-place,  the  GArhapatya  or  Householder's  hearth  ; tho 
solemn  taking  of  the  vrata  or  vow  of  fasting  and  abstention  during  the 
sacrifice  ; and  the  performance  by  the  sacrificer  of  the  evening  Agnihotra 
or  burnt  oblation  of  milk.  On  this  day  also,  the  day  before  the  appearance 
of  the  New  or  the  Full  Moon,  the  Adhvaryu  priest,  who  performs  the 
practical  par  t of  the  sacrifice,  cuts  a branch  from  a Parna  or  Palfisa  tree 
i Butea  Frondosa),  or  from  a Sami  tree  ( Acacia  Suma ),  trims  it  and  uses  it 
as  a switch  to  drive  the  calves  away  from  the  cows  whose  milk  is  to  form 
part  of  the  offerings  of  the  next  day’s  special  ceremony. 

1 Thee : ‘ I cut  ’ understood.  The  PalAsa  branch  is  addressed  by  the 
Adhvaryu.  For  food : as  instrumental  in  obtaining  the  seasonable  rain 
and  the  good  harvest  which  will  result  from  the  sacrifice.  Thee  for  vigour : 

‘ I cut  or  trim,’  in  order  to  obtain  the  bodily  strength  which  a sufficiency  of 
food  may  be  expected  to  bring.  Ye : the  Adhvaryu  touches  and  addressee 
the  calves.  Breezee:  as  the  winds  purify  the  ground,  so  do  ye  with  your 
droppings  which  are  used  for  smearing,  and  so  cleansing,  the  floors  of 
houses  ; or,  perhaps,  meaning  ‘ intruders,'  preventing  the  milking  of  the 
cows ; or,  free  to  wander  where  you  will,  and  then  to  return  home.  The 
following  lines  contain  a benediction  on  the  cows.  Noblett  worlc : the  sacri- 
fice, in  which  their  milk  is  the  most  important  element.  Savitar : the 
Sun-God  as  the  great  vivifier  and  stimulator.  No  thief  etc:  cf.  R.  V.  VI, 
28. 7.  Ouaiii  thou : the  Adhvaryu  addresses  the  sacred  branch  which  he 
hides  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Ahavanlya  or  of  the  QArhapatya  house. 


1 THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOH  /. 

2 Strainer  of  Vasu  art  thou.  Thou  art  heaven.  Eaitb  art 

thou.  Thou  art  Mlltariavan's  caldron. 

Thou  art  the  All-container.  Stand  thou  firmly,  secure  by 
Law  Supreme,  and  do  not  tottet.  Not  be  thy  Lord  of 
Sacrifice  unsteady. 

3 Thou  art  the  strainer,  hundred-streamed,  of  Vasu.  Thou 

art  the  strainer,  thousand-streamed,  of  Vasu. 

May  Savitar  the  God  with  Vasu’s  strainer,  thousand-stream- 
ed, rightly  cleansing,  purify  thee. 
i Which  didst  thou  milk  1 This  is  the  cow  Visv^yu.  This 
Visvakarman.  This  is  Visvadhayas. 

Thee,  Indra^s  share,  with  Soma  do  I curdle.  Be  thou  protec* 
tor  of  the  oblation,  Vi^inu. 

5 I will  observe  the  vow.  Lord  of  Vows,  Agni  1 May  I have 

strength  therefor.  Success  attend  mo. 

Now  into  truth  from  untruth  do  I enter, 

6 Who  is  it  that  unites  thee  t He  unites  thee.  For  what 

doth  he  yoke  thee?  Forthat  he  yokes  thee. 

You  two  for  work,  you  two  for  its  completion. 


2 Strainer  of  Vatu:  deftnser,  purifier,  of  the  eacrifice;  vasu-  meaning 
originally  good,  kind,  wealthy.  This  pavitram  or  strainer,  made  of  two  or 
three  blades  of  Kusa  grass  or  Darbha  ( Poa  Cynosuroidias },  used  at  religious- 
eeremouies,  ia  fasten^  with  this  fomula  on  the  bidideB  Palftsa  or  8am! 
branch  ( terse  1 ).  Thou  art  keaven ; he  puts-  the  gtMlt  er  cooking-pot  on 
the  Gfti’hapatya  fire,  and  addresses  it.  Ke  calls  it  heaven  because  as  an 
implement  of  sacrifice  it  aids  in  productDg  rain.  Earth  r as  being  made  of 
clay.  Mdtari^an’i  caldron : a fanciful  rapression  for  the  atmosphere  or 
mid-region  of  air,  MAtarisvan  being  here  identffied  with  Vftyu  the  Wind- 
God.  Lord  of  Sacrijice  : the  yajanutna  or  householder  who  institutes  and 
takes  part  in  tha  sacrifice.  Tire  strainer  is-  then  put  on  the  cooking-pot, 
and  addressed. 

3 Purify  thee : the  milk  which  rs  to  be  used  in  the  Agnihotra  sacrifice. 

4 Which  didst  thaw  milk  f : this  is  properly  part  of  verse- 8.  Ita  reply  to 
this  question,  thrice  repeated,  of  the  Adhvaryn,  the  milker  ( who  may  be 
any  one  above  thorank  of  a SAdra)  mentions-  the  onfinaryr  name  of  each 
of  the  three  cows,  and  the  Adhvaryn  givbs  her  a sacrificial  name,  thereby 
imparting  to  her  the  virtues  and  powers  which  the  name  signifies.  Ft^vdyu  ; 
All-life-containing  Fffoaifeamfiw ; All-effectfiig.  Vi^adhdyas:  AlPsup- 
porting.  Thee:  the  milk  which  is  now  removed  fnmthe  fire.  The  mixture 
is  then  covered  over  with  a vessel  not/hiade  of  earth,  and  entrusted  te  the 
guardianship  of  Vishpu  or  the  saerifiee. 

5 Spoken  by  the  sacrificer  who  with  hie  wUe  is  about  to  take  the  pres- 

cribed vrola  or  vow  of  abstinence  from  certaini  food  and  enjoyment  duiing 
the  performance  of  theeeremooies.  Lord  of  Tototr  Agni  ie  said  to  be  the 
God^*  VraU^atif  Lord  or  Keeper  of  vows.  reality^  godhead.  Un^ 

tru^ ; unr^ity,  perishable  humanity  ^ that  ie,  * 1 attain  to-  a divine  body 
and  am  no  longer  n mere  man.'  He-ia  thua  bound  to  i^teak.  nothing  but 
the  truth. 

6 Unites  thee  f .*  plaees  the  reseel  eentainmg  the  water,  which  has 
formally  brought  forward,  by  the  side  of  the  Ahavaalya  fire  t The  question 


VERSE  II.] 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA, 


3 


7 Scorched  are  the  fiends,  scorched  the  malignant  beings. 

Burnt  out  are  fiends,  burnt  out  malignant  beings. 

Throughout  the  spacious  middle  air  I travel, 

8 Thou  art  the  yoke.  Injure  thou  him  who  injures.  Harm 

him  who  harm  us.  Harm  the  man  we  injure. 

Thou  art  the  Gods*  best  carrier,  hound  most  firmly,  filled 

fullest,  welcomest,  Gods’  best  invoker. 

9 Thou  art  unbent,  receiver  of  oblations.  Stand  firmly  in  thy 

place  and  do  not  totter. 

Nor  be  thy  Lord  of  sacrifice  unsteady. 

Let  Vishnu  mount  thee.  To  the  wind  lie  open.  The  demons 

are  expelled.  Let  the  five  grasp  it. 

10  By  impulse  of  God  Savitar  I take  thee  with  arms  of  Asvins, 

with  the  hands  of  POshan, 

Thee  dear  to  Agni,  dear  to  Agni-Soma. 

11  Thee  for  abundance,  not  for  evil  spirit.  May  mine  eye  look 

upon  the  light  of  heaven, 

is  asked  by  the  Adhvaryu.  Pot  wliatf  or  For  whom?  For  that:  or  For 
him  : kastnai,  like  Latin  ■cui,  being  either  masculine  or  neuter.  The  mean- 
ing of  the  questions  is  ambiguous,  the  interrogative  pronoun  Who 
in  all  its  cases  being  also  regarded  as  a name  of  PrajApati,  Lord  of  Creatures. 
See  The  Hymns  of  the  Rigved*,  X.  121.  You  two : the  ladle  used  in  offer- 
ing the  Agnihotras,  and  the  winnowing-basket  with  which  chaff  and  grain  are 
separated.  Work : the  sacrifice.  The  words  ‘ I take  ’ are  understood. 

7 Scorch^ : the  ladle  and  winnowing-basket  are  heated,  to  symbolize  the 
expulsion  of  malignant  spirits  who  infest  the  air,  after  which  the  Adhvaryu 
is  free  to  move  in  all  directions. 

8 The  Adhvaryu  addresses  the  yoke  {dhur)  ot  the  cart  which  contains 
the  grain  and  other  elements  of  sacrifice.  Injure  • dhUrva.  The  play  on 
the  word  is  lost  in  translation.  Bound  most  firmly : msnttamam;  or,  in 
accordance  with  the  etymology  of  the  word,  best  provider,  most  liberal  giver. 

9 He  addresses  the  cart.  FwAau ; the  sacrifice.  Lie  open : he  addresses 
the  rice.  The  five : his  fingers,  with  which,  when  he  has  mounted  the  cart, 
he  touches  the  rioe. 

10  By  impidn:  preuave.  SemUar:  the  Impeller  and  Vivifier.  Afviru: 
twin  Light-Qods,  heralds  of  JDawn,  who  are  the  Adbvaryus  of  the  Gods. 
Pdihan:  a solar  Deity  who  destributes  their  respective  portions  to  the 
Oods.  Thee : the  rice.  Agni  and  the  dual  Deity  Agni-Soma  are  mentioned 
because  an  unaddressed  oblation  would  cause  doubt  and  contention  among 
the  Gods. 

The  offering,  to  Agni  at  a Full  Moon  sacrifice's  a rice-cake  presented  on 
eight  potsherds,  and  that  to  Agni-Soma  one  on  eleven. 

11  Tim:  the  remainder  of  the  rice;  ‘I  leave’  being  understo^.  For 
chundanee : or,  according  to  Mahldhaia,  loir  future  oblation.  For  em  9pn%t : 
ardtaye;  or,  with  Mahldhara,  for  non-oblation.  AtfirAi;  compr^ending, 
according  to  MaMdhara,  sacrifice,  day,  Gods,  and  Sun.  Thote  with  doors: 
houses,  especially  the  house  of  the  Sacrificer.  Throughout^  etf,  see  L 7, 

: or  centre.  AdUi$  lap : the  bosom  of  infinite  Earth, 


4 


THE  TEXTS  OP  THE 


[BOOKL 


May  those  with  doors  stand  on  the  earth  securely.  Through- 
out the  spacious  middle  air  I travel. 

Upon  the  navel  of  the  earth  I place  thee,  on  Aditi’s  lap. 
Protect  the  oblation,  Agni ! 

12  Ye  two  are  strainers  that  belong  to  Vishnu.  By  Savitar’s 

impulse,  with  this  flawless  strainer  I purify  you  with  the 
rays  of  Sflrya. 

Bright  Waters,  flowing  forward,  foremost  drinkers,  lead  for- 
ward now  this  sacrifice,  lead  forward  the  Sacrifice  s Lord, 
the  God-devoted  Lord  of  the  Sacrifice,  the  liberal  giver. 

13  Indra  elected  you  in  fight  with  Vritra:  in  fight  with  Vritra 

you  elected  Indra. 

By  over-sprinkling  are  ye  consecrated.  I sprinkle  thee 
agreeable  to  Agni.  I sprinkle  thee  welcome  to  Ag!ii-Soma. 
Pure  for  the  work  divine  be  ye,  and  holy,  pure  for  the  sacri- 
fice to  Gods.  Whatever  of  yours  the  impure  have  by  their 
touch  polluted,  hereby  I cleanse  for  you  from  all  defile- 
ment. 

14  Giver  art  thou  of  happiness.  Rejected  are  fiends,  rejected 

are  malignant  beings. 

Aditi’s  skin  art  thou.  May  Aditi  receive  thee.  A wooden 
stone  art  thou.  Thou  art  a broad-based  stone.  May  the 
skin  of  Aditi  receive  thee. 

15  Body  of  Agni  art  thou,  the  releaser  of  speech.  I seize  thee 

for  the  Gods’  enjoyment. 

A mighty  stone  art  thou,  formed  out  of  timber. 


12  Strainers:  he  makes  two  (see  I.  2),  and  addrewes  them.  Vishnu: 
the  sacrifice.  Flaioless  strainer:  the  wind.  You;  the  s^nficial  waters. 
Foremost  drinkers:  of  the  Soma  with  which  they  are  mingled. 

13  Elected : mixed  with  Soma,  to  inspirit  him.  Vritra : the  cloud-demon 

who  obstructs  and  withholds  the  rain.  The  root  of  the  word  is  m,  to  en- 
compass,  also,  to  choose ; hence  the  play  on  the  words  he  elected, 

Sli.  ye  el«=t«i;.nd  VrUra.  Cf.  K.  V.  III.  84.  3 avnnot, 

he  (indra)  encompassed  Vritra  the  Encompasser.  Thee : the  oblation.  Be 
ye  • the  sacrificial  vessels  which  he  purifies  by  sprinkling. 

14  Giver,  etc. : he  addresses  the  black-antolope’s  skin-‘ one  of  the  sym- 
bols of  Brfthmanical  worship  and  civilization.’  See  Sacred  l^ks  of  the 
TTMt  XII  P 23  note.  It  is  spread  under  the  wooden  mortar  m whwh  the 

is  husked  and  pounded,  to  prevent  any  loss  of  the  sacred  offerings. 
Ejected:  mwe  liteiSy,  “shaken  off,’  by  shaking  the  skin  as  it  falls  to  the 

stone : the  mortar  is  addressed,  made  of  wood  but  representing 
the  pressing-stones  with  which  Soma  juice  is  extracted. 

15  Thou  • the  rice-oblations  poured  into  the  mortar,  Rdeaser  of  speech  : 
nf  the  voice  of  the  priest  which  hitherto  has  been  restrained.  Great  wo^- 
eu  stone:  the  pestle  is  addressed.  HavUhknt:  oblation-preparer;  the 
Sacrificer,  bis  wife,  or  another. 


. TERSE  18.] 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA. 


5 


Make  ready  for  the  Deities  this  oblation : with  careful  pre- 
paration make  it  ready. 

Havishkrit,  come  ! Havishkrit,  come ! Havishkrit,  come  ! 

16  Thou  art  a cock  whose  tongue  is  sweet  with  honey.  Call  to 

us  hither  sap  and  manly  vigour. 

May  we  with  thee  in  every  fight  be  victors.  Rain-grown  art 
thou.  May  the  rain-grown  receive  thee. 

Clearel  off  are  fiends,  cleared  off  are  evil  beings.  Expelled 
are  fiends.  May  Vayu  separate  you.  May  Savitar  the 
God,  the  golden-handed,  with  flawless  hand  unto  himself 
receive  you. 

17  Bold  art  thou.  Cast  away  the  Corpse-consumer.  Drive  off 

the  fire  that  eats  raw  flesh,  0 Agni. 

That  which  makes  offerings  to  the  Gods  bring  hither. 

Firm  art  thou.  Make  earth  firm.  For  the  foe’s  slaughter  I 
set  thee  on,  devoted  to  the  priesthood,  devoted  to  the 
nobles  and  the  kinsmen. 

18  Agni,  do  thou  accept  our  holy  service. 

Keeper  art  thou  : make  firm  the  Air’s  mid-region.  For  tlie 
foe’s  death  I set  thee  on,  devoted  to  priesthood  and  nobi- 
lity and  kinsmen. 

Thou  art  a stay : uphold  the  sky  securely.  For  the  foe’s 
death,  etc. 

I set  thee  on  for  sake  of  all  the  regions.  Formers  of  layers 
are  ye,  and  heap-formers.  With  Bhngus’  and  Angirases’ 
heat  be  heated. 


16  Thoa : the  sacrificial  implemeut,  a peg  or  wedge,  with  which  the  press- 
hig-stones  are  beaten,  is  addressed.  Cock : on  account  of  the  noise  it  makes. 
Sweet : to  the  Gods,  as  announcing  the  prepwation  of  sacrifice.  Rain-grown ; 
the  winnowing  basket,  made  of  reeds  and  strong  grass  that  grow  rapidly  in 
the  rainy  season,  is  addressed.  Thu : the  husked  rice,  grown  also  in  the 
Rains,  which  is  poured  into  the  winnowing-basket.  Cleared  off:  together 
with  the  fallen  husks.  Ydya : the  wind.  You ; the  husked  and  unhusked 
grain.  Flawless : letting  no  grains  fall  through  separated  fingers.  Reuive 
you:  the  husked  grain. 

17  Thou : the  poker  or  fire-shovel  of  Pal&sa  wood  is  addressed.  Corpu- 
consumer:  the  fire  of  the  funeral  pile.  Thai  eats  raw  fiah : domestic  fire 
for  cooking  meat.  These  two  forms  of  fire  are  excluded,  and  the  swrificial 
fire  is  to  remain.  Firm,  art  thou : the  potsherd,  on  which  the  oblation  is  to 
be  cooked  is  addressed.  The  Icirnmn : of  the  Sacrificer. 

18  Keeper:  a second  potsherd  is  addressed.  Stay:  a third  potsherd  is 
addressed.  I set  thu  on : be  addresses  a fourth  potsherd  which  be  puts  on 
the  fire.  Ye : the  remaining  potsherds,  which  he  cove^  with  live  coals. 
Bkrigui  and  Angirases : ancient  priestly  families,  most  intimately  connected 
with  the  worship  of  Agni 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  L 

19  Giver  of  happiness  art  thou.  Rejected  are  fiends,  rejected 

are  malignant  beings.  Aditi’s  skin  art  thou.  May  Aditi 
receive  thee. 

Bowl,  rock  art  thou.  May  Aditi’s  skin  receive  thee. 

Thou  art  the  sky’s  supporting  pillar. 

Bowl  from  the  rock  art  thou.  The  rock  receive  thee. 

20  Grain  art  thou.  Please  the  Gods.  Thee  for  in-breathing. 

For  out-breath  thee.  Thee  for  diffusive  breathing.  May 
I impart  to  life  a long  extension. 

May  Savitar  the  God,  the  golden-handed,  with  flawless  hand 
unto  himself  receive  you. 

Thee  for  the  eye.  J uice  art  thou  of  the  Great  Ones. 

21  By  impulse  of  God  Savitar  I strew  thee,  with  arms  of  Asvins, 

with  the  hands  of  Pffshan. 

With  plants  let  waters,  plants  with  sap  be  mingled.  United 
be  the  rich  ones  with  the  moving.  The  sweet  ones  and 
the  sweet  be  joined  together. 

22  For  generation’s  sake  I join  thee.  This  is  Agni’s.  This  Agni- 

Soma’s.  Thee  for  food. 

Thou  art  the  caldron,  life  of  all  that  liveth.  Spread  thyself 
widely  forth,  thou,  widely  spreading.  So  may  thy  Lord  of 
sacrifice  spread  widely. 

Thy  skin  let  Agni  harm  not.  In  highest  heaven  let  the  God 
Savitar  bake  thee. 

23  Fear  not.  Shrink  not.  Let  not  the  sacrifice  be  languid,  not 

languid  be  the  Sacrificer’s  offspring. 

For  Trita  thee.  For  Dvita  thee.  For  Ekata  thee. 

19  Giver,  etc. : the  black-antelope’s  skin  is  again  addressed.  See  I.  14. 
Bowl,  rock : the  nether  pressing-stone  now  placed  on  the  skin.  Bmol  from 
the  rock ; the  upper  and  smaller  stone  regarded  as  the  offspring  of  the 
nether  stone. 

20  Grain : the  rice  now  poured  on  the  nether  stone  is  addressed.  Please  : 
dhinuhi,  imperative  of  dhi  from  which  Mahidhara  derives  dhdayam,  grain. 
In-breathing,  etc. : three  of  the  five  or  more  vital  airs.  Life : of  the  sacri- 
ficer.  May  Savitar,  etc.  : repeated  from  1. 16.  Thee : ' I look  at  ’ understpod. 
For  the  eye:  that  the  sacrificer’s  sight  maybe  strengthened.  Thou:  the 
clarified  sacrificial  butter.  Great  Ones : the  cows. 

21  Thee : the  ground  rice  which  is  now  poured  into  a vessel  which  con- 
tains the  two  strainers  (1. 12).  the  rice.  Rich  ones  ; the  waters 

with  which  the  flour  is  mixed.  The  moving : the  plants,  the  rice. 

22  For  generation's  sake:  that  children  may  be  born  to  the  Sacrificer. 
The  mixture  of  rice  and  water  is  addressed.  This  .■  the  dough  is,  divided, 
one  lump  or  cake  for  Agni  and  one  for  the  dual  deity,  Agni-Soma,  Thee  .* 
the  clarified  butter.  For  food : as  in  1. 1.  Caldron  : the  rice-cake  is  likened 
to  the  caldron  used  at  the  Pravargya  ceremony,  introductory  to  the  Soma 
Sacrifice.  See  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  XII.  p.  44,  note.  Agni : the  fire 

on  which  the  cake  is  put.  v 

23  Fear  not : my  touch.  He  addresses  the  cake  and  touches  it.  2Vi<a 


VERSE  27.]  WHITE  YAJIRVEDA.  7 

24  By  impulse  of  God  Savitar  J take  thee,  with  arms  of  Asvins, 

with  the  hands  of  Fiishan,  thee  who  for  Gods  performest 
sacred  service. 

Iiidra’s  right  arm  art  thou : sharp  with  a thousand  spikes, 
a huiulied  edges.  The  keeii-edged  Wind  art  thou,  the 
foemaii’s  slayer. 

25  0 Earth,  whereon  men  serve  the  Gods  with  worship,  let  me 

not  do  thy  plant’s  root  any  damage 
Go  to  the  pen,  the  cowstall.  lloaveu  rain  for  thee. 

On  this  earth’s  hirthest  end,  God  Savitar,  bind  him,  with 
hundred  fetters  bind  the  man  who  hates  us  and  whom 
we  hate.  Thence  do  not  thou  rcalease  him. 

26  May  I drive  Aram  away  from  Earth,  the  seat  of  men’s  ohl.i 

tions  to  tlie  Gods.  Go  to  the  pen release  him 

(as  in  verse  25). 

0 Aram,  thou  shalt  not  soar  to  he.iveu.  Let  not  thy  drc'p 
mount  upward  to  the  sky. 

Go  to  the  pen release  him  (as  in  verse  25). 

27  I with  the  metre  Gayatri  enclose  thee.  I lay  the  Trishtup 

metre  round  about  thee.  With  Jagati  metre  1 conhim 
and  gird  thee. 


= rp/roc  third ; an  ancient  Vedic  Deity,  perhaps  Agni  in  his  third  oi 
lightning  form.  DvUa  and  Ekata,  formed  analogically  from  r/ri,  tu-o,  .mo' 
tka,  One,  are  Brill  manical  filaments,  and  are  said  to  be  Trita  s hiotln  in 
See  Macdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  pp.  67-69.  According  to  Mahidlmra 
the  tliree  are  Agni'.s  brotlieis.  Thee  : ‘ I pour  out  ’ understood  ; the  water 
with  which  the  cooking-vessel  has  been  rinsed. 

24  Thee : the  sphya,  a wooden  implement  sh.aped  like  a sword,  used  for 
stirring  the  boiled  rice,  drawing  lines  on  tlie  ground,  and  other  snonfici.i] 
purposes.  Thousand  spikes:  like,  and  representing  in  its  power,  tlie  thuiKler- 
bolt  of  Indra.  Foeman's  slayer : destroyer  of  Asuras  or  fiends  aud  of  those 
who  hate  and  interrupt  sacrifices. 

25  0 Earth,  etc  : with  this  formula  the  Adhvaryu  throws  the  sp/hya  on  a 

clump  of  grass  placed  between  him  aud  the  altar.  Oo  to  the  pen,  etc.  be 
not  wasted  ; mix  with  the  droppings  of  the  cows.  He  addresses  the  earth 
raised  up  by  the  Rain  for  thee:  he  addresses  the  altar.  Earths 

furthest  end:  that  is,  Naraka  or  hell.  With  this  formula  the  loose  soil  is 
thrown  upon  the  rubbish-heap. 

26  The  sphya  is  thrown  a second  time.  Aroru . a certain  Asura  nr  fiend 
See  R.  V.  X.  99,  10  ; A.  V,  VI  46.  1.  Thy  drop  • earth,  or  the  altar  in  the 
shape  of  tbe  earth,  is  addressed,  wiiile  the  sphya  is  thrown  a third  time 
The  drop  is  earth’s  life  sustaining  moisture  which  must  not  mount  upward 
aud  be  lost. 

27  The  names  of  the  three  chief  Vedic  metres  are  given  to  the  three 
lines  drawn  with  the  sphya  on  three  sides  of  the  altar.  Thee  • yislmu,  that 
is,  the  sacrifice.  Sprung  from  good  soil  the  Vedi  or  altar  is  addressed 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


[ROOK  L 


Sprung  from  good  soil  art  thou,  and  bliss-bestowing.  Pleas- 
ant art  thou,  and  a fair  seat  to  rest  on.  Thou  hast  both 
strengthening  food  and  drink  in  plenty. 

28  Before  the  cruel  foe’s  secret  departure,  Mighty  One,  raising 

high  earth,  life-bestower,  which  to  the  Moon  they  lifted 
by  oblations,  that  earth  the  sages  still  point  out  and  wor- 
ship. 

Deposit  in  its  place  the  sprinkling-water.  Thou  art  the  slayer 
of  the  man  who  hates  us. 

29  Scorched  are  the  demons,  scorched  the  evil  beings.  Burnt 

out  are  fiends,  burnt  out  malignant  creatures. 
Unsharpened,  thou  art  slayer  of  the  foemen.  Thee,  rich  in 
food,  I cleanse  for  the  food’s  kindling. 

Scorched creatures  (as  above). 

Thee  rich  in  food,  I cleanse  for  the  food’s  kindling. 

30  A zone  for  Aditi  art  thou.  Pervader  of  Vishnu  art  thou. 

For  great  strength  I take  thee.  I look  upon  thee  with  an 
eye  uninjured. 

Thou  art  the  tongue  of  Agni.  Good  invoker  of  Gods  be 
thou  at  every  holy  station,  at  every  sacrificial  text  I utter. 

31  By  Savitar’s  impulsion  do  I cleanse  thee,  with  flawless 

strainer,  with  the  rays  of  Sfirya. 

By  Savitar’s  impulsion  do  I cleanse  you,  with  flawless  strain- 
er, with  the  rays  of  Sfirya. 

Light  art  thou  ; thou  art  splendid  ; thou  art  .\mrit.  Thou, 
truly,  art  tlie  Gods’  beloved  station,  inviolable  means  of 
holy  worship. 


28  The  cruel  foes  : probably  the  demon  Araru  is  meant  Mifjhty  One  : 

Vishnu,  or  the  sacrifice,  is  addressed.  Point  out : in  the  spots  of  the 
Moon.  Deposit:  the  Agnidhra  or  Fire-kindling  priest  is  addressed,  yti 
place  • the  altar.  Thou  : the  water,  which  is  called  on  to  aid  in  defending 
the  sacrifice  from  interruption.  , 

29  Scorched,  etc.:  the  formula  is  repeated  from  I.  7.  The  miva  or 
dipping-spoon  is  symbolically  heated.  I cleanse : by  wiping  it  with  sacred 
grass.  For  the  food's  kindling:  with  sacrihcial  butter.  With  this  formula 
he  cleanses  the  sruk  or  offering- spoon. 

30  The  Adhvaryu  girds  the  Sacrificer’s  wife  with  a triple  cord  of  Mufijs 
grass  (Saccharum  Munja),  and  initiates  her  as  hir  husband’s  associate  in 
the  ceremony.  Aditi:  Earth,  represented  by  the  Sacrificer’s  wife.  Per- 
vadtr-  the  southward  end  of  the  girdle  is  addressed.  Vishnu : the 
Sacrifice.  I : the  matron  speaks  as  she  looks  down  on  the  pot  of  sacrificia 
butter  which  the  Adhtaryu  places  before  her. 

31  The  Adhvaryu  speaks.  Thee : the  clarified  butter.  You : the  spnnk 

ling  waters.  Thou:  the  butter.  Amnt:  nectar,  the  drink  of  the  Gods 
or,  inimoital.  aJaiion ; ‘ favourite  resort  (or,  dainty)  : Eggeung- 


BOOK  THE  SECOND. 


Thou  art  a black-buck  dwelling  in  the  covert.  I sprinkle 
tliee  agreeable  to  Agni. 

Thou  art  the  altar.  Thee  welcome  to  the  sacred  grass  I 
sprinkle. 

Thou  art  the  sacred  covering-grass.  I sprinkle  thee  grateful 
to  the  sacrificial  ladles. 

2 Thou  art  what  giveth  Aditi  her  moisture.  Thou  art  the 

hair-tuft  on  the  head  of  Vishnu.  I spread  thee,  wool- 
soft,  good  for  Gods  to  sit  on. 

Hail  to  the  Earth’s  Lord  ! To  the  World’s  Lord  Hail ! Hail 
to  the  Lord  of  Beings ! 

3 For  safety  of  this  all  let  the  Gandharva  Visvilvasu  lay  theo 

round  as  a protection.  Thou  art  the  Sacrificer’s  guard, 
thou,  xVgni,  lauded  and  worthy  to  receive  laudation. 

Indra’a  right  arm  art  thou.  For  safety liiudation. 

For  safety  of  This  All,  with  firm  law,  northward  let  Mitra- 
Vanina  lay  thee  round  as  keeper.  Thou  art  the  Sacri- 
ficer’s  guard laudation. 

4 Thee,  Sa<;e,  who  offerest  to  Gods  their  banquet,  we  will 

enkindle  till  thou  shinest  brightly,  thee  mighty  in  the 
sacrifice,  0 Agni. 

1 Thou : the  Adhvaryu  addre.ssea  the  fuel  placed  on  the  altar,  as  he 
unties  and  sprinkles  it.  Black-buck : sacrifice  in  the  shajie  of  a black  deer . 
Mahldhara.  Altar:  which  he  sprinkles.  Sacred  yrass : the  Barhis  or 
sacrificial  grass  with  which  the  altar  is  covered. 

2 Thou : the  remainder  of  the  water,  which  he  pours  on  the  roots  of 
the  grass.  Aditi : the  earth.  Hair-tuft : this  formula  is  addressed  to  the 
Prastara,  a tied-up  bunch  of  grass  put  upon  the  sacred  grass  which  covers 
the  altar.  Thee:  the  sacred  grass.  Hail!  etc  : the  fire  is  enclosed  with 
three  fenders  or  fencing  sticks.  Auy  part  of  the  oblation  that  falls  outside 
these  sticks  is  offered  to  Agni’s  three  brothers  who  are  here  called 
respectively  Earth’s  Lord,  World’s  Lord,  and  Loid  of  Beings. 

3 Here  begins  the  ceremony  of  laying  the  paridhis  or  enclosing-sticks, 
made  of  Pal&sa  or  other  sacred  wood,  round  the  sacrificial  fire.  Vitodvasu  : 
Lord  of  all  Treasure  (see  R.  V.  X.  85.  21;  139.  4,  5.),  chief  of  the  Gan- 
dharvae,  a class  of  celestial  beings  closely  connected  with  light  and  the 
aerial  waters.  2hee : the  first  enclosing-stick,  placed  on  the  west  side  of  the 
fire.  Indra’i  arm:  the  second  stick,  placed  on  the  south  side  The  thiid 
stick  is  laid  on  the  north  side.  MitTra-Varuna:  Mitra  ( the  hriend)  is  the 
Iranian  Mithra  and  identified  with  the  Sun.  Varuna  ( Eucompasser),  origi- 
nally the  starry  heaven,  is  the  chief  Vedic  deity  next  to  Indra. 

^ 4 A iamidh  or  kindling  stick  is  applied  to  light  the  fire.  Thee:  the 
Ahavauiya  fire. 


10 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  II. 


Oil  this,  etc. 


5 Thou  art  a kindler.  From  the  east  let  Surya  keep  thee 

secure  from  every  imprecation. 

You  are  the  arms  of  Savitar.  I spread  thee  as  soft  as  wool, 
eood  for  the  Gods  to  sit  on.  On  thee  sit  Vasus,  Rudras, 

&  ^ Aad  t 1 

6 Thou  who  art  called  Juhu  art  rich  in  fatness.  On  this  dear 

seat,  with  the  dear  home,  be  seated. 

Thou,  Upabhrit  by  name,  art  rich  in  fatness.  On  this 

be  seated  • 

Thou  who  art  called  Dhruv^,  art  rich  in  fatness.  On  this,  etc. 

In  the  Law’s  lap  they  have  sat  down  in  safety 
Guard  these.  Guard  thou  the  Sacrifice,  0 Vishnu.  Keep 
thou  the  Sacrifice’s  Lord  in  safety. 

7 0 Agni,  Winner  of  the  Spoil,  I cleanse  thee,  thee  who  wilt 

hasten  to  the  spoil,  Spoil-winner. 

Obeisance  to  the  Gods ! Svadha  to  Fathers  1 Be  both  of  you 

easy  for  me  to  handle.  * -4.1 

8 May  I to-d.iv  offer  Gods  unspilt  butter.  Let  me  not  with 

mv  foot  offend  thee,  Vishnu.  , • , 

Agni,  may  I approach  thy  shade  abounding  in  store  of  riches. 

Thou  art  Vishpu’s  mansion.  _.  . 

Hence  Indra  wrought  his  deed  of  manly  vigour.  The  sacri- 
fice  stood  firmly  elevated.  

5 r/nai:  a “the 

as  it  is  protected  by  enclosnig-sticks  on  the  ‘Iff®®  , , j^rificef  Ton  • 
SuD  God,  the  espeller  of  evil  spnits  who  would 

two  blades  of  grass  laid  cross-wise  on  the  grass  which  co  a 

n« ; the  PrasLa  ( II.  2 ),  which  he  >•>!  teate^wUh 

of  deities  eight  in  number,  associated  thirty  three 

Agni.  Rudra^:  ^ group  of  deities,  sons^  R 

in  number.  Adityas : of  A^^ , < 3 

chief.  SiK  are  enumerated  m “o ul 

said  to  be  seven  in  number,  and  m R.  . • • * ^g'g^.jng.gpoons  or 

6 The  Adbvaryu  addresses  S Cbh^ 

ladles  made  of  different  sorts  of  wood,  the  . Prastiira  and  the 

Dhruvft,  which  he  lays  down  in  or  er,  bosom 

others  ou  the  Barhis  or  altar-gr^e  beneath  it.  1 he  Laws  lap 

of  sacrifice.  Vishnu : the  sacrific^  cleanse  • he  trims  the  fire. 

the*  ltd  *oCT  “theS.^:./.  the  offering  spoon, 

after  India’s  victory. 


terse  14.]  WHITE  YAJURVEDA.  11 

9 0 Agiii,  undertake  the  Hotar’s  office,  take  on  thyself  the 
duty  of  an  envoy. 

Heaven  and  Earth  guard  thee!  Guard  thou  Earth  and  Heaven. 

May  Indra  be,  by  this  presented  butter,  maker  to  Gods  of 
fair  oblation.  Svaha  ! Let  light  combine  with  light. 

0 Indra  bestow  on  me  that  Indra-power!  May  wealth  in  full 
abundance  gather  round  us.  Let  blessings  wait  on  us, 
yea,  real  blessings. 

Our  Mother,  Earth,  hath  been  invited  hither.  May  Earth, 
our  Mother,  in  return  invite  us.  I,  through  my  Kindler* 
ship,  am  Agni.  Svaha  I 

[1  The  Father  Heaven  hath  been  invited  hither.  May  Heaven 
the  Father  in  return  invite  us. 

By  impulse  of  God  Savitar  I receive  thee  with  arms  of 
Asvins,  with  the  hands  of  Pushau.  I feed  upon  thee 
with  the  mouth  of  Agni. 

[2  God  Savitar,  this  sacrifice  of  thine  have  they  proclaimed 
unto  Bnhaspati  the  Br.diman  Priest. 

Therefore  protect  the  sacrifice,  protect  the  sacrifice’s  lord, 
protect  thou  me. 

13  The  butter’s  rapid  flow  delight  his  spirit ! Brihaspati  extend 

this  act  of  worship.  May  he  restore  the  sacrifice  uninjured. 

Here  let  all  Gods  rejoice,  “ Om  ! Step  thou  forward. 

14  This  is  the  stick  for  kindling  thee,  0 Agni.  By  means  of 

this  grow  strong  and  swell  to  greatness.  May  we  too  grow 
in  strength  and  swell  to  greatness. 

0 Agni,  thou  who  winnest  food,  I cleanse  thee,  thee  who 
hast  hastened  to  the  food.  Food-winner. 

Hotar'i : aacnficer’s  or  invoker’s  ; he  is  the  chief  priest  with  whom  the 
Adhvaryu  is  associated.  Envoy  • messenger  to  the  Gods  to  whom  he  bears 
)blation8.  Svdhdl:  a sacrificial  exclamation:  Ave  ! Hail  ' Benedictio  sit 
Light  combine : the  butter  in  the  Juhfi  with  that  in  the  Dhruvi,  which  he 

aow  mixes.  mi  « i ■ 

10  That  Indra-poioer:  the  great  power  which  I hope  f<*r.  The  foi  mula  is 

muttered  by  the  Sacrificer.  May  wealth,  etc. : taken  from  11.  V.  1.  Jo  6. 
Earth  : Piithivi  ; the  broad,  expansive  one.  ^ ^ 

11  Father  Heaven:  or  Heaven-Father  ; DyaushpitA  (Dyauh  pitri)  = Zt*^C 
ranip,  Jupiter ; the  Universal  Father,  the  Consort  of  Earth.  I receive  thte 
laid  by  the  Brahman  or  directing  priest  as  he  takes  hi«  allotted  portion  of  the 

""^n^^Bkhaspati : Lord  of  Prayer  ; the  Brahman  Priest  of  the  Gods,  and 
the  repi^utative  and  impersonation  of  human  priesthood. 

13  Om  : the  sacred  mystical  syllable  ; yea  ; so  be  it ; Amen.  Step  thou 

fonwird ; the  Brahman’s  answer  to  the  Adhvaryu. 

14  The  kindling-stiuk  is  consecrated  by  the  Hotar.  Food ; or  spoil,  wealth, 
the  prize. 


12 


TitE  TEXTS  OP  THE 


[BOOK  U. 


15  After  the  victory  of  Agui  Soma  may  I obtain  the  victory. 

By  impulse  of  sacrificial  food  I speed  me  onward. 

May  Agni-Soma  drive  off  him  who  hates  us,  drive  off  the 
man  whom  we  detest.  By  impulse  of  sacrificial  food  away 
I drive  him. 

After  the  victory  of  Indra-Agni  may  I obtain  the  victory. 
By  impulse  of  sacrificial  food  I speed  me  forward. 

May  Indra-Agni I drive  him. 

16  For  VasLis  thee.  For  Rudras  thee.  Thee  for  Adityas. 

Be,  Heaven  and  Earth,  accordant  with  each  other.  With 
rain  may  Mitra- Vanina  assist  thee. 

May  the  birds  go,  licking  what  is  anointed. 

Cj’o  to  the  Maruts’  speckled  mares.  Go,  having  become  a 
speckled  cow  thyself,  to  heaven,  and  from  that  place  bring 
the  rain  for  us  hither. 

Thou  art  the  eye’s  guard  : guard  mine  eye,  0 Agni. 

1 7 The  stick  w'hich  thou,  God  Agni,  laidest  round  thee,  what 

time  thou  wast  kept  hidden  by  the  Fanis,  this  do  I bring 
to  thee  for  thine  enjoyment.  May  it  remain  with  thee 
and  ne’er  be  fruitless. 

Approach,  ye  two,  the  place  which  Agni  loveth. 

18  The  residue  ye  have  to  be  your  portion,  mighty  by  food,  ye 

Gods,  ye  who  are  stationed  on  the  grass- bunch,  and  to  be 
laid  as  fences. 

All  ye,  applauding  this  my  speech,  be  seated  on  this  grass- 
bunch  and  there  be  joyful.  Svaha  ! Vat  1 

15  The  formula  is  recited  by  the  Sacrificer  as  he  separates  the  Jubu  and 
the  U|>abhi’it  spoons  and  moves  the  former  eastward.  Victory : their  undis- 
turbed appiopriation  of  the  rice-cake  offered  to  the  dual  Deity  at  the  Full 
Moon  sacrifice.  Indra-Agni-.  as  in  the  case  of  Agni-Soma,  but  the  formula 
is  to  be  used  at  the  New  Moon  saciifice. 

16  With  the  first  three  formulas  the  Adhvaryu  anoints  the  three  enclos- 
ing-sticks ill  the  order  in  which  they  were  laid  down.  Thee:  ‘ I anoint  ’ 
being  understood.  Accw'dant:  in  producing  rain.  Mltra-Varuna;  who 
are  especially  Rain-Gods  (see  R.  V.  V.  63  and  69).  Birds:  the  metres  Gdyatri 
and  others,  according  to  Mahidhara.  What  is  anointed:  the  Piastar.i. 
According  to  the  SatHpatha-Br.ihmana,  the  formula  is  : ‘May  (the  Gods) 
eat,  licking  the  anointed  bird  (the  Prastara)  ’ See  Sacred  Books  of  the 
East,  XII.  p,  242  Speckled  mares:  which  convey  the  Maruts,  the  Gods  of 
st'um  and  rain.  Speckled  cow:  representing  the  Earth. 

17  The  stick:  the  Adhvaryu  throws  the  western  enclosing-stick  on  the 
fire.  Panis:  demons  of  darkness  who  steal  the  Gods’  cows,  the  rays  of 
light,  and  liide  them  in  caverns.  Ye  two  : the  remaining  sticks  which  are 
now  till  own  into  the  fire. 

18  The  residue:  of  the  sacrificial  butter.  Ye  Oods-  Vim  devd^i,  the 
Visvedevas  or  All-Gods  Grass-bunch : the  Prastara.  Fences : that  is,  re- 
presentatives of  the  enclosing-sticks.  Svdhd  : All  hail ! Vdt : a sacrificial 
exclamation  on  making  an  offering  of  clarified  butter,  meaning,  probably, 
Take,  or  carry  (to  the  Gods). 


\VHITE  YAJVRVEDA. 


13 


_ VERSE  22.] 

19  Rich  in  oil  are  ye.  Giiar.l  the  two  yoke-fellows.  Ye  two 

are  full  of  grace,  to  grace  conduct  me. 

Glory  to  thee,  0 Sacrifice,  and  increase  ! Stand  firm  in  my 
auspicious,  righteous  worship. 

20  0 Agni  of  unweakened  strength,  far-reaching,  protect  mo 

from  the  lightningflash,  protect  me  from  boiidai>e.  from 
defect  in  sacrificing,  from  food  injurious  to  health  protect 
me. 

Make  thou  the  food  that  feeds  us  free  from  poison  in  the 
home  good  to  sit  in.  Svah.i ! Vat ! 

Hail  to  the  Lord  of  close  embraccments,  Agni ! Hail  to  Sa- 
rasvati  enriched  with  glory  ! 

21  Veda  art  thou,  whereby,  0 godlike  Veda,  thou  hast  become 

for  Deities  their  Veda : thereby  mayst  thou  become  for 
me  a Veda. 

0 Deities,  ye  knowers  of  the  Pathway,  walk  on  the  path- 
way  having  known  the  Pathway. 

God,  Lord  of  Spirit,  hail ! bestow  upon  the  Wind  this  sacri- 
fice. 

22  Blest  be  the  Grass  with  sacred  food  and  butter.  Let  Indra 

be  united  with  the  Atlityas,  the  Vasus,  Marut.s,  and  the 
Visvedevas.  Let  Svaha-offerings  rise  to  heavenly  ether. 


19  Ye:  the  Juhil  and  Upabhrit  spoons.  Yoke-felloios : the  two  oxen  who 
draw  the  cart  containing  the  sacrificial  elements. 

20  0 Agni:  he  grasps  the  two  spoons,  the  sruk  or.Juhil  and  the  sntm 
In  tht  horn  good  to  sit  in  : Mahidhara  alternatively  supplies,  ‘ establinh  me.’ 
Lord  of  dose  embracements:  oblation  is  offered  to  Agni  as  a God  who  prcHides 
over  the  production  of  children,  and  to  Sarasvatl  or  V4k,  Goddess  of  Speech 
and  Eloquence,  who  will  make  them  famous. 

21  The  Matron,  the  Sacrificer’s  wife,  unties  the  Veda,  the  tied-up  buncli 
of  sacred  grass  used  for  various  purposes  in  sacrifice,  passed  from  one  priest 
to  another,  and  handed  to  the  Sacrificer,  and  to  hi.s  wife  when  she  recites 
a text  or  formula,  as  she  does  in  this  place.  Their  Ved/i:  (from  vid,  t<> 
know,  or  obtain)  their  knower,  or  finder.  For  me  a Fcdci.-  a finder,  or 
obtainer.  0 Deities:  he  addresses  nil  the  invited  Gods.  Pathway  tlu* 
sacrifice.  Walk  on  the  pathway : go  your  several  ways;  the  formula  of  di-^ 
missing  the  Gods  who  are  present  at  the  sacrifice.  Lord  of  Spirit : Genius 
of  min’s  spiritual  power  and  life  ; the  Moon,  according  to  Mahidhara,  or 
Paramesvara  the  Supreme  Lord.  The  Wind:  representative  of  the  New  or 
Full  Moon  sacrifice.  This  sacrifice : special  sacrifice,  which  is  to  be  estab 
lished  in,  or  united  with,  the  other. 

22  Tht  Grass : the  Barhis  or  altar  grass,  Mahidhara  explains  the  ver^e 
differently ; Together  with  Adityas,  Vasus,  Maruts,  and  Visvedevas, 
thoroughly  may  Indra  anoint  the  Grass  with  butter  like  to  havis  (sacred 
food).  Svdhd- offerings : duly  consecrated  oblations.  , Heavenly  ether  : the 
Sun  in  heaven. 


14  THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  II. 

23  Who  liberates  theo  from  the  yoke?  He  frees  thee.  For  whom? 

For  him  he  looses  thee.  For  plenty. 

Thou  art  the  Rakshasas’  allotted  portion, 

24  We  have  combined  with  lustre,  vigour,  bodies ; we  have 

united  with  the  blessed  spirit.  May  Tvashtar,  bounteous 
giver,  grant  us  riches,  and  clear  each  fault  and  blemish 
from  the  body. 

25  By  Jagati  metre  in  the  sky  strode  Vishnu.  Therefrom  ex- 

cluded is  the  man  who  hates  us  and  whom  we  detest. 

By  Trislitup  metre  in  the  air  strode  Vishnu.  Therefrom,  etc. 
By  Gayatri  upon  the  earth  strode  Vishnu.  Therefrom,  etc. 
From  this  food.  From  this  resting-place  excluded. 

We  have  reached  heaven.  We  have  combined  with  lustre. 

26  Thou,  noblest  ray  of  light,  art  Self-existent.  Giver  art  thou 

of  splendour.  Give  me  splendour. 

I move  along  the  path  that  Surya  travels. 

27  Agni,  may  I become  a good  householder,  through  thee, 

Home-master,  0 Householder  Agni.  Mayst  thou  become 
an  excellent  Householder  through  me  the  master  of  the 
house,  0 Agni. 

Through  hundred  winters  may  our  household  matters —not 
like  a one*ox  car — be  smoothly  managed. 

I move  along  tlie  path  that  Surya  travels. 

28  I have  performed  the  vow.  Lord  of  Vows,  Agni ! Full  power 

was  mine,  and  it  has  proved  successful. 

Now  am  I he  I truly  am,  no  other. 


23  He  pours  ou  the  altar  the  holy  water  which  has  been  brought  forward 
(pranUd)  for  the  ceremony  by  the  Adhvaryu  from  the  Gftrhapatya  house. 
Who  t .-  or  Ka.  See  I.  6.  Thee : the  holy  water.  He : Praj4pati.  Plenty : 
the  prosperity  of  the  Sacrificer.  Thou ; the  refuse  of  the  rice,  w-hich  is 
strewn  on  the  rice  cake  potsherd,  under  the  black-buck’a  skin,  as  the  allott- 
ed share  of  the  R/lkshosas  or  fierce  and  malicious  demons. 

24  The  Adhvaryu,  having  gone  round  the  fire,  pours  out  a full  vessel  of 
water  which  the  Sacrificer  catches  with  both  hands  hollowed  and  placed 
together,  and  recites  the  text.  Bodies : limbs  and  members  fit  for  the  per- 
formance of  religious  duties,  or,  perhaps,  our  wives  and  sons.  Tvashtar  ; 
the  divine  Artificer,  developer  and  sh^er  of  the  forms  of  living  beings. 

26  He  makes  the  three  ceremonial  Vishnu-strides  in  imitation  of  that 
solar  deity’s  strides  through  the  three  divisions  of  the  world.  By  Jagati : 
supernatural  powers  are  attributed  to  the  Vedic  metres  as  representations 
of  effectual  prayers. 

26  Thou  ; the  Sun,  to  which  he  looks. 

27  Hundred  winters .-  regarded  as  the  natural  duration  of  human  life. 
See  The  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  and  The  Hymns  of  the  Atharva-veda, 
Index.  I move : he  turns  from  left  to  right. 

28  Having  completed  the  vow,  the  Sacrificer  discharges  himself  of  fur- 
ther obligations.  He  I truly  am : a man,  not  a semi'dlvine  being  as  1 was 
while  performing  the  vow.  See  1.  6 and  note. 


VERSE  $3.]  WniTE  YAJURYEDA.  15 

29  To  Agni  Hail  I who  bears  gifts  due  to  Sages,  To  Soma  Hail! 

accompanied  by  Fathers. 

Expelled  are  Asuras  and  fiends  who  sate  upon  the  covering 
grass. 

30  The  Asuras,  attracted  by  oblation,  who  roam  at  will  assum- 

ing varied  figures,  from  this  our  world  may  Agni  drive 
them,  whether  they  clothe  themselves  in  large  or  little 
bodies. 

31  0 Fathers,  here  enjoy  yourselves.  Come  hither,  like  bulls, 

come  each  to  his  allotted  portion. 

The  Fathers  have  enjoyed  themselves,  and  hither,  like  bulls, 
come  each  to  his  allotted  portion. 

32  Obeisance  to  your  genial  sap,  0 Fathers!  Fathers,  obeisance 

unto  you  for  Ardour  ! Fathers,  obeisance  unto  you  for 
Svadha  I Obeisance  unto  you  for  Life,  0 Fathers  I 
Fathers,  to  you  obeisance  for  the  Awful ! Fathers,  obeisance 
unto  you  for  Passion  ! 0 Fathers,  unto  you  bo  adoration. 
Bestow  upon  us  houses,  0 ye  B'athcrs.  Of  what  is  ours,  0 
Fathers,  will  we  give  you.  With  this  your  raiment  clothe 
yourselves,  0 Fathers. 

33  Fathers,  bestow  on  mo  a babe,  a boy  enwreathed  with 

lotuses,  so  that  there  may  bo  hero  a man. 


29  The  following  are  texts  for  the  Pindapitriyajha,  the  monthly  ancestral 
saciifice  or  offering  of  obsequial  cakes  to*  the  Fathers  or  Manes  as  part  of 
the  New  and  Full  Moon  saciifices.  To  Agni:  i^rt  of  the  oblation 
presented  to  him  as  the  general  receiver  of  all  sacrificial  offerings.  Sage:t : 
a special  class  of  Manes.  To  Soma : as  especially  connected  with  the 
Fathers.  See  R.  V.  VIII.  48.  13;  A.  V.  XVIII.  4.  72,  73;  Macdonell, 
Vedic  Mythology,  p.  109.  Expelled : he  draws  a Hue  of  demarcation  from 
north  to  south. 

30  He  lays  down  a firebrand  to  keep  the  fiends  at  a distance.  ^ Varied 
figures  • even  the  forms  of  departed  ancestors.  Large  or  little  bodies . this 
13  Mahidhara’s  explanation  of  the  doubtful  words  purdpurah  and  nipurak. 

32  Obeisance  is  offered  to  the  Fathers  six  times  in  accordance  with  the 
seasons  of  the  year.  Your  genial  sap : the  fresh  juices  of  trees  and  plants 
in  Spring.  Ardour : the  Summer.  Life:  the  vivifying  water  of  the  Rains. 
SvadM : or,  viands ; the  food  offered  to  the  F.ither9,  representing  fruitful 
Autumn.  The  Avful:  the  cold  Winter.  Passion:  the  chilling  Dewy 
Season  which  kills  the  plants.  Similarly  it  was  the  belief  of  the  Old  North- 
men that  their  dead  patriarchs  had  the  power  of  sending  good  srosons.  See 
Corpus  Poeticum  Boreale,  II.  414,  418.  Houses:  wives  and  families.  Rai- 
ment : threads,  or  wool,  or  hairs  from  the  Sacrificer’s  chest,  placed  on  each 
obsequial  cake. 

33  The  matron  who  wishes  fw  a sod  eats  the  middlemost  of  the  three 
cakes  and  recites  this  formula. 


16 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


[BOOK  11. 


34  Bearers  of  vigour  and  immortal  fatness,  milk  and  sweet  be- 
verage and  foaming  liquor,  ye  are  a freshening  draught. 
Delight  my  Fathers. 

34  He  addresses  the  water3  which  he  pours  on  the  cakes.  InmoHal  fat- 
nm  : imperishable  ghritam,  ghi,  or  clarified  butter  which  goes  to  the  Gods. 
According  to  Mahidhara,  amritam  here  means  destroyer  or  banisher  of  all 
disease  and  death.  Sweet  beverage : kildla;  a kind  of  Metheglin.  Poa7n~ 
ing  beverage : parisrut ; a sort  of  beer. 


BOOK  THE  THIRD. 


Serve  Agiii  with  the  kuidling-brand,  with  drops  of  biifitr 
wake  the  Guest. 

In  him  pay  offerings  to  the  Gods. 

2 To  Agin  Jatavedas,  to  the  flame,  the  well-enkindled  God, 
Offer  thick  sacrificial  oil. 

3 Thee,  such,0  Augiras,  with  brands  and  sacred  oil  we 
()  very  brilliant,  Yoiitht'ullest. 

4 Rich  m oblations,  dropping  oil,  to  thee,  sweet  Agoi.  ie(. 

them  go. 

Accept  witli  favour  these  my  brands 
0 Earth  ' Ether ! Sky  ! 

Like  heaven  in  plenty  and  like  earth  in  compa.ss  ! Upon  tl  v 
back,  Earth,  place  of  .sacrificing  to  Gods,  for  gam  of  hx.d 
I lay  food-eating  Agin 

d This  spotted  Rnll  hath  come  and  sat  before  the  Mother  and 
before 

The  Father,  mounting  up  to  heaven. 


This  Book  coutains  formulas  for  the  Agnihotra  or  monung  ami  ovomug 
hurnt-oblatiou  of  milk  which  is  obligatory  ou  flu*  householder  (hiiing  ( wnh 
some  exception  ) the  whole  of  Ins  life,  and  foi  the  Four-monthly  =acntu(.s 
at  the  beginning  of  the  three  chief  seasons,  Spring,  Rains,  and  Autumn 

1 This  veise  and  the  following  contain  texts  for  tlm  Agny.ldhiina,  i.lir 
tienioinal  layiig-dowii  or  establishment  of  Ins  own  saciificial  fires  by  tiie 

ymmg  liouseiiolder  (iueU  Agni  who  is  constantly  maintained  in  m<  ns’ 

2 Jiltavedas  knower  of  (all)  beings;  Oimnscieut.  The  text  i'-’  tak*  n 
from  H V.  V.  5,  1. 

Augiras , Agni,  as  the  chief  messcngei  to  the  (Tod-..  YouthfuUr,^ : 
youngest  of  Gods,  as  being  perpetually  ivnioduoed  at.  sacrifice.  Thvui . 
the  three  kindling-sticks  of  Asvattha  Wood,  anointed  with  sacrificial  butter, 
winch  are  put  on  the  fire  with  the  texts  1,3  4 respectively 

.0  Earth  I Ether!  Sky:  he  lay.s  down  the  Aliavaniya  fire  on  the  lurcc 
prepared  for  it,  with  this  solemn  .saciificial  exclamation  which  is  said  lo 
ctunprehend  the  Univeise,  the  aid  of  which  the  sacrificer  thus  obtain'?.  O', 
according  to  Mahidhata,  the  three  words  refer  to  the  rc-ipcctive  creation 
of  priests,  nobles,  and  people ; or  self,  human  beings,  and  lower  animaH. 
Like  heacen,  etc : ‘ .May  I become  ’ uiidei  stood  In  plenty  m the  nurnin-r 
of  its  stars.  So  numerous  may  rny  sons  and  cattle  be  Like  earth 
may  I spread  with  my  offspring,  or  be  the  retuge  of  living  creatures. 

6 With  the  recitation  of  this  and  the  two  following  ver«es,  which  form 
Hymn  189  of  Book  X of  the  Rigveda,  he  offeis  woiship  to  Agni  and  l.tvs 
down  the  Dakshinlgni  or  Southern  Fire.  Spotted  Pull:  the  Sun,  here 
represented  by  Agni.  The  Mother  E.irtb.  Tne  Father  the  Sky 


18  THE  TEXTS  OP  THE  [BOOK  HI. 

7 As  expiration  from  his  breath  his  radiance  penetrates  within  : 
The  Bull  shines  out  through  all  the  sky. 

8 He  rules  supreme  through  thirty  realms.  Song  is  bestowed 

upon  the  Biid 

Throughout  the  days  at  break  of  morn. 

9 Agni  is  light,  and  light  is  Agni.  Hail ! 

Surya  is  light,  and  light  is  Siirya.  Hail  ' 

Agni  is  splendour,  light  is  splendour.  Hail  ! 

Suiya  IS  splendour,  light  is  splendour.  Hail  I 
Light  is  Surya,  Surya  is  light.  Hail ! 

10  Accordant  with  bright  Savitar  and  Night  with  Indra  at  iier 

side, 

May  Agni,  being  pleased,  enjoy.  All-hail ! 

11  Approaching  sacrifice,  may  we  pronounce  a text  to  Agni 

who 

Heareth  us  even  when  afiir. 

12  Agni  is  head  and  height  of  heaven,  the  Master  of  the  earth 

IS  he 

He  quickeneth  the  waters’  seed. 

13  You  two  will  I invoke,  0 Indra-Agni,  will  please  you  both 

together  with  olilation. 

Givers,  you  twain,  of  vigorous  strength  and  riches,  you 
twain  do  T invoke  for  gain  of  vigour. 

14  This  IS  thine  ordered  place  of  birth  whence,  sprung  to  life, 

thou  shoiiest  forth. 

Knowing  this,  Agni,  rise  thou  up  and  cause  our  riches  to 
increase. 

15  Here  by  ordainers  was  this  God  appointed  first  Invoker, 

best  at  worship,  to  be  praised  at  rites, 

Whom  Apnavana  and  the  Bhrigus  caused  to  shine,  bright- 
coloured  ill  the  wood,  spreading  to  every  house. 


S Thirtif  realms:  all  the  divisious  of  the  world,  the  number  beiug  used 
indehuitely.  The  Bird,  or  the  winged  One;  the  Sun,  Ids  morning  song 
reiueseuting  prayer. 

Here  be^in  the  formulas  of  the  Agnihotra,  or  morning  and  evening 
oblations  of  burnt  milk.  Agni  formula  to  accompany  the  evening  obla 
tion.  Surya  : formula  to  be  employed  in  making  the  morning  offering 
12  Taken  from  R.  V.  VIII.  44.  16.  The  waters  seed : as  lightning,  Agni 
unpiegnates  the  waters  of  the  air. 

14  j'his:  the  G4rhapatya  fire.  The  verse  is  taken  from  R.  V.  III.  29.  10 
1 '>  Taken  from  R.  V.  IV.  7 1.  Ordainers . regulators  of  sacrifice,  the 
ancient  fire-priests.  Apnavdna:  an  ancient  Rishi,  connected  with  the 
priestly  family  of  the  Bhrigus  and  the  earliest  worship  of  Agni.  Cf.  R.  V. 
VUi.  91  4 


VERSE  22.] 


WHITE  Y A JURY  ED  A. 


19 


16  After  his  ancient  splendour  they,  the  bold,  have  drawn  the 

bright  milk  from 

The  Sage  who  wins  a thousand  gifts. 

17  Thou,  Agni,  art  our  bodies’  guard.  Guard  thou  my  body. 
Giver  of  life  art  thou,  0 Agni.  Give  me  life. 

Giver  of  splendour  art  thou,  Agni.  Give  me  splendour. 

All  that  is  wanting  in  my  body,  Agni,  supply  for  me. 

18  Enkindled  we  enkindle  thee  through  hundred  winters,  thee 

the  bright; 

We  healthy,  thee  who  givest  health;  we  strong,  thee  author 
of  our  strength ; 

We,  never  injured,  Agni,  thee  uninjured  injurer  of  foes. 

0 rich  in  shining  lights,  may  I in  safety  rich  the  end  of  thee. 

19  Thou  hast  attained,  0 Agni,  to  the  splendour  of  Surya,  to 

the  eulogy  of  Rishis,  and  to  the  habitation  which  thou 
lovest. 

May  I attain  to  lengthened  life,  to  splendour,  to  offspring 
and  abundant  store  of  riches. 

20  Ye  are  food,  may  I enjoy  your  food.  Ye  are  might,  may  1 

enjoy  your  might.  Ye  are  energy,  may  I enjoy  your 
energy,  Ye  are  abundant  riches,  may  I enjoy  your  abun- 
dant riches. 

21  Sport,  wealthy  ones,  in  this  abode,  this  fold,  this  spot,  this 

dwelling-place. 

Remain  just  here,  and  go  not  hence. 

22  Composed  art  thou  of  every  form  and  colour.  With  sap  and 

ownership  of  kine  approach  me. 

To  thee,  dispeller  of  the  night,  0 Agni,  day  by  day  with 
prayer. 

Bringing  thee  reverence,  we  come ; 


16  Taken  from  R.  V.  IX.  54.  1.  In  the  original  liymn  the  bold  are  the 
Soina-preseers,  and  the  mgt  is  Soma.  Here  Mahl.lhara,  to  suit  the  sacrificml 
occasion,  explains  the  woids  as  ‘ milkers  ’ and  ‘ cow.’ 

18  Enkindled:  brightened  or  made  illustrious  by  thy  favour.  Hundred 
winters . implying  a prayer  for  life  extended  to  that  period.  Shining  lights : 
Moon  and  stars ; he  addresses  Night. 

^ 19  Splendour  of  Stirya : at  night,  when  the  setting  Sun  has  entered  the 
Ahavanlya  fire.  UahitaJtion:  or  dainty  offering. 

20  He  approaches  the  cow  that  has  been  milked  for  the  oblation.  Ye : 
thou  aud  the  other  cows.  Food : in  the  shape  of  milk  and  butter. 

22  Thou : he  touches  and  addresses  the  cow.  To  thee : he  approaches 
the  G&rhapatya  fire  and  reverences  it  This  text  and  verses  23,  21  are 
taken  from  R.  V.  1.  1.  7-9. 


20 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


I TOOK  III 


23  Ruler  of  sacrifices,  guard  of  Law  eternal,  radiant  One, 
Increasing  in  thine  own  abode. 

21  Be  to  us  easy  of  approach,  even  as  a father  to  his  son  . 

Agni,  be  with  us  for  our  weal. 

25  0 Agni,  be  our  nearest  Friend ; be  thou  a kind  deliverer 

and  gracious  Friend. 

Excellent  Agm,  come  thou  nigh  to  us,  and  give  us  wealth 
most  splendidly  renowned. 

26  To  thee  then,  0 most  bright,  0 radiant  God,  we  come  with 

prayer  for  happiness  for  our  friends. 

So  hear  us,  listen  to  this  call  of  ours,  and  keep  us  far  from 
every  evil  man. 

27  0 Ida,  come,  0 Aditi,  come  hither.  Come  hither,  much- 

desired  ! From  you  may  I obtain  my  heart’s  desire. 

28  0 Brahmanaspati,  make  him  who  presses  Soma  glorious, 

Even  Kakshiv^u  Ausija. 

29  The  rich,  the  healer  of  disease,  who  findeth  wealth,  increaseth 

store, 

The  prompt, — may  he  be  with  us  still. 

30  Let  not  the  foeman’s  curse,  let  not  a mortal’s  treachery  tall 

on  us: 

Preserve  us,  Brahmanaspati ! 

3 1 Great,  heavenly,  unassailable,  ours  be  the  favour  of  the  Three, 
Aryaman,  Mitra,  Varuna. 

32  For  over  them,  neither  at  home  nor  upon  pathways  perilous. 
The  evil-minded  foe  hath  power, 

33  For  they,  the  Sons  of  Aditi,  bestow  eternal  light  upon 
A mortal  man  that  he  may  live. 

2:)  Laiv  eternal:  the  order  of  the  universe,  or.  specially,  est.tbli^hed  sacnfice- 
2r»  This  and  the  following  verse  make  up  Hymn  24  of  H.  V.  V'.,  the  two 
h.Uves  of  26,  transposed,  forming  verses  3 and  4. 

*27  He  approaches  and  addresses  the  cow  Idii  or  HA,  Nourishpaent 
personified,  here  a symbolical  name  of  the  cow  as  representing  pleutj. 
Addi : here  and  elsewhere  a sacrificial  name  of  the  cow 

28  This  verse  and  the  two  following  are  taken  from  R.  V.  I.  18  1-3. 
o’j-aAmawasprtii.'— Biihaspati ; Lord  of  prayer,  or  Guardian  of  the  Veda, 
file  special  deity  and  prototype  of  the  Btahmans  and  the  priestly  commu- 
nity, and  Purohita  or  tribal  Priest  of  the  Gods,  KakshUdn : called  Ausija 
or  son  of  Usij,  a renowned  Rishi,  the  seer  of  several  hymns  of  the  Rigveda. 
Glorious  : or  clear  of  voice. 

29  The  rich,  etc. ; Brahmanaspati. 

31  This  veise  and  the  two  following  form,  with  a variation  in  33;.  Hymn 
185  of  Book  X.  of  the  Rigveda.  Aryaman  • the  name  of  one  of  the  Adityas, 
commonly  invoked  with  Mitra  and  Varuna. 


VERSE  41  ] WlffTE  YAJCRVErKA  21 

34  Ne’er  art  thou  fruitless,  Tndra,  ne’er  dost  thou  forsake  thy 

worshipper. 

But  now.  0 Liberal  Lord,  thy  bounty  as  a God  is  ever  pour- 
ed forth  more  and  more. 

35  May  we  attain  that  excellent  glory  of  Savitar  the  God  : 

So  may  he  stimulate  our  prayers. 

36  May  thine  inviolable  car  wherewith  thou  guardest  worship 

pers 

Come  near  to  us  from  every  side. 

37  Earth  ' Ether  ! Sky  ! May  1 be  rich  in  offspring,  well-mau 

ned  with  men  and  opulent  with  riche.s.  Frieiully  to  men  ' 
do  thou  protect  my  olfsprmg.  Worthy  ot  praise  ' do  thou 
protect  my  cattle. 

0 pointed  One,  protect  the  food  that  feeds  me. 

38  We  have  approached  tiie  ()mni.scient,  best  finder  out  of 

wealth  for  us.  Splendour  and  strength  bestow  on  us, 
O Agui,  thou  Imperial  Lord. 

3D  Lord  of  the  Home,  this  Agui  Giirhapatya  is  best  at  finding 
riches  for  our  children. 

Splendour  and  strength  bestow  on  us,  0 Agni,  Master  of  the 
Home. 

40  Rich,  furtherer  of  plenty  is  this  Agni,  Master  of  the  Herd 
Splendour  and  strength  bestow*  on  us,  0 Agm,  Master  of 

the  Herd. 

41  Fear  not,  nor  tremble  thou,  0 House.  To  thee  who  hearest 

strength  we  come. 


34  Indra.  as  Deity  of  the  sacrifice,  is  as.M)ciate<i  with  Agni.  The  verse  i.s 

taken  from  R.  V.,  Valakhilya,  3.  7.  , , 

35  Taken  ftoiu  R,  III.  ti2,  10.  This  stanza  is  the  Savitn,  the  (iilyatit 
pcir  excellence,  ‘ the  celebrated  verse  of  the  Ved.is  which  foims  pait^ot  th»* 
daily  devotions  of  the  Brahmans,  and  wa.s  first  made  known  to  Rngli^h 
reailers  by  Sir  William  Jones’s  tran.«lation  of  a paraphrastic  inter[)retation  ; 
he  render.s  it,  Let  us  adore  the  supremacy  of  that  divin-  ^in  who  illumin 
ates  all,  from  whom  all  proceed,  to  whom  all  m«ist  return,  wliom  we  inv(;k« 
to  rliiect  our  understandings  aright  in  our  progie-s  towaids  his  holy  Kcat.’ 
WiUn  SeeRigveda  Sauhita,  Vol,  III.  p 111,  Prayaa:  or.  thoughts. 

30  Addressed  to  Agni  Come  near  to  ; or,  encompass. 

37  Earth!  etc.:  see  III.  6.  Friendly  to  men . he  approaches  and  addresses 
the  Garhapatya  fire.  Pointed  One:  flame  «>f  the  flie. 

38  He  approaches  the  Ahavaniya  fire.  The  Omnmunt  Agni^ 

40  Master  of  the  Ile^  d : purlshya  ; the  original  meaning  of  purUha  is  rub 
bish,  loose  soil,  manure,  and  is  used  symbolically  for  the  cattle  which  pro- 


duce the  manure.  I 

41  — 43  Formulas  to  be  used  by  the  householder  on  approaching  the  Dak- 
shina  fire  on  departing  fioui  aud  returning  to  UL  house.  Feav  not ; in  the 


ma.ster  s absence. 


r 


THE  RAHAKRISHHA  MISSION 
tMSTITUTE  OF  lULTURE 
LIBRARY 


22 


THB  TEXTS  OP  THE 


[BOOK  III. 


I,  bearing  sh'ength,  intelligent  and  happy,  come  to  thee 
House,  rejoicing  in  my  spirit.  ' 

42  The  home  on  which  the  wanderer  thinks,  where  oheerfnlness 

and  joy  abound— 

We  call  the  Home  to  welcome  us.  May  it  know  us  who 
know  it  well. 

43  Here  have  the  cows  been  called  to  us,  the  goats  and  sheep 

have  been  called  near,  ^ 

And  in  our  home  we  have  addressed  the  mcath  that  sweeten- 
eth  our  food. 

I come  to  thee  for  safety  and  for  quiet.  May  joy  be  ours, 
felicity,  and  blessing.  ^ 

44  jye  invocate  the  Maruts,  the  voracious,  eaters  of  their  foes 
Delighting  m their  mess  of  meal. 

45  We  expiate  by  sacrifice  each  sinful  act  that  we  have  done 

hether  111  VI  lage  or  the  wild,  in  company  or  corporeal 
sense.  Svaha ! ^ 

46  Let  us  not  hero  contend  with  Gods,  0 ladra,  for.  Fierce 

One  ! here  is  thine  own  sacred  portion, 

Thine,  Mighty  One,  whoso  friends,  the  bounteous  Maruts 
his  song  who  pours  obl.ation,  streamlike,  honours. 

47  The  skilhil  workers  have  performed  their  work  with  voice 

that  gives  delight. 

y'our  homr'^^^^^  companions,  to 

48  0 eve^r^moving  Cleansing  Bath,  thou  movest  gliding  on  thy 


42  Mcath  • htldla  ; a sweet  beverage,  the  nature  of  which  h uncertain 

Four-monthly  sacrifices  at  the  begin- 
ning  of  bpuug,  the  Rains,  and  Autumn.  The  Sacrificer’s  wife  is  first  e tiler! 
upon  to  confess  her  infidelities,  if  she  has  been  guiltv  of  any  and  to  le  Ire 
the  name  or  names  of  her  lover  or  lovers.  After  confession  or  declaraS 
of  innocence,  she  is  made  to  recite  the  text  Eaters:  consumers,  destroyers 
traditional  interpretation  is  doubtful.  See  Prof’ 
^rridge^  Vedic  Hymns,  Part  II.  p.  14  ofa.cal:  a sort  of  or 

45  Spoken  by  the  Sacrifioer’s  wife,  or  by  her  and  her  husband.  In  vil- 

other  byebueeof  the  tongue'or 

« Taken  from  R.  V.  I.  173.  12.  Spoken  by  the  Saorificer. 

AO  Matron.  Skilful  loorkcvs priests. 

• Baptism  in  a stream  of  fresh  water 

Saenficer  and  his  wife.  I7/w  luadly  roan:  the  terrible 


VERSE  55.] 


WHITE  Y A JURY  ED  A 


With  Gods  may  I wash  out  the  sin  that  I have  sinned 
against  tlie  Gods,  with  men  the  sin  against  inaniiind. 
Preserve  me  safe  from  injury,  0 God,  from  him  who  loudly 
roars. 

49  Full,  fly  away,  0 spoon,  and  filled  completely  fly  thou  bach 
to  us. 

0 Satakratu,  let  us  twain  barter,  like  goods,  our  food  and 
strength. 

.50  Give  me,  I give  thee  gifts  : bestow  on  me,  and  I be.sto\v  cm 
thee. 

To  me  present  thy  merchandize,  and  I to  thee  will  give  iny 
wares. 

51  Well  have  they  eaten  and  regaled  : the  friends  h.ive  risen 

and  passed  away. 

The  sai'es,  luminous  in  themselves,  have  praised  thee  with 
their  latest  hymn. 

Now,  Indra,  yoke  thy  two  Bay  Steeds. 

52  Thee  will  we  reverence,  thee,  0 Lord  of  Bounty,  who  art 

fair  to  see. 

Thus  praised,  according  to  our  wish  come  now  with  rich  I \ 
laden  car,  Now,  Indra,  y’oke  thy  two  Bay  Steeds. 

53  We  call  the  spirit  hither  with  a hero-celebrating  strain. 

Yea,  with  the  Fathers’  holy  hymns. 

51  The  spirit  comes  to  us  again  for  wisdom,  energy,  and  Ide, 
That  we  may  long  behold  the  Sun. 

55  0 Fathers,  may  the  Heavenly  Folk  give  us  the  spirit  rmce 
again, 

That  W0  may  bo  with  those  who  live. 


49  Here  begin  the  foriiiul.is  for  tlie  presentation  of  the  S4k  luiedli.i  'dl'  r 

ings  on  the  full  moon  of  K.ii'ttika  (Octobfr-November).  Tlie  Adliv, uv.i 
'>tSciate^.  Full : of  the  boiled  rice  to  be  offered  to  Indra.  Spoon  • tlir 
Crdled  with  blessingi  in  return.  Sitakfatn- 

of  % Hundred  Powers;  or  sacrifices,  according  to  the  Commentators,  iinrtn' 
cf.  A,  V.  III.  15.  1;  I stir  and  animate  the  merchant  Indra  Food  and 
Urenqtk  • the  sacred  food  purchasing  strength  for  the  worshipper, 

50  Give  me.  etc.:  dehi  me,  dadduu  te ; do  nt  des  • the  fundamental  [irin- 
ciple  underlying  sacrifice.  According  to  Mahidhara,  line  lis  spoten  i»y 
Indra  and  line  2 by  the  Sncrificer, 

51,  52  Taken  from  K V.  I.  82.  2,  3,  F.*od  is  offered  to  the  Fathers,  and 
Indra  is  addressed.  They  . . . the  friends:  the  Fathers.  See  TI.  31. 

53—50  Taken  from  R.  V,  X.  57,  3— 0.  The  spirit,  the  mind  or  thought 
of  the  worshippers  which  in  paying  obeisance  to  the  Fathers  has,  as  it  were, 
gone  to  the  world  of  the  Departed  .and  is  now  invited  to  return  to  e.irth  la 
the  original  hymn  the  application  is  different,  the  spirit  of  a deceased  ra.iii 
being  recalled.  See  Max  Miiller,  Royal  Asi-xtic  Society’s  Journal,  1806  pp. 
449  and  458.  Strain : itonicna : the  R V.  h.is  soniem,  with  Soma. 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


24 


[BOOK  IIL 


5(>  0 Somn,  with  the  spirit  still  within  us,  blest  with  progeny, 

Mfiy  we  be  busied  in  thy  law. 

57  0 Rudra,  this  is  thine  allotted  portion.  With  .\mbika  thy 
Sister  kindly  take  it.  This,  Rudra,  is  tliy  share,  the  rat 
thy  victim. 

hS  We  have  contented  Rudra,  yen,  put  off  Tryambaka  the  God, 

That  he  may  make  us  wealthier,  may  make  us  yet  more 
prosperous,  may  make  us  vigorous  to  act. 

5!J  Thou  art  a healing  medicine,  a balm  for  cow  and  horse  and 
man,  a happiness  to  ram  and  ewe. 

60  Tryainbaka  we  worship,  sweet  augmonter  of  prosperity. 

As  from  its  stem  a cucumber,  may  I be  freed  from  bonds  of 
death,  not  reft  of  immortality. 

We  worship  him,  Tryambaka,  the  husband-finder,  sweet  to 
smell. 

As  from  its  stem  a cucumber,  hence  and  not  thence  may  1 
be  loosed. 

61  This,  Rudra,  is  thy  food:  with  this  depart  beyond  the 

Muj  avails. 

AVith  bow  unstrung,  with  mufled  staff',  clothed  in  a garment 
made  of  skin,  gracious,  not  harming  us,  depart. 

62  May  Jaiua(laj:nrs  triple  life,  the  triple  life  of  Knsyapa, 

The  triple  life  of  Deities — may  that  same  triple  life  he  ours. 


.ai  0 Soma : jw  being  closely  connected  with  the  Fathers 

57  Knilra,  the  fietce  Tempest- God,  destroyer  of  men  and  cattle  is  to  he 
propitiated  This  .'i  iioe-oake.  There  is  to  he  one  cake  for  each  living 
son  and  servant  of  the  Sicrificer,  and  one  over  for  future  additions,  and 
tho'C  cakes  are  all  to  be  on  one  pot'herd,  Ambikd  the  peisonilitation  ot 
Autumn  with  which  Rudra  kilK.  The  rat  • the  supeinunieiary  cake  is  t * 
he  hulled  in  the  earth  tliiown  uj)  hy  a lat  or  vole,  and  tins  symbolic  sacn 
nee  will  satisfy  Rudia  and  induce  him  to  .spare  other  animals. 

58  Tnjamhaht : a name  of  Rudia  as  having  three  wives,  si.sters,  ot 
nurhei.-,,  or  Triocular,  tlie  Three-eyed  God,  as  Siva  is  repieseiited  in  later 
hteiatiiie 

.59  Thou  : Rudra  in  his  gentle  mood.  ' 

ou  Spoken  by  the  girls  of  the  Saciificer’s  family  as  they  walk  round  the 
ait.ir  The  first  two  lines  are  taken  from  R.  V VII  59  12.  Ifunhuml-Jimle)' 
more  u.sually  a title  of  Aiyamaii.  See  A.  V.  XIV.  1.  17.  Jlenct  and  not 
tkcnce : from  niy  father’s  house  and  not  from  my  future  husband’s  Cf 
R V X.  85.  25. 

<)l  Thi/  food ; provisions  for  thy  journey  ; the  remains  of  the  rice-cakes 
picked  in  two  baskets  at  the  end  of  a pole  and  fa-stened  on  a tree,  post, 
bamboo,  or  ant-hill.  See  Muir.  Oiiginal  Sanskrit  Texts,  II.  352  Mujavdns 
apiiareutly  a hill-tribe  in  the  North-west. 

d2  Jamadagni  and  Kasyapa  were  ancient  Vedic  Rishis.  See  The  Hymna 
of  the  Rigveda.dudex. 


VERSE  63  1 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA. 


03  Gracious,  thy  name  ; the  thmuier  is  tiiy  father  Oheisauce 
tie  to  thee  : forbear  to  harm  me 
1 shave  thee  tor  long  life,  tor  food  to  feed  thee,  for  jiroc^env, 
for  riches  in  abundance,  tor  noble  children,  for  heroic 
viL'uiir 


63  The  Sacrificer’'^  head  and  beaid  ait*  sLaveri  (rracioux  lljt*  laycr 
addres‘-ed  Thunder  the  vujra  or  thundeibolt,  uiadeot  iron  like  tlio  i.i/or 
y Uuiie  thcc  the  AdhvM3.u  speaks,  u.sin^'  the  lAord  niuvtaiinmi  (<  auM  tl  m 
to  i.e  turned  round)  the  teoLnital  teiin  to  he  employed  at  tins  saintuu;d  al’ 
round  slia\ing. 


book  the  fourth. 


Wb  have  reached  this  earth’s  place  of  sacrificing,  the  place 

wherein  all  Deities  delighte  . rejoice 

Crossing  by  Rik,  by  Saman  and  by  Yajus,  may  we  j 
m food  and  growth  of  riches. 

Oracious  to  \ne  be  these  Celestial  Waters ! 

Protect  me,  Plant.  0 Knife,  forbear  to  harm  him. 

2 The  Mother  Floods  shall  make  ns  brighs  and  shining,  cleans- 

from  them  purified  and  ,h„„.  I put  i 

3 ThroZ  Ones’  milk  art  thou  Giver  splendour  art  | 

thou  • bestow  on  me  the  gift  of  splendom. 

Pupil  Irt  thou  of  Vritra’s  eye.  The  gver  of  eyes  art  thou. 
Give  me  the  gift  of  vision. 

the  beams  of  Surya ! 

-Rooiis  tv -Vin.  couhnn  torimiuTf^Tth? Sons  aacriftce  in  geueral. 

Wya„o/»,.«>lri,.,-wUichhasbee,...refun^^ 

hall,  etc.  The  Sacrificcr  ■;««'*!’ ‘'  '„7“7'asniog  the  ch.et  post  ot 

nraiiis  or  two  piece,  of  the  w,>0<len  bv  meins  'd  the  verse  ot  praise, 

the  saerificul  hall.  V/atcrs.  to  be  used  in  the 

the  chanted  iH<dm,  find  the  ^ ^ baptism.  He  moistens 

Apsii-Dik.hil  or  Consecration  a^blade  of  Kusa  gra.^8  placed  on  bis 

linyr:  "R'whfoh  ie  said  to  be  a or  thunderbolt. 

uienfromK  V.  X.^n.J0 

bathe  m the  consecrating  waters.  Tint  ot  the  water.  Thei  the  linen 

:;:;“!Lr?Sihe.Vf“:rhe!e;S.™-oar..  ardour,  leligmus  seal. 

of  ttejws ; the_^fr«b 

he  IS  .Hiointed  from  head  to  to<a.  i Taittiriya-SamhitS,  VI.  1.  5 that 
hix  eye  with  collynum.  It  is  s j became  ointment 

VritrVseye-baU.whenIndnicc^^^^^^^^  S j, , thi 

Lord  of  Thought  : strainei : or  purifier 

name  deity,  or  Brih.«pat»  Lord  «f  J ^ purification,  thi 

Vayu  the  wind.  Lord  of  the  straina 

abtfo"«e"hfhrs^^mcein  aocordauoe  with  my  preconceived  wishei 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA. 


VERSE  10  ] 

Of  thee,  Lord  of  the  Strainer!  who  art  by  the  strainer 
purified, 

With  what  desire  I purify  myself,  may  I accomplish  it 

5 We  come  to  you  for  precious  wealth,  0 Gods,  as  sacrificr 

proceeds. 

0 Gods,  we  call  on  you  to  give  blessings  that  wait  on  siicnhce. 

6 Svaha, ! from  mind  the  sacrifice.  Sv-aha ! from  spacious 

firmament.  . * iv  i i 

Svaha!  from  Dyaus  and  Prithivi.  Sv^ha ! from  \\ind  I 

seize.  Svaha  1 

7 To  Resolution,  Motive,  Agni,  Svahi ! All-hail  to  Wisdom, 

and  to  Mind,  and  Agni ! . w o 

All-hail  to  Consecration,  Fervour,  Agni ! Hail  to  Saras\ati, 

Pdshan,  and  Agni ! j v 

Ye  vast,  divine,  all-beneficial  Waters,  ye  Heaven  and  har  i 

and  spacious  Air  between  them, 

Let  us  adore  Brihaspati  with  oblation.  All  hail  I 

8 May  every  mortal  man  elect  the  friendship  of  the  gmdmg 

EadTmie  solicits  him  for  wealth:  let  him  seek  fame  to  pros- 
per  him.  ,, 

9 Rik’s,  Saman’s  counterparts  are  ye.  I touch  you.  lo  a 

' me  till  the  sacrifice  be  ended.  Olicisaiict' 

Thou  art  a place  of  refuge.  Give  me  refuge, 
unto  thee  ! Forbear  to  liarm  me. 

10  .t  A.sir.«.  ...  U-. 

... 

thou,  the  Sacrificer’s  refuge^^^ 

i-ii' 

Prescribed  Dyam  and  Pritiiioi : Heaven  and  harth. 


2S  TlfE  TEXTS  OF  THE  {BOOK  IV. 

Thou  art  the  womb  of  Iiidra.  Make  the  crops  produce 
abundant  grain. 

Stand  up  erect,  0 Tree.  Protect  me  from  harm  until  this 
bacrihce  be  ended. 

11  Prepare  ye  vow-food.  Agni  is  the  Brahman,  Agni  is  sacri- 

fice, tlie  tree  is  holy. 

For  aid  we  meditate  divine  Intelligence,  most  merciful, 
Free-giver,  bringing  worship.  May  it  guide  us  gently,  as 
v\e  would 

Favour  us  Gods,  miiuFborn,  endowed  with  mind  and  intel- 
lectual might ! All-had  to  them  ! May  they  be  mir  pro- 
tectors. 

12  Waters  that  we  have  drunk  I become  refreshing,  become 

auspicious  draughts  within  our  belly. 

Free  from  all  sm  and  malady  and  sickness,  may  thev  be 
pleasant  to  our  taste,  divine  Ones,  immortal,  strength- 
eners  of  eternal  Order. 

13  This  IS  thy  sacrificial  form. 

Not  offspring,  waters  I discharge.  Freeing  from  sin  and 
consecrate  by  Svaha  enter  ye  the  earth.  Be  thou  united 
with  the  earth. 

14  0 Agni,  watch  thou  well.  May  we  take  joy  in  most  refresh- 

ing sleep. 

Protect  us  with  unceasing  care.  From  slumber  waken  us 
again. 


)'itriarchal  Risshi.  See  Index  to  The  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda.  Garment  knot  : 
he  meeting  ends  of  the  cloth  worn  round  the  body  ; ‘tuck’:  Eggeling. 
)f  Sonia  • belonging  to  Soma  .ifter  the  consecration  of  the  wearer,  and  to 
he  Fathers  before  that  ceremony.  Vishnu's  : the  Sacrificer’s.  The  icomh  of 
^ndra  • he  addresses  a black-bnck’s  horn  which  he  ties  to  tlife  fiinge  of  his 
faruient.  See  the  legend.  Sacied  Books  of  the  East  XXVI.  30 — 33. 
^laliidhara  give.s  a somewhat  .similar  legend,  from  the  Taittijly-v  Samhit&, 
.soiibing  Indra’s  birth  to  the  union  of  Yajfla  (Sacrifice)  with  Dakshinft 
S.icrificia]  Guerdon)  inste.ad  of  Vak  (Speech  ).  Make  the  rrops : he  draws 
, line  with  the  horn  on  the  ground  0 Tree  • a staff  of  Udumbara  (Ficus 
Tlomerata)  wood  which  the.\dhvaryn  gives  to  the  Sacrificer. 

1 1 Vow-food  or  fast-food,  cliiefly  milk  which  the  attendants  prepare.  The 
iaci'ificer  pronounces  this  formula  thrice.  The  Brahman:  (neuter)  the 
niestliood,  or,  according  to  Mahidhara,  the  three  Vedas.  The  tree  • tl.e 
vliadira  (Acacia  Catechu)  and  other  trees  whose  wood  is  used  for  sacrificial 
lurposes.  For  aid:  to  help  us  in  the  performance  of  the  sacrifice. 

I'J  Recited  after  drinkinK  the  milk. 

13  I'his,  etc.-  micturiens,  he  takes  up  with  the  horn  a lump  of  earth  or 
oiiiething  similar,  and  addresses  embi^ied  sacrifice : This  earth  is  thy 
acriticial  form.  i.  e.  place  meet  for  worship.  Ye : the  waters  of  which  he 
elieves  himself.  Be  thou : he  throws  down  the  lump  of  earth. 

l-I  With  a prayer  to  the  Guaidian  Agni  he  goes  to  sleep. 


VERSE  19  ] 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


15  Thought  hath  returned  to  me,  and  life;  my  breath  and 

soul  have  come  again. 

Oiir  bodies’  guard,  unscathed,  Vaiavanara  Agni  preserve  us 
from  misfortune  and  dishonour. 

16  Thou,  Agui,  art  the  guardian  God  of  sacred  vows  amotig 

mankind,  thou  meet  for  praise  at  holy  rites. 

Grant  this  much,  Soma!  bring  yet  more.  God  Savitar  win- 
givcth  wealth  hath  given  treasure  unto  us. 

17  This  is  thy  form,  0 Bright  One,  this  thy  lustre.  Combnu 

with  this  thy  form  and  go  to  splendour. 

Impetuous  art  thou,  upheld  by  mind,  and  Vishnu  loveth 
thee. 

IS  Moved  by  thine  impulse  who  hast  true  impulsion,  may  F 
obtain  a prop  to  stay  my  body. 

Pine  art  thou,  glistering  art  thou,  immortal,  dear  to  all  tiu' 
Gods. 

19  Thought  art  thou,  mind,  intelligence,  the  Guerdon,  royal, 
worshipful,  Aditi  with  a double  head.  Succeed  for  us  ni 
going  forth,  succeed  for  us  in  thy  return.  May  Mitra 
bind  thee  by  the  foot.  May  Piishan  guard  thy  pathways 
for  Indra  whose  eye  is  over  all. 

15  Uttered  on  awaking.  Vaimlaara:  All-men’s;  fiiendly  it  ilcar  (o  sll 
Aryan  men. 

16  Tlie  first  two  lines  are  taken  fioin  U.  V VIIl.  11.  1.  (n-ant  dr  • 
this  foiuHila  is  to  be  used  when  a gift  has  been  ottered  to  him  alter  Ins 
conseciation. 

17  This  is  the  formula  for  the  Hiranyav.ati-Alniti  or  Offering  with  Oobl 
Having  poured  the  butter  left  m the  dhruvd  ladle  into  the  julni,  he  throws 
on  the  butter  a piece  of  gold  tied  with  Daibha  grass  TA/s  (1)  rln 
blitter.  Thin  (2)  : the  gold  which  is  iilentified  with  light  So  in  n|d 
Noithern  poetry  gold  is  called  the  gleam  of  Ocean,  the  fire  of  Oian 
(a  Scottish  stream)  ; the  sun  of  the  deep.  See  Corpus  Poeticum  lioiealt, 
II.  p.  468.  Inpduous  oafayuktd  is  Mahidliara’s  explanation  of  plk 
According  to  the  Satapatha-Br.dhmana,  the  meaning  is  ‘singer  of  firai'-es  ’ 
Vdk  or  Speech  is  addressed.  Vishnu:  Sacrifice;  oi  Soma 

18  Thine:  V^k's,  as  repre.sented  by  the  cow  which  is  to  be  given  in 
exchange  for  the  Soma  required  for  the  sacrifice.  Pure  art  thou  he 
addresses  the  piece  of  gold  which  he  takes  up. 

19  The  Adhvaryu  addresses  the  Soma-purchasing  cow.  (rutrdtm 
priestly  fee,  consisting  chiefly  of  a cow  or  cows.'  Aditi  regarded  as  tiie 
Co.smic  Cow.  See  R.  V.  IX.  96.  15.  With  double  head:  as  mistress  of  the 
prdyaniya  (introductory)  and  udayantya  (concluding)  libations  ; or  facing 
both  ways,  regarded  as  Vdk  or  Speech.  In  goiny  forth:  to  procure  tlie 
Soma.  Bind  t/iee  ■ to  prevent  wandering  and  loss,  Pdshan  as  the  guuie 
of  travellers  and  guardian  of  ways. 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  IV. 


JO 

20  Thy  mother  give  thee  leave  to  go,  thy  father,  thine  own 

brother,  and  thy  friend  of  the  same  herd  with  thee  ! 

Go  thou,  0 Goddess,  to  the  God.  To  Soma  go  for  Indra’s 
sake. 

May  Rudra  turn  thee  back.  Return  safely  with  Soma  as 
thy  friend. 

21  Thou  art  a Vaavl,  thou  art  Aditi,  thou  art  an  Aditya,  thou 

art  a Rudii,  thou  art  a Chandra. 

Brihaspati  vouchsafe  thee  rest  and  comfort ! Rudra  with 
Vasus  looks  on  thee  with  favour. 

22  On  Aditi’s  head  I sprinkle  thee,  on  the  earth’s  place  of 

sacrifice. 

Footstep  of  Ida  art  thou,  filled  with  fatness.  Hail ! 

Rejoice  in  us.  Thy  kinship  is  in  us.  In  thee  are  riches. 
Mine  be  riches  ! Let  us  not  be  deprived  of  abundant 
riches.  Thine,  thine  are  riches.  ‘ 

23  I with  mv  thought  have  commerced  with  divine  far-sighted 

Dakshina.  10 

Steal  not  ruy  life.  I will  not  thine.  May  I,  0 Goddess,  in 
thy  sight  find  for  myself  a hero  son. 

24  Tell  Soma  this  for  me  : This  is  thy  share  allied  with  Gayatri. 
For  me  say  this  to  Soma : This  is  thine  allotted  Trishtup 

share. 

Tell  Soma  this  for  me  : This  is  thy  share  allied  with  Jagati. 
Tell  Soma  this  for  me:  Win  thou  sole  lordship  of  the  metres' 
names. 

Ours  art  thou  : pure  thy  juice  for  draught.  Let  separator!: 
pick  thee  out. 

20  Rudra  : as  Lord  of  Cattle.  ^ 

•il  Vusvi:  a female  Vasu.  See  II.  5.  Adityd  : a daughter  of  Aditi 
a female  Aditya.  Rudrd : a female  Rudra.  Chandrd ; a female  Moon 
bright  as  the  Moou-Ood.  . 

22  Aditi’s  head : the  surface  of  the  earth.  Thee : an  oblation  o 
clarified  butter.  Footstep  of  IM  : he  addresses  the  footprint  of  ,the  coi 
identified  with  Id&,  a Goddess  of  Devotion,  the  daughter  of  Manu  or  ma 
thinking  on  and  worshipping  the  Gods.  In  thee  are  riches  : he  gives  th 
impressed  earth  to  the  Sacrificer.  Mine  : the  Sacrificer  replies.  Let  us  not 
the  Adhvaryu  speaks  for  himself  aud  others.  Thine,  thine ; totoh  for  tvay 
tvayi ; spoken  by  the  matron,  to  whom  also  the  impressed  earth  has  bee 

^ 23  Spoken  by  the  matron,  on  whom  the  cow  has  been  made  to  lool 
Bakshind : or  Guerdon,  the  Soma-cow.  See  verse  19. 

24  Spoken  by  the  Sacrificer  to  the  Adhvaryu.  WUh  Odyatrt : this  an 
the  two  other  metres  being  used,  respectively,  at  the  morning,  noon,  ar 
evening  Soma-pressings.  Ours  art  thou : the  Soma-plant  is  addresse* 
Pick  thee  : selecting  the  parts  that  are  fit  for  sacrificial  use. 


VERSE  28.] 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA. 


31 


25  I sing  my  song  of  praise  to  him,  Savitar,  God  between  the 
Bowls,  strong  with  the  wisdom  of  the  wise,  of  true  impul- 
sion, wealth-giver,  the  well-belovM  thonghtfal  Sage. 

To  him  at  whose  impulsion  shone  aloft  in  heaven  the  splen- 
did light. 

Most  wise,  the  Golden-handed  hath  measured  the  sky  with 
skilled  design. 

Fu:  ving  creatures,  thee.  Let  living  creatures  breathe 
after  thee.  Breathe  after  living  creatures. 

2G  Thee  who  art  pure,  with  what  is  pure  1 purchase,  the  bright 
with  bright,  immortal  with  immortal. 

The  Sacrificer  keep  thy  cow.  Let  thy  gold  pieces  be  with  us 

Fervour’s  form  art  thou,  and  Prajftpati’s  nature.  Witii  the 
most  noble  animal  art  thou  purchased.  May  I mcroase 
with  thousandfold  abundance. 

27  As  friend,  the  giver  of  good  friends,  approach  us  1 

Take  thou  thy  seat  on  the  right  thigh  of  Indra,  yearning  on 
yearning,  pleasing  on  the  pleasing. 

Anghari,  Svana,  Bhrilja,  and  Banibhari,  0 Hastii,  and  Su 
ha^ta  and  Krisanu, 

These  are  your  prices  for  the  Soma  purchase.  Keep  them 
securely,  let  them  never  fail  you. 

28  Keep  me,  0 Agni,  from  unrighteous  conduct : make  me  a 

sharer  iii  the  path  of  goodness. 


25  The  Boidi : heaven  and  earth,  so  called  fnan  tlwir  hemisplierical 
anpearauco.  liut  see  Hillebrandt.  Vedische  MytlKdogie,  I.  p.  77,  and 
Ludwig,  Ueber  die  Neuesten  Arbeiteu  auf  dem  Gebiete  dei  R(^ve(  a 
h.rsobuuK,  p.  87.  For  limwj  creatures,  thee:  I tie  thee  (boina)  up  in  the 
wrapper,  the  ends  of  which  are  brought  together,  for  the  gocnl  of  living 
creatures  who  will  be  benefited  by  the  sacrifice.  « 

•26  Thee:  the  S.. mi  WmI  is  pure  - g..W  brought  tor  the  puioha.c. 
TheSueriiccr:  spoken  by  the  Adhvaryu.  The  eo,r  g.ve„  m exchange  for 
the  Sonia  is  now  given  back,  and  the  gold  pieces  ore  similarly  re  umed;  tl.e 
bargaining  Iiere  being  only  a form,  and  the  ijricc  of  tl«  boma  havnig  pro 
bably  been  settled  beforehand.  See  S.icred  Books  of  tfie  East,  XX\  171  , 
HauL  Aitareya.Brdhmanam,  II.  69,  note  2.  Fmour  s form : the  hacnflrer 
addresses  a shtgoat,  said  to  have  sprang  from  the  h ervour  or  Austere  Devo- 
tion of  Praj.dpati,  which  has  been  placet!  looking  westward,  /ityd/iafis 
mUi-c  dear  to  the  Gods  as  FrajApati  the  Lord  of  Creatures  ; or  ^“anse 
she  produces  young  three  times  a year,  hence  also  called  »m«<  noUe  or  most 

'’"Jy'Hc^givea  the  she-goat  to  the  Sotna-aeller  and  takes  the  Soma  with  his 
right  hand  in  exchange,  reciting  the  formula.  A,  tu. 

Imlra:  the  Sacrificer  (endowed  during  the  ceremony  with  the  attributes 
of  Indra)  on  whose  bared  thigh  the  Soma  la  placed.  Any/idn  etc. ; the 
names  of  the  seven  Guardians  of  the  eeleatial  Soma,  purchased  from  them 
by  the  Gods.  Krisilnu  is  frequently  mentioned  m the  Rigveda.  These . 
the  articles  given  to  the  Soma-eeller.  . o 

28  Recited  by  the  Sacrificer.  Immortah : especially  Soma. 


32  THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  IV. 

I,  following  Immortals,  have  arisen  with  longer  life,  with  a 
good  life  before  me. 

Now  have  we  entered  on  the  path  that  leads  to  bliss  without 
a foe, 

The  path  whereon  a man  escapes  all  enemies  and  gathers 
wealth. 

30  The  skin  of  Aditi  art  thou.  Sit  on  the  lap  of  Aditi. 

The  Bull  hath  propped  the  sky  and  air’s  mid-region,  the 
com{)ass  of  the  broad  earth  hath  he  measured. 

He,  King  Supreme,  approached  all  living  creatures.  Truly 
all  these  are  Vanina’s  ordinances. 

31  Over  the  woods  the  air  hath  he  eitended,  put  milk  in  kiiie 

and  vigorous  speed  in  horses, 

Set  intellect  in  hearts  and  tire  in  houses,  Surya  in  heaven 
and  Soma  on  the  mountain. 

32  Ascend  the  eye  of  Surya,  mount  the  pupil  set  in  Agni’s  eye 
Wliere,  radiant  through  the  Wise  One,  thou  speedest  iilong 

with  dappled  steeds. 

33  Apjiroach,  ye  oxen,  fit  to  bear  the  yoke  ; be  yoked  without 
, a tear 

Slaying  no  man,  urging  the  Brahman  forward,  go  happily 
to  the  Sacrificer’s  dwelling. 

34  Lord  of  the  World,  thou  art  my  gracious  helper ; move  for- 

ward on  thy  way  to  all  the  stations. 

Let  not  opponents,  let  not  robbers  had  thee,  let  not  malig- 
nant wolves  await  thy  coming. 

Kly  thou  away  having  become  a falcon.  Go  to  the  dwelling 
of  the  Sacrificer.  ’Phat  is  the  special  place  for  us  to  rest  in. 

“29  He  puts  the  Soin:)  oil  his  heiul  aiicl  goes  towards  the  o.iit  in  w liicK 
tlie  Soma  has  been  bi ought,  lecitiiig  the  text  taken,  witli  one  variatu  i , 
from  R.  V.  VI.  51.  16. 

30  The  antelope-.skin  is  spread  in  the  Soma  cart  by  the  .\dhvaryu  wlio 

recites  the  formula.  of  Aditi  See  I.  14.  Sit  0 vSoma.  The  Bull 

the  mighty  V.iruna,  here  meaning  Som.i.  The  text  istakeu.  with  alieratn  ii 
of  two  words,  from  R.  V VIll  42  1.  Appw^chcd  ‘ perv.ides  ' M dii 
dhivra;  ‘ hath  taken  his  s^b  over : ’ Eggeling  Liviw)  cnatuM  or  woildn 

31  He  wraps  the  Soma  in  a cloth,  reciting  the  texts  taken  tnuii  11  \ 
V.  85.  2. 

32  He  addiessevS  the  antelope-skin  which  he  hangs  up  in  front  of  the 
Soma-cart.  IPhsc  • the  All-knowing  Sun.  The  skin,  lepieMenting  tlie 
Sun  and  Agni,  will  keep  ofif  evil  spirits. 

33  Ye  oxen:  the  pair  that  draw  the  Soma-cart.  The  Hrahnian  the 
priest,  or  the  sacrifice.  Happily  ■ or,  s-ifely,  uninjured  by  evil  -spirits 

34  Spoken  by  the  Sacrificer  Lord  of  the  World:  Soma  is  addies-^ed 
JStations  the  Patnisdl^  or  Matron’s  Hall,  the  Havirdhana  oi  Uolatioi.- 
Store,  and  other  places  in  the  sacrificial  enclosure. 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA 


■ VERSE  37.] 


35  Do  homage  unto  Varuna’s  and  Mitra’s  eye:  offer  this  solenan 

worship  to  the  Mighty  God, 

Who  seeth  far  away,  the  Ensign  born  of  Gods.  Sing  praises 
unto  Surya,  to  the  Son  of  Dyaus. 

36  Thou  art  a prop  for  Varuna  to  rest  on.  Ye  are  the  pins  that 

strengthen  Varinia’s  pillar.  . , o- 

Thou  art  the  lawful  seat  where  Varuna  sitteth.  Sit  on  the 
lawful  seat  where  Varuna  sitteth. 

37  Such  of  thy  glories  as  with  poured  oblations  men  honour, 

may  they  all  invest  our  worship. 

Wealth-giver,  furtherer  with  troops  of  heroes,  sparing  tno 
brave,  coma,  Soma,  to  our  houses. 


35  The  SicriBcer  recites  the  text  taken  from  R V.  X.  37-  ’■  J’"''"”"; 

and  Mitra's  tye : Surya,  the  Sun  represented  by  the  Sdin.i.  Eyam  Zo.i, , 
Heaven  or  Sky  personified. 

36  Thou:  the  prop  that  aupporte  the  pole  of  the  cait,  which  has  o- w 
betme  the  support  of  Varuna  represented  by  the  Soma.  U.  t'vo  wo..<in 
rtegs  that  keep  the  prop  steady.  The  lawful  seat ; he  addresses  h -.'.t 
or  throne  on  which  Soma  is  placed,  the  antelope-skin  having  been  srrMd 
over  it.  Varuna  is  represented  by  Soma  throughout  the  ver^e. 

37  The  Sacrificer  recites  the  text  taken  from  R.  VJ  91  19.  as  Somn 
brought  into  the  baciificial  hall.  Glories  • powers  . tgg^^luig 


BOOK  THE  FIFTH. 


Body  of  Agni  art  thou.  Thee  for  Vishnu.  Body  of  Soma  art 
thou.  Thee  for  Vishnu.  Thou  art  the  Guest's  Reception. 
Thee  for  Vishnu.  Thee  for  the  Soma-bringing  Falcon. 
Thee  for  Vishnu.  Thee  for  the  giver  of  abundance,  Agni. 
Thee  for  Vishnu. 

2  Birth-place  art  thou  of^  Agni.  Ye  are  sprinklers.  Thou  art 
Urvasi.  Thou  art  Ayu.  Thou  art  Pururavas. 

I rub  and  churn  thee  with  Gayatri  metre.  1 rub  and  churn 
thee  with  the  Trishtup  metre.  I rub  and  churn  thee  with 
the  Jagati  metre. 

3 Be  ye  for  us  one-minded,  be  one-thoughted,  free  from  spot 

and  stain. 

Harm  not  the  sacrifice,  harm  not  the  sacrifice's  lord.  Be 
kind  to  us  this  day.  Omniscient  Ones ! 

4 Preserver  from  the  curse,  Son  of  the  Rishis,  Agni  is  active 

having  entered  Agni. 

Here  for  us  kindly  with  fair  worship  offer  oblation  to  the 
Gods  with  care  unceasing.  SvS.ha  ! 

5 For  him  who  flies  around  and  rushes  onward  I take  thee, 

for  Tanunapalt  the  mighty,  the  very  strong,  of  all  surpass- 
ing  vigour. 


Verses  1 — 4 contain  formulas  for  the  Atitbya  or  Ceremonial  Reception  and 
Entertainment  of  Soma  when  introduced  into  the  sacnficial  hall 

1 The  Adhvaryu  takes  the  havis  or  saci  iticial  food,  that  is,  the  elements 
of  oblation,  from  the  cart,  and  addresses  it  with  the  formula.  Thou  : the 
sacred  food.  Vidhnu:  meaning,  according  to  Mahldhara,  Soma  the  pervader 
of  the  sacrifice.  Thee  ■ ‘ I take  ’ understood.  Falcon  : that  brought  the 
Soma  from  heaven.  See  R.  V.  IV.  27. 

2 Thou;  a piece  of  wood  forming  the  lower  part  of  the  fire-drill,  in  which 
the  spark  is  produced  by  rapid  friction.  SprinJclers : or,  stallions,  mates. 
Two  blades  of  Kusa  grass,  placed  on  the  fire  drill,  are  addressed.  Thoii  : 
the  lower  ^piece  of  the  drill.  Urvaii : a celebrated  Apsaras  or  celestial 
nymph.  Ayu  • the  butter  in  the  pan  is  said  to  be  Ayu  the  son  of  Urvasi. 
Pururavas : the  human  husband  of  Urvasi  and  father  of  Ayu.  The  up- 
per piece  of  the  drill  is  addressed  as  it  is  placed  on  the  lower  piece.  The 
clarified  butter,  or  sacrifice,  is  the  child  produced  by  the  union.  For  the 
legend  of  Urvasi  and  Purftravas,  see  R.  V.  X.  (The  Hymns  of  The  Rig- 
veda,  Vol.  IT.  (2nd  ed.)  pp.  527 — 530),  and  Max  Muller,  Chips  from  a Ger- 
man Workshop,  Vol.  IV.  (new  ed.)  pp.  107—114.  Thee:  Agni,  the  fixe. 
With  Gdyatri,  etc, : while  verses  in  these  metres  are  recited. 

3 Ye ; the  Ahavanlya  fire  and  the  newly-kindled  fire  which  is  thrown  on 
it.  Omnitoimt  One  ^ jdtavedasau  ; ‘ ye  knowers  of  beings : ’ Eggeling. 

4 of  the  Rithia : produced  in  sacrifice  by  the  priests. 

5 Here  follow  fonaulaa  for  the  TinCinaptra,  a ceremony  in  which  Tanuna- 
pit,  usually  Ago*  (Son  of  Himself,  born  from  other  fire),  here  V4yu  the 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA. 


VERSE  8.] 


Strength  of  the  GoJa,  inviolate,  inviolable  still  art  thou,  the 
strength  that  turns  the  curse  away,  imcursed  and  never 
to  be  cursed. 

May  I go  straight  to  truth.  Place  me  in  comfort. 

0 0 Agni,  Guardian  of  the  Vow,  0 Guardian  of  the  Vow,  in 
thee 

Whatever  form  there  is  of  thine,  may  that  same  form  be 
here  on  me  : on  thee  be  every  form  of  niiiio. 

0 Lord  of  Vows,  lot  our  vows  be  united.  Muy  Diksh.Vs 
Lord  allow  my  Consecration,  may  holy  Fervour  s Lord 
approve  my  Fervour. 

7 May  every  stalk  of  thine  wax  full  and  strengthen  for  Indra 
Fikadhanavid,  God  Soma ! 

May  Indra  grow  in  strength  for  thee’  for  ludra  mayest  thou 
grow  strong. 

Increase  us  friends  with  strength  and  mental  vigour  May 
all  prosperity  be  tliino,  God  Soma.  May  I attain  the 
solemn  Soma-pressing. 

May  longed-for  wealth  come  forth  for  strength  and  fortune. 
Let  there  be  truth  for  those  whose  speech  is  truthful.  To 
Heaven  and  Earth  be  adoration  offered. 

8 That  noblest  body  which  is  thine,  0 Agni,  laid  in  tlio  lowest 
deep,  encased  in  iron,  hath  chased  tlie  awful  word,  the 
word  of  terror.  Svaha  ! 


That  noblest encased  in  silver,  etc.  ' 

That  noblest  ....  with  gold  arouml  it,  etc.  Svaha  ! 


Wiud-aud,  is  invoked,  and  the  aacrificial  butter  is  tonebed  by  sacrificer  and 
prieata  aa  a form  of  adjuration  or  bond  of  friendahip.  Who  fiits,  etc.:  Vilyu. 
Thee  ■ the  sacrificial  butter.  Go  straight  to  truth : faithfully  keep  the  pro 
mise  which  I am  making.  Place  me  in  comfort:  according  to  Mahldhara, 
eHtabli-sli  me  in  the  fair  path,  the  performance  of  sacrifice. 

0 Formulas  for  a kind  of  minor  Consecration.  The  Sacrifjeer  exchanges 
persona  with,  and  becomes,  Agni.  DiksM'i  Lord  Soma,  Lord  of  Conse 
cratioD.  Fervour : or  Penance. 

7 The  piieats  perfonn  the  Apyftyan.a,  the  sprinkling  of  the  Soma  wiMi 
water  to  make  it  swell,  Ekadliunavul : according  to  Mahfdliara,  receiver 
or  finder  of  the  one  chief  prize,  i.  e.  Soma  ; or,  knower  of  tlie  Kkadhanas. 
pitchers  which  hold  the  water  which  is  to  be  mixed  with  the  Soma. 

8 Formulas  for  the  Upasads  (services  or  sieges;  Milton’s  ‘ beseeching  and 
besieging’),  offerings  of  butter  to  Agni,  Soma,  and  Vishtiu  ihnee  daily  iui 
three  days  or  more  According  to  the  legend,  the  A.sur a.  or  rebel  demons 
having  been  defeated  in  battle  by  the  Gods,  made  three  castles,  one  of  iron 
on  earth,  one  of  silver  in  mid-air,  and  one  of  gold  in  the  sky.  Agni,  a 111-. 
Gods’  request,  in  the  form  of  the  Upaead  deity  entered  and  burn  thenp 
and  they  became  the  three  bodies  of  Agni  mentioned  m the  text.  / t 
awful  word : the  threats  of  the  Asuras 


36 


THE  TEXTS  OP  THE 


[BOOR  V. 


9 For  me  thou  art  the  home  of  the  afflicted.  For  me  thou  art 

the  gathering-place  of  riches.  Protect  me  from  the  woe 
of  destitution. 

Protect  me  from  the  state  of  perturbation. 

May  Agni  know  thee,  he  whose  name  is  Nabhas,  Go,  Agni, 
Angiras,  with  the  name  of  Ayu. 

Thou  whom  this  earth  containeth,  down  I lay  thee  with  each 
inviolate  holy  name  thou  bearest. 

Thou  whom  the  second  earth,  etc.  Thou  whom  the  third 
earth,  etc. 

Thee,  further,  for  the  Gods’  delight. 

10  A foe-subduing  lioness  art  thou : be  fitted  for  the  Gods. 

A foe-subduing  lioness  art  thou  : be  purified  for  Gods. 

A foe-subduing  lioness  art  thou  : adorn  thyself  for  Gods. 

11  Indra’s  shout  guard  thee  in  the  front  with  Vasus.  The  Wise 

One  guard  thee  from  the  rear  with  Rudras.  The  Thought- 
swift  guard  thee  on  the  right  with  Fathers.  The  Oranific 
guard  thee,  leftward,  with  Adityas. 

This  heated  water  I eject  and  banish  from  the  sacrifice. 

12  Thou  art  a lioness.  All-hail!  Thou  art  a lioness  winning 

Adityas.  All-hail ! 

Thou  art  a lioness  winning  Brahmans  and  Nobles.  All-bail ! 
Thou  art  a lioness  that  wins  fair  offspring,  win  abundant 
wealth.  All-hail ! 

A lioness  art  thou.  Bring  the  Gods  hither  for  him  who 
offers  sacrifice.  All-hail ! 

To  living  creatures,  thee. 

9 The  lines  of  the  altar  and  of  the  pit  from  which  earth  is  to  be  dug  cut 
for  its  construction  are  now  marked  out.  Thou : ^the  eart^.  Thee : the 
earth  dug  out  of  the  pit.  Nabhas : or,  Vapour.  At/n : Life,  said  to  be  a 
name  of  Agni.  Before  this  address  to  Agni,  the  Adbvaryu  thiows  the 
Spbya  or  wooden  sword  to  the  place  where  the  pit  is  to  be  dug  Thou 
whom  : 0 Agni,  who  art  in  this  loose  dug  earth  which  I 6C,itter  on  the  place 
where  the  high  altar  is  to  be.  Second.  . . . third : the  ceremony  aud  he 
formula  are  repeated  with  these  substitutions  for  ‘this.’  Thee,  further . iie 
takes  up  earth  a fourth  time. 

10  He  sets  apart  the  earth  required  for  the  high  altar,  addresses  and 
sprinkles  it. 

11  Jndra's  shout:  as  God  of  Battles.  The  Wise  One:  Vanina,  the 
moral  Governor  of  the  world,  from  whom  no  secrets  are  hid.  The  Thought- 
swift  : Yama,  God  of  the  Departed.  The  Omnific:  Visvakarman,  an  abstract 
deity  representing  the  Supreme  God  as  Creator  of  all  things  Heated  water: 
after  having  sprinkled  waters  on  four  sides  he  pours  away  the  rest  outside 

the  altar  place.  i,  xu  i.. 

12  With  four  invocations  he  pours  butter  on  the  four  corners  of  the  altar 
place,  and  with  the  fifth  on  the  centre.  Thee:  the  offering-ladle.  ‘ I raise  ’ 
understood. 


VERSE  17  ] 


WHITE  YAJVRVEM 


37 


13  Firm  art  thou,  steady  thou  the  earth.  Firm-seated  art  thou, 

steady  thou  the  air. 

Movelessly  set  art  thou,  steady  the  sky.  Agni’s  completion 
art  thou. 

14  The  priests  of  him  the  lofty  Priest  well -skilled  m hymns 

harness  their  spirits,  yea  harness  their  holy  thoughts. 

He  only  knowing  works  assigns  their  priestly  tasks.  Yea, 
lofty  is  the  praise  of  Savitar  the  God.  All-hail ! 

15  Forth  through  This  All  strode  Vishnu  : thrice  bis  foot  he 

planted,  and  the  whole  was  gathered  in  his  footstep’s  dust. 
All-hail  ! 

16  Rich  in  sweet  food  be  ye,  and  rich  in  milch-kine,  with  fer- 

tile pastures,  fain  to  do  men  service. 

Both  these  worlds,  Vishnu,  hast  thou  stayed  asunder,  and 
firmly  fixed  the  earth  with  pegs  around  it. 

17  Heard  by  the  Gods,  ye  twain,  to  Gods  proclaim  it. 

Go  eastward,  0 ye  twain,  proclaiming  worship.  Swerve  ye 
not ; bear  the  sacrifice  straight  upward. 

To  your  own  cow-pen  speak,  ye  godlike  dwellings. 

Speak  not  away  my  life,  speak  not  away  my  children. 

On  the  earth’s  summit  here  may  ye  be  joyful. 

13  He  encloses  the  centre  or  navel  of  the  alUr  place  with  stickb  of  Pltu- 

daru  (Pinus  Deodara).  With  thiee  invocations  he  addresses,  re.spectively, 
the  middle  stick,  the  southern,  and  the  uorlhcru.  Completion:  or  equip- 
ment ; purUha : all  that  is  required  to  make  Agni  complete,  bdellium 
(giiggulu),  sweet-scented  reed-grass,  and  the  tufts  that  have  grown  between 
the  horns  of  a ram.  . , tt  - 

14  The  Commentator  gives  rules  for  the  construction  of  Havirdhftnas  or 
sheds  for  the  carts  that  bring  Soma  and  other  elements  of  saciifice,  of  the 
Sadas  or  Priests’  shed,  of  the  Soma-pressing  place,  and  of  the  Dhishpyas  or 
side-altars  or  heartlis.  The  priests:  an  offering  of  butter,  taken  up  in  four 
ladlings,  is  made  to  Savitnr  with  recitation  of  this  text  from  K.  ^ .V.  81.  i. 
Knowing  v:oYh : skilled  in  the  rules  which  regulate  religious  functions. 

15  Having  laid  a piece  of  gold  in  the  right-hand  track  of  the  nght-hand 

cart  he  makes  an  offering  with  this  text  fiom  It.  V.  I.  22.  17.  Thrice : on 
earth,  in  the  air,  in  the  sky.  „ . , , u-  u 

16  Ye : the  offering  ladle  and  the  pot  or  saucer  of  sacrificial  butter  which 
the  PratiprasthAtar  or  assistant  priest  takes  up,  and  having  laid  a pi«cc  of 
gold  in  the  left-hand  track  of  the  left-hand  cart  makes  an  oblation  with  the 
text  taken  from  R.  V.  VII.  99.  3,  the  first  line  of, which  appears  to  be,  origi- 
nally, Vishnu’s  benediction  on  heaven  and  earth  when  he  parted  and  sup- 
ported them.  Pegs  : such  as  those  used  for  stretching  a woven  cloth  or  a 
skin.  In  later  literature  the  word  means  also, ‘rays,’ eiinbeams.  With 
beams  of  light  didst  thou  hold  fast  the  earth  on  all  sides  Lggeling. 

17  Ye:  the  Matron  addresses  the  two  axle-pins,  which  she  anoints  with 
the  remains  of  the  butter.  Straight  upward:  to  the  Gods.  Cow-^n:  sig- 
nifying wealth  in  cattle  to  the  Sacrificer.  Dwellings : the  house-like  carts. 
Speak  not  away  : destroy  not  with  ill-omened  creaking.  Earth  s Summit : 
the  high  sacrificial  ground.  Be  joyful:  in  your  rest. 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  V. 


?8 


18  Now  will  I tell  the  mighty  deeds  of  Vishnu,  of  him  who 

measured  out  the  earthly  regions. 

Wlio  propped  the  highest  place  of  congregation,  thrice  set- 
ting down  his  foot  and  widely  striding. 

For  Vishnu  thee. 

19  Either  from  heaven  or  from  the  earth,  0 Vishnu,  or,  Vishnu, 

from  the  vast  wide  air's  mid-region, 

Fill  both  thy  hands  full  with  abundant  riches,  and  from  the 
right  and  from  the  left  bestow  them. 

For  Vishnu  thee. 

20  For  this  his  mighty  deed  is  Vishnu  lauded,  like  some  wild 

beast,  dread,  prowling,  mountain-roaming, 

He  within  whose  three  wide-extended  paces  all  living  crea- 
tures have  their  habitation. 

21  Thou  art  the  frontlet  for  the  brow  of  Vishnu.  Ye  are  the 

corners  of  the  mouth  of  Vishnu.  Thou  art  the  needle 
for  the  work  of  Vishnu.  Thou  art  the  firmly-fastened  knot 
of  Vishnu.  To  Vishnu  thou  belongest.  Thee  for  Vishpu. 

22  By  impulse  of  God  Savitars  I take  thee  with  arms  of  Asvius 

and  with  hands  of  Piishan. 

Thou  art  a woman.  Here  I cut  the  necks  of  Rakshasas  away. 
Mighty  art  thou,  mighty  the  sound  thou  makest.  Utter  thy 
mighty-souiiding  voice  to  Indra : 

23  Fiend  killing,  charm-destroying  voice  of  Vishnu. 

Here  1 cast  out  that  charm  of  magic  power  which  stranger 
or  housemate  for  me  hath  buried. 


18  The  Adlivaryu  puts  up  a wooden  prop  to  support  the  pole  of  the  nght- 
hand  or  southward  cart,  and  recites  the  text  taken  from  R.  V.  1. 154.  1.  iliee: 

‘ I support  ’ understood.  j t 

19  Similarly  the  Pratiprasthsltar  supports  the  left-hand  or  northward  cart, 

reciting  the  text  from  Atharva-veda,  VII.  26.  8.  »,  u j 

20  The  Sacrificer,  after  touching  the  middle  reed-mat  of  the  cart-sned, 
recites  the  text  from  R.  V.  1.  154.  2.  Pam:  see  verse  18. 

21  Thou  ■ he  addresses  a post  on  whicli  is  a wreath  of  D.irbha  grass.  le  • 

the  ends  of  the  band  of  grass.  Neeilk : ‘sower’:  Eggoling.^  ^ 

wooden  peg  used  in  stitching  together  the  folding  doors  (‘luirdl^  : EggelingJ 
of  the  cart-shed.  Kwi : he  ties  the  string  in  a knot.  Thou  belongest : he 
touches  the  completed  nHtid.  Thee : ‘ I touch  ’ uudorstond. 

22  Formulae  to  accompany  the  preparation  of  the  Uparavaa  or  sounrt- 

hnles  made  in  the  earth  tq  ioci’ease  the  noise  of  the  pressing  or  pounding  o! 
the  Soma.  Thee : a Woodw  digging  instrument,  a trowel  or  short  spade. 
Woman:  connected  to  a helper  with  the  men  who  manage  the  ceremony. 
Moreover,  the  word  abhfi,  ^ feminine,  fferc;  he  draws  outlines 

of  the  holes.  Rdkshwas:  the  malignant  fiends  who  would  m^r  or  obstruct 
the  sacrifice.  Mighty : he  addresses  each  hole  that  he  has  dug.  Utter . 
when  thou  art  made  use  of  at  the  Soma  pounding. 

28  Of  Vishnu  • belonging  to  him  as  guardian  of  thetsacnfice.  Lharrn  Oj 
magic  power . valaga;  a collection  of  bonos,  nails,  hair,  etc.,  tied  up  m * 


yiSRSE  26.] 


WHITE  Y A JURY  ED  A. 


39 


Here  I cast  out  the  charm  of  magic  power  buried  for  me 
by  equal  or  unequal. 

Here  I cast  out  the  charm  that  hath  been  buried  for  mo  by 
non-relation  or  relation. 

I cast  the  charm  of  magic  out. 

24  Self-ruler  art  thou,  conquering  foes.  Ruler  for  ever  art 

thou,  killing  enemies. 

Men’s  ruler  art  thou,  slaying  fiends.  All  ruler,  killing  foes, 
art  thou. 

25  I sprinkle  you  whom  Vishnu  owns,  killers  of  fiends  and  evil 

I liiy  down  you  whom  Vishnu  loves,  killers  of  fiends  and 

wicked  charms.  c n a i 

I scatter  you  whom  Vishnu  loves,  killers  of  fiends  and 

wicked  charms.  , n i 

You  two  whom  Vishnu  loves,  who  kill  fiends  and  ill  charms 

do  I lay  down.  , n i 

You  two  whom  Vishnu  loves,  who  kill  fiends  and  ill  charms 

I compass  round.  , 

To  Vishnu  thou  helongest.  Ye  are  Vishnu  8. 

26  By  impulse  of  God  Savitar  I take  thee  with  arras  of  Asvins, 

with  the  hands  of  Piishau.  . tvm  i 

Thou  art  a woman.  Here  I out  the  necks  of  Rikshasas  away. 
Barley  art  thou.  Bar  off  from  us  our  haters,  bar  our  enemies. 
Thee  for  heaven,  thee  for  earth,  thee  for  air’s  region 
l>ure  he  the  worlds,  the  Fathers'  dwelling-places.  Ihou  art 
the  habitation  of  the  Fathers. 

Lemies.  See  The  Hymn«  of  the  AtliHrva.veda  X.  1.  18.  a d «ote  1 
diHger  of  therte  Bound-holea  dislodges  by  his  act  any  snch  chartns  .ts  i ^ 
W buried  there,  and  recites  a formula  as  he  throws  up  the  earth  from 

24  By  way  of  benediction  the  Sac.ificer  touches  and  addresses  each  of  the 
completed  holes,  with  a formula  for  each. 

25  Ho  sprinkles  lustral  water  over  the  holes.  / lay 
boards,  one  on  each  of  two  pits.  / scatter.  I, lades  of 

tico:  the  pressing-boards.  / comptm  round:  with  earth  to  P 
steady.  tIou;  the  skin  used  in  the  Soma-pre.s.ng 
pressing-stones  which  belong  to  Vishnu  as  guardian  of  the 

26  Forranlas  for  putting  up  a P;’"^ 

merata)  m the  centre^  the  Sadas  or  shed  ^^arlev  into  the 

‘.VO  liu<;«^peute(l  from  verse  22  He  throws  baney  mio  ^iie 

sprinkling- water.  War  ley : yw-t/u,.  />«..  • yavaita.  There  is  a play  on  tne 

words.  Thuforli£aven:  he  sprinkles  the  top  of  the  branch,  /^ov  earth- 
the  bottom.  For  air  s region  : the  middle.  Eure  he  the  worlds:  he  pours 
the  remaiiitOg  water  into  the  hole  made  for  the  branch.  7liou , a lajcr  of 
Davbha  grass  which  he  strews  in  the  hole. 


40 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  K 


27  Prop  heaven,  fill  full  the  air,  on  earth  stand  firmly.  Dyutana, 

offspring  of  the  Maruts,  plant  thee !,  Mitra  and  Varuna 
with  firm  upholding, 

1 close  thee  in,  thou  winner  of  the  Brahmans,  winner  of 
Nobles  and  abundant  riches. 

Strengthen  the  Brahmans,  strengthen  thou  the  Nobles, 
strengthen  our  vital  power,  strengthen  our  offspring. 

28  Firm-set  art  thou.  Firm  be  this  Sacrificer  within  this  home 

with  offspring  and  with  cattle. 

0 Heaven  and  Earth,  be  ye  filled  full  of  fatness. 

Indra’s  mat  art  thou,  shelter  of  all  people. 

29  Lover  of  song,  may  these  our  songs  encompass  thee  on  every 

side ; 

Strengthening  thee  of  lengthened  life,  may  they  be  dear 
delights  to  thee. 

.30  Thou  art  the  needle  for  the  work  of  Indra.  Thou  art  the 
firmly  fastened  knot  of  Indra.  Indra’s  art  thou.  Thou  art 
the  Visvedevas’. 

31  All-preseut  art  thou,  carrying  off.  Oblation-bearing  priest 

art  thou. 

Thou  art  the  Swift,  the  Very  Wise.  Tutha  art  thou,  wha 
knoweth  all. 

32  Thou  art  the  yearning  one,  the  sage*  Angh^ri,  Bambhari 

art  thou. 

27  He  raises  aud  addresse-^  the  branch  or  post.  Dyutdna : the  name  of  a 
Vedic  Rishi,  seer  of  R.  V.  VIII.  85.  It  is  said  to  mean  Vftyii,  the  wn  or 
attendant  of  the  Storm- Gods.  I close  thee  in  : with  earth  put  round  it. 

28  Thou : the  Uduinbara  post,  which  he  (the  Sacrificer)  touches.  0 
Heaven  and  Earth : he  pours  clarified  butter  ou  the  forked  top  of  the  post. 
Indra  s mat:  of  grass,  to  thatch  the  Sadas  or  Priests’  shed.  All ‘people: 
the  Sacrificer  and  the  officiating  priests, 

29  After  enclosing  the  shed  with  mats,  he  addresses  Indra  as  Lord  of 
the  Sadas  with  the  text  taken  from  R.  V.  I.  10.  12. 

•30  Thou : he  addresses  the  rope  with  which  the  mats  are  fastened. 
Needle  • ‘Sewer’ ; Eggeliug.  See  verse  21.  TlwU  art  Indra's:  he  addresses 
the  enclosed  ^das.  Visvedevas’ : belonging  to  the  All-Gods.  See  II.  18. 

31  and  32  contain  formulas  for  the  consecration  of  the  eight  Dhishnyas, 
aule-altars  or  hearths,  each  of  which  is  addressed  in  turn  : (J)  the  Agu'idh- 
riya  or  hearth  of  the  Agntdhra  or  Fire-kindler  {cairying  off,  meaning  ‘ bear- 
ing oblations  to  the  Gods  ’ ) ; (2)  the  Hotar’s  hearth  } ( 3)  the  hearth  of  the 
MaitrAvariina  or  first  Assistant  of  the  Hotar  ; (4)  tfatt  hearth  of  the  Brdh* 
mWi&chhansi  [Tutha  meaning  ‘Brahman  priest,’  whf  knows  ^ ~ 
fees  are  to  be  distributed).  ^ 

0‘>  (3)  The  hearth  of  the  Potar  or  Cleansing  Priest  is  addressed  as 
the\tarning  one;  (6)  the  hearth  of  the  Neshter,  the  priest  who  leads 
f 01  ward  the  Sacrificer ’s  wife,  is  addressed  by  the  names  of  AuguAnand 


VERS£  35.'! 


WHITE  YAJURVEPA, 


41 


Aid-seeker  art  thou,  worshipping.  Cleanser  art  thou,  the 
cleansing-place.  Krisanu,  Sovran  Lord,  art  thou. 

Thou  art  the  Pavamana  of  the  assembly.  Thou  art  the 
welkin  ever  moving  forward.  Swept  clean  art  thou,  preparer 
of  oblations.  Thou  art  the  seat  of  Law,  heaven’s  light 
and  lustre. 

33  A sea  art  thou  of  all-embracing  compass.  Aja  art  thou,  w'ho 

hath  one  foot  to  bear  him.  Thou  art  the  Dtagon  of  the 
Depths  of  ocean.  Speech  art  thou,  thou  the  Sadas,  thou 
art  Indra’s.  Doors  of  the  sacrifice,  do  not  distress  me  ! 
Lord,  Ruler  of  the  pathways,  lead  me  onward.  In  this  Ood- 
rcachmg  path  may  I be  happy. 

34  Look  ye  upon  me  with  the  eye  of  Mitra. 

0 Agnis,  yc,  receivers  of  oblations,  are  by  a lauded  name? 
lauded  together.  Protect  me,  Agnis!  with  your  glittering 
army.  Fill  me  with  riches,  Agnis  1 be  my  keepers.  To 
you  be  adoration.  Do  not  liarm  me. 

35  Thou  art  a light  that  wears  all  forms  and  figures,  serving 

the  general  host  of  Gods  as  Kindlcr. 


Bdmbhdri,  two  uf  the  guardians  of  the  celestial  Soma.  See  IV.  27  ; (7)  the 
hearth  of  the  Aohhavdka  or  Inviting  Priest  is  addressed  as  Aid-seeker;  (8) 
the  Mdrjdliyii  hearth  on  which  the  sacrificial  vessels  are  cleaned  is  aildresaed 
aa  Cleanser,  After  tlie  completion  of  the  Dhishnyas  the  Abavaniya  fire  is 
pointed  at  and  addressed  as  Krisduu,  the  chief  guardian  of  the  Celestial 
Soma.  Tke  Paoamdua:  the  Adhvaryu  aiidresses  the  Bahishpavamdna  place, 
the  place  where  a morning  Stotra  or  hymn  of  praise  is  sung  outside  the 
Vedi  or  altar  Assembly:  of  priests.  Welkin:  the  pit  from  which  the 
earth  for  the  altar  aud  Dhishnyas  is  takeu  is  likened  to  the  sky  with 
openings  between  clouds.  Moving  forward:  or,  perhaj^s,  precipitous^ 
shelving  downward.  According  to  Mahidhara,  circumambulated  by  the 
priests.  Sv)cpt  chan : the  slaughtering-place  is  addressed,  of  Law : 
the  Udumbara  post,  where  Sdmaus  are  chanted  at  sacrifice. 

33  A sea:  the  seat  of  the  Brahman  priest,  to  which  all  Gods  resort  and 
where  the  Brahman  of  fathomless  knowledge  sits.  Aja:  the  fire  at  the 
door  of  the  Prachinavamsa  hall  (the  ball  whose  supporting  beam  is  turned 
eastward)  is  addressed.  Aja  Ekap4d,  or  the  One-foored  Unborn,  is  perhaps 
the  Sun  or  Lightning.  See  The  Hymns  of  the  liigveda,  VI.  50.  14,  anti 
Macdouell,  Vedic  Mythology,  pp.  73,  74.  Dragon  of  the  Defths:  Alii 
Budhnya,  frequently  associated  with  Aja-EkapAd,  is  a deity  of  the 
atmospheric  ocean.  See  The  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  Index,  and  Macdonell, 
Vedic  Mythology,  pp.  72,  73.  'f  he  Garhapatyn  lire  is  thus  addressed.  Speech  • 
the  Sadds  or  shed  in  which  the  priests  perform  religious  duties  with  spoken 
Words  Doors,  etc. : that  is,  let  me  pass  in  and  out  without  stumbling. 
Ruler  of  tke  pathways : the  Sun  is  addre88»<*-  path , *»v»  lUuo. 

. cue  priests  are  addressed.  Mitra  : or,  of  a friend.  Agnis : 
the  fires  of  the  Dhishnyas.  Glittering  : raudrena;  or,  Rudra-like,  awful, 
destructive  of  enemies. 

35  With  the  text,  he  takes  clarified  butter  mixed  with  sour  curds. 
,*  the  clotted  butter.  Kindler : * for,'  says  Mahidhara,’  * the  Gods  are 
illuminated  or  brightened  when  they  have  enjoyed  the  sacrificial  butter/ 


42 


THE  TEXTS  OP  THE 


[BOOK  V.. 


Thou,  Soma,  wilt  withhold  thy  wide  protection  from  body- 
woiiiidiug  hatreds  shown  by  others.  All-had  ! 

Let  the  Swift  graciously  enjoy  the  butter.  All-hail  ! 

36  By  goodly  paths  lead  us  to  riches,  Agni,  thou  God  who 

knowest  every  sacred  duty. 

Kemove  the  sin  that  makes  us  stray  and  wander : most 
ample  adoration  will  we  bring  thee. 

37  Wide  room  and  comfort  may  this  Agni  give  us,  and  go  be- 

fore us  cleaving  down  our  foemeu . 

May  he  win  booty  in  the  fight  for  booty : May  be  quell  foes 
in  his  triumphant  onset. 

38  0 Vishnu,  stride  thou  widely  forth,  give  ample  room  for  our 

abode. 

Drink  butter,  homed  in  butter!  Still  speed  on  the  sacri- 
fice’s lord.  All-had ! 

To  thee,  God  Savitar,  belongs  this  Soma.  Guard  him  secure- 
ly : let  not  demons  harm  thee. 

Now  hast  thou  joined  the  Gods  as  God,  God  Soma : meu 
have  1 joined  here  through  abundant  riches. 

All-had ! from  Varuna’s  noose  am  I delivered, 

40  0 Agni,  Guardian  of  the  Vow,  0 Guardian  of  the  Vow,  on 

me  whatever  form  of  thine  hath  been,  may  that  same 
form  be  upon  thee.  Whatever  form  of  mine  hath  been  on 
thee,  may  that  be  here  on  me. 

0 Lord  of  Vows,  our  vows  have  been  accomplished.  Diksha’s 
Lord  hath  approved  my  ConseQration,  and  holy  Fervour’s 
Lord  allowed  my  Fervour. 

41  0 Vishnu,  stride  thou  widely  forth,  make  ample  room  for 

our  abode. 

Drink  butter,  homed  in  butter ! Still  speed  on  the  sacrifice’s 
lord.  All-hail  ! 


Thou,  Soma ; with  this  formula  he  offers  an  oblation.  Let  the  Swift : he 
oftei'8  to  Soma  a second  time. 

36  The  Sacrificer  recites  the  text  taken  from  R.  V.  1.  189.  1. 

37  The  Adh vary u lays  the  fire  on  the  Agnldhra  hearth,  and  in  its  shed 
puts  down  the  preswing-stones,  the  Soma-trougb,  and  the  Soma  vessels,  and 
offers  oblation  with  the  text. 

38  He  offers  oblation  in  the  Ahavanlya  fire  with  the  text. 

39  He  .sprea<is  the  hlack-antelope  skin  in  tiie  right-hand  or  southward 

cai-t,  and  lays  the  Soma  uiereon  nv4.r 

the  Soma  has  secured  me  from  danger  of  punishment  hy  Varuna. 

40  He  lays  a kindling-stick  on  the  Ahavanlya  fire.  0 Agni,  etc. : repeated 
from  verse  6. 

41  Formulae  for  the  preparation  of  the  Yfipa  or  Sacrificial  Stake. 
The  ceremony  begins  with  an  offering  and  a verse  (repeated  from  38)  to 
Vishnu,  as  he  is  the  eacrifice  and  the  stake  belongs  to  him. 


■TERSE  43.] 


WHITE  YA  JURY  EDA. 


43 


* side  Ttll'l! ''tr;  Ihs  '-ear 

Side  of  those  that  were  more  distaut,  and  farther  than 

the  nearer  have  I found  thee 

h!!f  ;k  «<«>»  »elc'’n>e 

thee  fur  the  Gods  service.  For  Vishnu  thee.  FJaiit,  guard  » 
Axe,  do  not  harm  it ! 

^The  earth**  Be  in  accordance  with 

^7elioity''*'''“''"^““'’  ''**'*  ‘®  g™** 

Hence,  with  a hundred  branches,  God,  Lord  of  tho  Forest 
grow  thou  up.  ’ 

May  we  grow  spreading  with  a hundred  branciies. 


the  reat  of  the  butter  and  goes  with  the  carpenter  to 
bhewo^  in  search  of  a suitable  tree,  a PalAea,  Khadira,  Vilva  (Aegl^ 
Marmelos  or  Bel),  or  the  hke.  When  ho  has  found  it  he  recites  the  vZl 
expressing  the  trouble  he  has  taken.  Others:  other  trees  .Voiran  of  Z 
; a large  tree  ; the  technical  name  of  the  Sacrihcial  Htake 

cganled  as  a form  of  Agni.  For  Vishnu  thee:  he  touches  it  with  the 

tatmu'wdlteS  ' * pot' "here  lb, 

hunderbolt,  entreats  it  to  spare  the  three  worlds.  To  >/reat  Minty:  iia 
)cdnng  a most  important  part  in  saciitice.  tiau-e  . from  this  stump 


BOOK  THE  SIXTH. 


By  impulse  of  God  Savitar  I take  thee  with  arms  of  Asvius, 
with  the  hands  of  Pdshan.  Thou  art  a woman.  Here 
1 cut  the  necks  of  Rakshasas  away.  Barley  art  thou. 
Bar  off  from  us  our  haters,  bar  our  enemies. 

Thee  for  heaven,  thee  for  earth,  thee  for  the  welkin.  Pure 
be  the  worlds,  the  Fathers’  dwelling-places.  Thou  art  the 
habitation  of  the  Fathers. 

2 Thou  art  a leader,  easy,  to  Unnetars,  of  access.  Know 

this.  It  will  stand  upon  thee, 
yavitar,  God,  anoint  thee  with  sweet  butter.  Thee  for  the 
plants  laden  with  goodly  fruitage  ! 

T)iou  with  thy  top  hast  touched  the  Sky,  hast  with  thy 
middle  filled  the  air,  and  steadied  with  thy  base  the  earth. 

3 Those  seats  of  thine  which  we  desire  to  visit,  where  there 

are  many-horned  and  nimble  oxen, 

There,  of  a truth,  was  mightily  imprinted  the  loftiest  step 
of  widely-striding  Vishnu. 

I close  thee  in,  the  winner  of  the  Brahmans,  winner  of 
Nobles  and  abundant  riches. 

Strengthen  the  Brslhmaus,  strengthen  thou  the  Nobles, 
strengtlien  our  vital  power,  strengthen  our  offspring. 

4 Look  ye  on  Vishnu’s  works,  whereby  the  Friend  of  Indra, 

close-allied. 

Hath  let  his  holy  ways  be  seen. 


The  Sacrificial  Stake,  which  may  be  of  any  length  from  five  cubits  to 
seventeen  or  even  more,  is  then  brought  to  the  enclosure  and  erected  with 
the  following  formulas. 

1 The  forniula  is  the  same  as  that  for  the  erection  of  the  Udumbara  post. 
See  V.  26.  Tlice : the  spade. 

2 Thou  : The  first  chip  cut  from  the  stake  and  thrown  into  the  hole  in 
which  the  stake  is  to  stand.  Leader : introducer  of  the  stake  into  its  recep- 
tacle. Unnetars:  priests  who  pour  the  Soma  juice  into  the  cups.  Know  this. 
that  the  stake  will  stand  on  thee,  Savitar^  etc. : he  anoints  the  stake.  Thee 
for  the  plants : he  anoints  the  cap  or  wooden  top-ring  and  fastens  it  on  the 
stake,  that  rice  and  other  plants  may  thrive  and  be  productive.  Thou  with 
thi/  top : the  stake  is  erected. 

.3  He  fixes  the  stake  in  the  hole  with  the  text  which  is  a modification  of 
R.  V,  1, 154.  6.  Oxen:  the  stars  with  their  ever-twinkling  rays.  Cf.  R.  V.  I. 
105  10. 

4 The  Sacrificer  touches  the  stake  and  recites  the  verse  taken  from  R.  V, 
I 22,  19.  Let  ..  . he  seen:  Mahidhara  takes  paspase  as  from  spush,  to 
bind  : ‘ bound  on  himself.’  According  to  Slyaua,  the  meaning  is  anutUhthi- 
ti,  performs. 


TERSS  lOJ  WEITE  YAJVSVIDA. 

5 The  princes  evermore  behold  that  loftiest  place  where 

Vishnu  is, 

Laid  as  it  were  an  eye  in  heaven. 

6 Thou  art  invested.  Heavenly  hosts  invest  thee  ! Riches  of 

men  invest  this  Sacriticer ! 

Heaven  s son  art  thou.  This  is  thine  earthly  station.  Thine 
is  the  beast  whose  home  is  in  the  forest. 

7 Eiicourager  art  thou.  The  hosts  of  heaven  have  come  to 

yearning  Gods,  the  best  conductors. 

God  Tvashtar,  make  the  wealth  of  cattle  quiet.  Delightful 
to  the  taste  be  thine  oblations.  ^ 

8 Joy,  wealthy  Plies  ! Bnhaspati,  save  our  riches. 

I bind  thee  with  the  noose  of  holy  Order,  thou  ollering  to 
the  Gods.  Bold  be  the  Slayer. 

9 By  impulse  of  God  Savitar  I bind  thee,  with  arms  of  Asvins 

and  with  bauds  of  Pushau,  thee  welcome  unto  Agui  and 
to  Soma. 

Thee  for  the  waters,  thee  for  plants.  Thy  mother  grant 
thee  permission,  and  thy  father,  brother  born  of  one  dam, 
thy  friend,  thy  herd-companion.  I sprinkle  thee  welcome 
to  Agni-Soma. 

10  DriuKer  art  thou  of  water.  May  the  Waters,  the  Goddesses, 
add  sweetness  to  the  oblation  prepared  for  Gods,  even 
rhoiigh  already  sweetened. 

5 He  looks  up  to  the  cap  of  the  stake.  I‘rinces:  the  wealthy  institut<-rg 
of  sacrifice. 

6 Thou  art  invested : he  girdles  the  stake  with  n triple  band  of  Ku«a 
grass.  Heaven's  ion : he  addresses  a chip  of  the  stake  which  he  inw-itB 
under  the  girdle  of  grass.  The  chip  is  cut  from  the  stake  which  p'-xluccd 
from  raiu  which  comes  from  lieaveu.  Thine : the  stake  is  nddresKcd. 

7 Formulas  for  binding  and  slaughtering  the  victim.  £nconraqtr  lie 
takes  up  and  addresses  some  grass  which,  as  a companion,  encourages  and 
guards  him  in  his  work.  He  touches  the  victim  with  the  grass  and  recitw 
the  text.  Hosts  of  heaven;  the  sacrificial  animals  which  have  consented  be 
immolated  to  the  Qods.  Conductors : of  the  Sacrificer,  to  heaven.  Tvashtar; 
es  creator  and  lord  of  cattle.  Thine  oblation : he  addresses  the  victim. 

Wealthy  One'i : the  cows  rich  m milk.  I hind:  he  puts  a noose  round  the 
victim.  Ac  -Slayer this  is  Mahldhara’s  explanation  of  ‘ dharsliA 
minusbab,’  which  seems  rather  to  mean,  as  Prof.  Eggeling  observes,  ‘ be 
bold;  I am  (or  be,  the  slaughterer  is)  a man.’  ‘Dare,  b^ing  human,’  addres- 
sed to  the  Iramolator,  would  seem  to  give  the  meaning. 

9 He  binds  the  victim  to  the  stake  with  the  following  formulas.  Thu : 

‘ I sprinkle  ’ understood.  Waters  ....  plants:  rain  and  grass,  to  which  the 
victim  owes  its  existence.  Mother  . . . father : Earth  and  Heaven,  accord- 
ing to  Mahidhara.  Grant  thee  permission:  conseut  to  thy  sacrifice. 

10  Drinker:  he  holds  lustral  water  under  its  mouth.  May  the  Waters: 
he  sprinkles  the  victim’s  chest  and  belly.  Thy  breath : ho  anoints  the  am- 


4C  THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  VI. 

Thy  breatli  join  wind,  thy  limbs  those  meet  for  worship,  the 
sacrifice's  lord  the  boon  he  prays  for. 

11  Balmed,  both  of  yon,  with  butter,  guard  the  cattle.  Grant, 

Rich  ! the  Sacrificer’s  prayer.  Approach  thon. 

Meeting  with  heaveidy  Wind,  from  air’s  mid-region.  Be 
thon  united  with  this  offering’s  body. 

0 Great  One,  lead  the  sacrifice’s  master  on  to  a sacrifice  of 
loftier  order.  All-hail  to  Gods  ! To  Gods  All-hail ! 

12  Become  no  serpent,  thou,  become  no  viper.  To  thee, 

0 widely-spread,  be  adoration. 

Advance,  unhindered,  on  thy  way.  To  rivers  of  butter 
move  along  the  paths  of  Order. 

13  Bear  the  oblation  to  the  Gods,  ye  Waters  celestial  and  pure 

and  well-provided.  May  we  become  providers  well-provided. 

14  1 cleanse  thy  voice,  thy  breath,  thine  eye,  thine  ear,  thy 

navel,  and  thy  feet,  thy  sexual  organ,  and  thy  rump, 

15  Let  thy  mind,  voice,  and  breath  increase  in  fulness,  thine 

eye  be  fuller,  and  thine  ear  grow  stronger. 

Whatever  there  is  in  thee  sore  or  wounded,  may  that  be 
filled  for  thee,  cleansed  and  united. 

Blest  be  the  days.  Plant,  guard  ! Axe,  do  not  harm  him. 

16  Thou  art  the  demons'  share.  Expelled  are  demons.  Here 

1 tread  down ; here  I repel  the  demons ; here  lead  the 
demons  into  lowest  darkness. 

mal’a  for«hea<b  shoulder  aud  loins.  J&in  wind : like  to  like.  Heet  for  wor- 
ship : the  Gods,  or  sacrifices  offered  to  them. 

11  Both;  a chip  from  the  stake  and  the  whittle  or  slaughtering-knife 
with  wliich  he  touches  the  victim’s  forehead.  Cattle : honorific  plural,  the 
victim.  Rich!;  the  Goddess  of  Speech,  Vdk.  Approach:  and  inspire  the 
Sacrificer.  From,  air's,  etc.  : ‘ Guard  him  ’ understood.  0 Great  One  ; or,  0 
Kain-boru  ; he  addresses  a blade  of  grass  thrown  down  behind  the  SiVmitra 
or  fcilaughteriug-place.  AU-hail  f : Some  Gods,  says  Mahidhara,  have  Svilh^ 
or  All-hail ' before  them  and  some  have  it  after  them. 

12  He  throws  the  victim’s  halter  into  the  pit.  Serpent . . . viper : ^ snake 
is  called  the  Rope  with  Fangs.  See  A.  V.  IV.  3.  2 ; XIX.  47.  8.  To  thee  • 
the  Matron,  bringing  water  for  washing  feet,  recites  the  text.  0 widely^ 
spread ; the  saorifice. 

14  The  Matron  wipes  each  organ  of  the  animal  as  she  recites  the  appro- 
priate clause  of  the  text.  In  the  original,  sundhdini,  ‘ I cleanse,’  is  repeat- 
ed as  each  organ  is  named. 

16  The  Adhvaryuand  the  Sacrificer  sprinkle  all  the  members  of  the 
victim  and  recite  the  text.  Plant : a blade  of  grass  laid  upon  the  victim 
when  turned  over  on  its  back.  Axe ; here  meaning  the  slaughtering-knife, 
16  Thou  ; the  lower  part  of  the  Wade  of  grass  which  he  has  smeared  with 
blood  Ye  two ; sticks,  called  vapAsrapanis,  on  which  the  omentum  or  caul 
when  extracted  from  the  victim,  is  wrapped  for  roasting.  0 V/tyu ; the 
Adhvaryu  throws  the  upper  part  of  the  grass-stalk  into  the  Ahavauiya  fire. 


. VERSE  20.J 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


47 


Invest,  ye  two,  the  heaven  and  earth  with  fatness. 

0 Vayn,  eagerly  enjoy  the  droppings.  Let  Agni  eagerly 
enjoy  the  butter.  All-hail ! 

Go,  both  of  yon,  by  Svahl  consecrated,  to  Ordhvanabhas, 
offspring  of  the  Mariits. 

17  Ye  Waters,  wash  away  this  stain  and  whatsoever  taint  be  here, 
Each  sinful  act  that  I have  done,  and  every  harmless  curse 

of  mine. 

May  Waters  rid  nie  of  that  guilt,  and  Pavamana  set  me  free. 

18  Be  they  united,  with  the  Mind  thy  mind,  and  with  the  Breath 

thy  breath. 

Thou  qniverest.  Let  Agni  make  thee  ready.  Waters  have 
washed  together  all  thy  juices. 

Thee  for  the  Wind’s  rush,  for  the  speed  of  Pilshan.  From 
heated  vapour  may  it  reel  and  totter, — the  disconcertwl 
hatred  of  our  foemon. 

19  Ye  drinkers-up  of  fatness,  drink  the  fatness;  drink  up  the 

gravy,  drinkers  of  the  gravy  ! Thou  art  the  oblation  of  the 
air’s  mid-region.  All-had! 

The  regions,  the  fore-regions,  the  by-regions,  the  intermediate 
and  the  upper  regions, — to  all  the  regions  Had  ' 

20  In  every  limb  is  Indra’s  ont-breath  seated,  in  every  limb  is 

Indra’s  in-breath  settled. 

God  TvashUr,  let  tliiiie  ample  forms  be  blended,  that  what 
wears  different  shapes  may  be  onc-fashioned. 

To  please  thee  let  thy  friends,  motlier  and  father,  joy  over 
thee  as  to  the  Gods  thou  goest. 

Butter  • which  ia  poured  on  the  oineutum.  Both  of  you  - the  ro/wting-atickd 
which  are  thrown  into  the  lire.  U rdhvanabhm : He  who  m in  the  cloud  on 
high  ; Vdyu. 

17  The  priests,  the  Sacrificer,  and  his  wife  purify  themselves  at  the  pit 
with  the  text  which  i.s  found  also  in  A.  V.  VII  89  3.  Of.  R.  V.  I.  23.  2^;  X. 
9.  8.  Pavam/Sna:  he  who  flows  clear,  or  blows  to  purify  ; Soma,  or  Vdyu. 

18  The  Adhvaryu  sprinkles  the  victim’s  heart  with  clotted  butter. 
3/»nd;  = heart ; let  thy  heart  be  united  with  the  heart  of  the  G(kIs,  and  thy 
breath  with  theirs.  Thou  quiverest ; he  takes  up  the  vasd  or  melted  fat  and 
pieces  of  cooked  meat  Agni:  the  fire.  Thee:  ‘I  take’  understood.  PH- 
than : the  Sun.  Heated  vapour : the  wind. 

19  Ye  dnnkers : the  All-Gods,  to  whom  the  oblation  is  offered.  The 
gravy:  the  vasd.  See  verse  18.  Thou:  the  gravy.  The  regions,  etc:  I 
have  borrowed  Prof.  Eggehng's  translafcioii  of  the  words  used  to  designate 
the  intermediate  points. 

20  He  touches  the  remains  of  the  victim  as  he  recites  the  text.  The 
purpose  of  this  part  of  the  ceremony  is  to  re-unito  the  separated  portioua 
and  to  re-animate  the  body  for  life  in  heaven. 


4S  TBE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  VI. 

21  Go  to  tbe  sea.  All-hail ! Go  to  the  air.  All-hail ! Go  to  God 

Savitar.  All-hail ! 

Go  thou  to  Mitra-Varuna.  All-hail ! Go  thou  to  Day  and 
Night.  All-hail  I 

Go  to  the  Metres.  All-hail ! Go  to  Heaven  and  Earth.  All- 
hail  ! Go  to  the  sacrifice.  All-hail  I Go  to  Soma.  All- 
hail  ! Go  to  the  heavenly  ether.  All-hail ! Go  to  Vaisva- 
nara  Agui.  A 11  hail ! Bestow  upon  me  mind  and  heart. 
Thy  smoke  mount  to  the  sky,  to  heaven  thy  lustre.  Fill 
thou  the  spacious  earth  full  with  thine  ashes. 

22  Harm  not  the  Waters,  do  the  Plants  no  damage.  From  every 

place,  King  Varuna,  thence  save  us. 

Their  saying  that  we  swear  our  oath  by  sacred  cows,  by 
Varuna, 

0 Varuna,  save  us  therefrom. 

To  us  ik  Waters  and  let  Plants  be  friendly ; to  him  who 
bates  us,  whom  we  hate,  unfriendly. 

23  These  waters  teem  with  sacred  food : rich  in  that  food,  one 

longs  for  them. 

Rich  be  the  holy  rite  therein.  In  sacred  food  be  Sfirya  rich. 

24  I set  you  down  in  Agni’s  seat  whose  home  is  indestructible. 
Tndra-and-Agni’s  share  are  ye,  Mitra-and-Varuna’s  share  are 

ye* 

The  share  of  all  the  Gods  are  ye. 

May  waters  gathered  near  the  Sun,  and  those  wherewith  the 
Sun  18  joined, 

Speed  on  this  sacred  rite  of  ours. 

25  Thee  for  the  heart,  thee  for  the  mind,  thee  for  the  heaven, 

thee  for  the  Sun. 

Bear  up  erect  to  heaven,  to  Gods,  this  rite,  these  sacrificial 
calls.  

n He  addresses  the  heart-spit,  the  stick  on  which  the  victim's  heart 
has  beea  roasted,  and  which  is  now  buried  where  dry  ground  and  moist 
ground  meet  Waters... plants : being  between  both  and  not  touching  either. 
From  mry  place:  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon  suggests  that  dkdmno^ 
dUmnah  of  the  text  is  a corruption  of  ddnno^ddmmk,  ‘ from  every  bond 
or  fetteV’  Their  saying:  the  meaning  is  not  clear.  Perhaps,  Save  us 
from  our  enemies’  blame  wheuthey  find  fault  with  us  for  swearing  by  cows 
and  by  Varuna,  when  an  oath  on  cows  alone  would  be  sufficient. 

23  These  mters : the  Vasatiivarl  waters,  to  be  used  in  pressing  out  the 
Soma  juice.  Kick  in  that  food:  the  Sacrificer. 

24  The  text  is  taken  from  K V.  I.  23,  17. 

25  The  Adhvaryu  takes  Soma  down  from  the  cart,  lays  him  on  the  pres- 
sing-etonee,  and  recites  the  text.  Heart  . ...mind:  I take  thee  down  in 
order  to  fulfil  the  wish  and  purpose  of  the  Sacrificer.  SacrificUd  calls  • or, 
according  to  Mahidhara,  the  seven  chief  prieuts  themselves. 


VERSE  30.]  WHITE  YA  JURY  EDA.  49 

26  Descend,  0 Soma,  King,  to  all  thy  people.  Down,  unto  thee, 

go,  ono  and  all,  thy  people  ! 

May  Agni  with  his  fuel  hear  my  calling.  Hear  it  the  Waters 
and  the  Bowls,  Divine  Ones ! Hear,  Stones,  as  knowing 
sacrifice,  my  calling.  May  the  God  Savitar  hear  mine 
invocation.  All  hail ! 

27  Waters  Divine,  your  wave,  the  Waters’  offspring,  fit  for  ob- 

lation, potent,  most  delightful — 

Upon  those  Gods  among  the  Gods  bestow  it,  who  drink  the 
pure,  of  whom  ye  are  the  portion.  All-hail ! 

28  Drawing  art  thou : I draw  thee  up  that  Ocean  ne'er  may 

waste  or  wane. 

Let  waters  with  the  waters,  and  the  plants  commingle  with 
the  plants. 

29  That  man  is  lord  of  endless  strength  whom  thou  protectest 

in  the  fight, 

Agni,  or  urgest  to  the  fray. 

30  By  impulse  of  God  Savitar  I take  thee  with  arms  of  Asvins, 

with  the  hands  of  Pushan. 

Free  with  thy  gifts  art  thou.  Perform  for  Indra  this  deep, 
most  excellently  ordered  worship. 

With  the  most  noble  bolt  I pay  the  worship  enriched  with 
strengthening  food  and  milk  and  sweetness. 

Ye  are  Nigrabhya  waters,  heard  by  Deities  : make  me  con- 
tent. 


26  Boivh : there  ia  some  doubt  m to  the  exact  ineariiiig  of  dhishamU 
here.  From  the  context  sacrificial  implements  of  some  kind  are  clearJy 
implied.  See  Oldenberg,  Vedic  HyranM,  II.  121.  Mahidliara  explains  the 
word  as  meaning  Divine  Voices  or  Words,  i.  e.  hymns.  Stones  ; for  pressing 
Soma. 

27  Eli  pours  butter  into  tho  water  and  recites  the  text.  The  pure 
Soma. 

28  Drawing : or  ploughing.  He  removes  the  oblation  by  means  of  the 
Maitrdvanjna  priest’s  cup,  that  is,  ho  makes  the  sediment  fioat  away,  / 
draw : he  takes  some  water  in  the  Maitrdvarupa’s  cup.  IF aters  with  the 
waUn:  th«  Vasatlvarl  water  and  that  in  the  cup,  which  he  brings  together. 
Plants  With  the  plants : beaus,  lentils,  etc.,  with  rice  and  other  grains. 

29  If  the  ceremony  be  the  liturgical  rite  called  Agnishtoma  ( Praise  of 
Agni),  an  oblation  is  to  be  offered  with  this  text  taken  from  R.  V,  I.  27.  7. 

30  Formulas  for  the  Morning  Soma-Pressing.  / take  thee .'  the  stone 
called  UpSinsusavaDa  or  Low- voiced  Presser,  Most  noble  bolt : Soma,  like 
a tbunderboit  in  power,  I pay  the  worship : or,  I make  tho  Soma ; the 
words  are  understood.  Nigrdbhyd:  the  technical  n.ime  of  the  Vasatlvan 
waters  when  poured  into  the  Hotar's  cup.  This  water  is  now  brought,  and 
the  rest  of  the  text,  with  the  verse  that  follows,  io  recited  over  it. 

4 


50  WHITE  YAJURVEDA.  [BOOK  Yl. 

31  Content  my  mind,  content  my  speech,  content  my  breath, 

content  mine  eye,  content  mine  ear,  content  my  soul,  con- 
tent my  progeny,  content  my  herds,  content  the  troops 
of  men  about  me : never  may  the  bands  of  men  about  me 
suffer  thirst. 

32  For  Indra  girt  by  Vasus  and  accompanied  by  Rudras,  thee. 

For  Indra  with  Adityas,  thee.  For  Indra  foe-destroyer, 
thee.  Thee  for  the  Soma-bringing  Hawk.  For  plenty- 
giving Agni,  thee. 

33  Soma,  what  light  there  is  of  thine  in  heaven,  what  on  the 

earth,  what  in  raid-air’s  wide  region, 

Therewith  give  broad  space  to  the  Sacrificer  for  his  enrich- 
ment : Comfort  thou  the  giver. 

34  Auspicious  are  ye,  conquerors  of  Vritra,  formed  for  bestow- 

ing wealth,  the  Immortal’s  Consorts. 

Lead  to  the  Gods  this  sacrifice,  Divine  Ones  I and  at  our  in- 
vitation drink  of  Soma. 

35  Be  not  afraid ; shake  not  with  terror.  Take  thou  strength. 
Ye  two  Bowls,  being  firm,  stay  firm,  and  take  ye  strength. 
Mishap— not  Soma— hath  been  killed. 

36  East,  west,  north,  south,  from  every  side  to  meet  thee  let 

the  regions  run. 

Fill  him,  0 Mother,  let  the  noble  meet  together. 

37  Thou,  verily,  0 Mightiest,  as  God  shalt  gladden  mortal  man. 
0 Bounteous  Lord,  there  is  no  comforter  but  thou.  Indra, 

I speak  ray  words  to  thee.  ^ 


32  He  measures  out  Soma  on  the  UpAmsu  press-stone,  five  handfuls  with 
a formula  tor  each.  Soma  bringing  Hawk : see  Y.  1. 

33  He  touches  the  measured-out  Soma. 

11  watera  on  the  Soma.  Conqueror,  of  Vritra  • 

^ blended  with  Soma  the  inspirer  and  strengthener  of  Indra.  Of.'l.  13 
The  Immortal,  Con^orU : as  closely  connected  with  the  imperishable  Sipma.* 

36  He  address^  the  Soma  which  he  beats  with  the  press-gtone  Take 
thou  etrmgth:  gap  or  juice,  according  to  Mahfdliara.  Tw  Bowh  - 

Heaven  and  Earth ; or  the  swrificial  implements,  bowls  or  boards,,  may  be 


BOOR  THE  SEVENTH. 


2 

3 


4 


Flow  for  Vkhaspati,  cleansed  by  hands  from  the  two  off- 
shoots of  the  Bull. 

Flow  pure,  a Deity  thyself,  for  Deities  whose  share  thou  art. 

Sweeten  the  freshening  draughts  we  drink. 

Soma,  whatever  name  thou  hast,  unconquerable,  giving  life, 
To  that  thy  Soma,  Soma  ! Hail ! 


Self-made  art  thou  from  all  the  Powers  that  are  in  heaven 
aud  on  the  earth. 

May  the  Mind  win  thee,  thee.  All-hail ! for  Surya,  0 thou 
nobly-born. 

Thee  for  the  Deities  who  sip  light-atoms. 

Truly  fulfilled,  0 Plant  divine,  be  that  for  which  I pray  to 
tlice. 

With  ruin  falling  from  above  may  So-and-So  bo  smitten, 
crash ! 

Thee  for  out- breathing,  thee  for  breath  diffused  ! 


Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  Hold  in.  Rich  Lord  ! be  Soma  » 
guard. 

Be  thou  protector  of  our  wealth : win  strengthening  food  by 
sacrifice. 


Formulas  for  the  Grahagrahatw  or  drawing  cups  or  libations  of  Soma 
juice.  He  first  presses  and  draws  the  Uparpsu  Graha  or  draught,  so  named 
from  the  UpAmsusavana  or  Low-voiced  Piess-stone  used  for  the  purpose. 

See  VI.  30,  note.  , « r,  .u 

1 Flov}:  0 Sonia,  VAcha^ti:  Lord  of  Speech;  Prlna,  Breath,  the 
Genius  of  Life  which  remains  in  the  human  body  as  long  as  the  power  of 
speech.  Hands:  of  the  priests.  Oisho«ti  of  tU Bull:  two  sprigs  of  the 
mighty  Soma  through  which  the  juice  is  poured.  Flowpurt:  he  draws  a 
second  cup. 

2 He  drawa  a third  cup,  still  addressing  the  Soma. 

3 Self-made : the  Upimsugraha  is  said  to  be  Prftna  or  Breath,  nc  Mind  : 

meaning  PrajApati.  for  the  Deities:  he  wipes  off  and  addresses  the 

Soma  that  has  adhered  to  the  cup.  Sip  light-atoms:  or,  according  to 
Mabldhara,  guard  the  motes  of  light  which  are  distinct  from  the  rays  of 
the  Sun.  Truly  fulfilled ; this  formula  is  to  be  used  when  the  baxiriiicer 
wishes  to  invoke  a curse  upon  an  enemy.  Plant : a sprig  of  the  Soma  P ant. 
So-and-So:  asau;  iste  : the  name  of  the  enemy  is  to  be  supplied.  Thee.  1 
put  thee,  the  cup,  down.  Out  breath ; prdna.  Breath  diffused : vyana ; 
another  of  the  five  or  more  vital  airs,  that  which  circulates  or  is  diffused 
through  the  whole  body.  He  puts  down  the  Updmsu  press-stone  which  he 
addresses.  , . ^ . 

4 TaJetn,  upon  a base:  n frequently  recurring  expression  for  an  offenng 
that  is  supported  or  held  up.  The  base  or  support  being  the  cup  or  the  earth 
on  which  it  w deposited.  Here  the  Antaryftma  Graha  ( a cup  to  W drawn  after 
sunrise  with  suppression  of  voice  and  breath)  is  addressed.  Hold  in . an 
chha;  a plav  upon  the  word ; retain  the  juice  in  the  vessel,  or,  wituhold 
from  our  enemies  ceitain  fiendish  powers.  Bich  Lord : India  is  addressea. 


52  THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  TIL 

5 The  heaven  and  spacious  earth  I lay  within  thee,  Hay  within 

thee  middle  air’s  wide  region. 

Accordant  with  the  Gods  lower  and  higher,  Rich  Lord,  re- 
joice thee  in  the  Antaryilma. 

6 Self-made  art  thou light-atoms  (verse  3 repeated). 

Thee  for  the  upward  breath, 

7 0 Vayii,  drinker  of  the  pure,  be  near  us:  a thousand  teams 

are  thine,  All-bounteous  Giver. 

To  thee  the  rapture-giving  juice  is  offered,  whose  first 
draught,  God,  thou  takest  as  thy  portion. 

8 These,  Indra-Vayu!  have  been  shed;  come  for  our  offered 

dainties’  sake : 

The  drops  are  yearning  for  you  both. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  For  Vayu,  Indra-Vayu,  thee. 
This  is  thy  home.  Thee  for  the  close-knit  friends. 

9 This  Soma  hath  been  shed  for  you,  Law-strengtlieners, 

Mitra-Varuna ! 

Here  listen  ye  to  this  my  call. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  For  Mitra  thee,  for  Varuna. 

10  May  we,  possessing  much,  delight  in  riches,  Gods  in  oblation, 

and  the  kine  in  pasture ; 

And  that  Milch-cow  who  shrinks  not  from  the  milking, 
0 India- Varuna,  give  to  us  daily. 

This  is  thy  home.  Thee  for  the  righteous  Twain. 

1 1 Distilling  honey  is  your  whip,  Asvins,  and  full  of  pleasantness. 
Sprinkle  therewith  the  sacrifice. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  Thee  for  the  Asvins,  This  is 
thy  home.  Thee  for  the  Honey-lovers. 

7 Formulas  for  the  Aiudra-Vdyava  Graha,  libation  to  the  dual  deity  Indra- 
Vayu.  Thia  veree  is  taken  from  R.  V.  VII.  92.  1.  Of  the  pure : Soma. 
Pint  draught : cf.  R.  V.  I.  134.  1 ; 135  1 ; IV.  46.  1 ; V.  43.  3 ; VIII.  89. 2. 

8 Taken  from  R.  V.  I 2.  4.  7%esc;  Soma  juicea.  Thou;  the  Soma. 
Thee : ‘ I draw  ’ understood.  This ; the  earth,  on  which  he  deposits  the 
cup.  Thg:  Indra  and  Vayu  or  Indra-Vayu  being  regarded  an  one  Deity.  The 
dom-hut  friends : Indra  and  Vdyu. 

9 Formulas  for  the  Maitrd- Varuna  Graha,  libation  to  Mitra-Varuna.  The 
text  is  taken  from  R.  V.  II.  41.  4. 

10  He  mixes  the  Soma  with  milk  symbolizing  wealth  in  cattle.  The 
text  is  taken  from  R.  V.  IV.  42.  10.  The  added  formula  is  repeated  from 
verse  8.  Mikh-cow:  wealth.  The  righteous  Twain;  Mitra  and  Varuim. 
Ritdyubhydm,  dative  dual  of  ritdyu,  observing  the  Law,  devoterl  to  the  Right, 
is  explained  in  the  Satapath’a-Brdhraana  ( Sacijed  Books  of  the  East,  XXVI 
p.  272 ) as  Rita,  Right  or  Truth,  that  is,  Mitra,  and  Ayu,  Lif^  meaning 
Varuha, 

11  Formulas  for  the  Asvina  Graha,  the  cup  or  libation  offered  to  tlif 
Asvins.  Whip  ; this  Whip  is  glorified  in  A V.  IX.  1.  It  signifies,  perhaps, 


ySRSE  16.1 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


53 


12  Thou  in  the  first  old  time,  as  all  were  wont,  so  now  drawest 

from  him,  li^ht-finder,  throned  on  sacred  grass, 
Preeminence  and  strength,  from  him  turned  hither,  swilt, 
roaring,  who  winneth  those  whereby  thou  waxest  strong. 
Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  Thee  for  Sauna. 

This  is  thy  home.  Protect  thou  manly  power. 

Sanda  hath  been  removed,  may  Deities  who  drink  the  pure 
iibation  lead  thee  forward.  Invincible  art  thou. 

13  Well  stored  with  heroes  and  begetting  heroes,  with  growth 

of  wealth  surround  the  Sacrificer. 

The  Bright,  conjoined  with  Heaven  and  with  Earth,  with 
the  brightly-shining  one. 

Expelled  is  Sanda.  Thou  art  Sukra’s  dwelling. 

14  May  we,  0 mdiant  Soma,  be  the  keepers  of  thine  uninjured 

strength  and  growth  of  riches. 

This  is  the  first  all  bounteous  Consecration:  ho  the  tirsi, 
Varuna,  Mitra,  and  Agni. 

15  He  is  the  first  Brihaspati,  the  Prudent.  Offer  ye  juice  with 

Svahfl ! to  that  Indra.  r ..a 

Content  be  priestly  offices,  those  with  good  snorifice  « ' 

those  that  are  pleased  when  they  have  gained  fair  o 
ings  with  the  solemn  Hail  1 
^Pbe  Kindler  of  the  Fire  hath  sacrificed. 

IG  See,  Vena,  born  in  light  hath  driven  hither  on  chariot  of 
the  air  the  calves  of  Prisiii. 

the  early  stimulating  and 

first  appearance  of  i vivifying,  and 


T,.  teatisutenfron. 

12  Formulas  for  the  "j' v‘T  « t.^ffhop^leffl'y 

The  text,  taken  with  a variation  from  R.  V.  v.  , waters.  See  the 
now;  Indra.  Him:  Soma  •.  'i*  Hlv  Sanda: 

Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  where  he  Offered  to  k deity, 

an  Asura  or  demon,  for  whom  the  'np  i . , j 1^1  1^ 

He  is  said  to  be  Sukra's  son.  /nwnciWe  art  ^ tlm  nfini  , 

alUr,  on  which  the  Adhvaryn  deposits  his  cup,  is  addressed  and  sec 
the  attacks  of  demons. 

13  The  Sdkra  cup  or  libation  is  '‘J  Adhvaryn. 

U JTeepert : givers,  according  to  M^Idharm  themselves.  Accord- 

Fire:  the  Aguldh,  who  b the  Ust  to  mixt  with  meal,  with  the 

soJy®  o“  :!r  “v  I.  ihT  Aanthin  U said  to  be  the  Moon, 


54  TEE  TEXTS  OP  TEE  [BOOK  Vll 

Singers  with  hymns  caress  him  as  an  infant  there  where  the 
waters  and  the  sunlight  mingle. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  Thee  for  Marka. 

1 7 To  his  oblation,  swift  as  thought  ye  hurried  and  welcomed 

eagerly  the  prayers  he  offered. 

With  arrows  in  his  hand  the  Very  Mighty  forced  from  him 
all  obedience  of  a servant. 

This  is  thy  dwelling-place.  Protect  the  people.  Marka  hath 
been  removed. 

Gods,  drinkers  of  the  Manthin,  lead  thee  forward  ! Invinci- 
ble art  thou. 

18  Well  stored  with  people  and  begetting  people,  with  growth 

of  wealth  surround  the  Sacrilicer. 

The  Manthin  joined  with  Heaven  and  Earth  and  with  the 
Manthin-shining  one. 

Expelled  is  Marka.  Thou  art  Manthin’s  dwelling. 

19  0 ye  eleven  Gods  whose  home  is  heaven,  0 ye  eleven  who 

make  earth  your  dw'elling. 

Ye  who  with  might,  eleven,  live  in  waters,  accept  this  sacri- 
fice, Ye  Gods,  with  pleasure. 

20  Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  Thou  art  igrayana,  good  first 

libation. 

Be  thou  the  guard  of  sacrifice : protect  the  sacrifice’s  lord. 
Vishnu  with  might  protect-  thee.  Guard  thou  Vishnu. 
Guard  on  all  sides  the  Soma  sacrifices, 

21  Soma  flows  pure.  Soma  flows  pure  for  this  Priesthood,  for 

the  Nobility,  pure  for  the  worshipper  who  pre-sses  out 
the  juice,  flows  pure  fur  food  and  energy,  for  waters  and 
for  plants ; flows  pure  for  general  prosperity.  Thee  for  the 
Universal  Gods.  This  is  thy  home.  Thee  for  the  Universal 
Gods. 


as  Sukra  is  the  Sun.  Vena : the  loving  Sun  ; apparently  the  Sun  rising  in 
the  mist  of  morning.  Primi:  the  Speckled  Cow,  the  variegaWd  cloud. 
Her  calves  are  the  masses  of  mist  which  the  Sun  dispels.  Marka : son  of 
Sukra,  and  Purohita  or  tribal  priest  of  the  Asuras. 

‘ 17  The  text  as  it  stands,  taken  from  R.  V.  X.  61.  3,  seems  unintelligible 
and  is  probably  corrupt.  See  The  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  new  Vol. 
IL  465.  The  following  formula  is,  mutatis  mutandis,  identical  with  that 
in  verse  12.  Manthin  ; Soma  juice  mixed  and  stirred  up  with  meal. 

18  The  Pratiprasth&tar  or  assistant  priest,  on  the  north  side  of  the  Sacri- 
ficial Stake,  addresses  a chip  of  the  Stake  which  he  has  sprinkled,  and  throws 
it  on  the  Ahavantya  fire.  Cf.  verse  13. 

19  The  formula  for  the  Agrayana  Graha,  a libation  oftered  to  the  All- 
Gods,  with  the  text  taken  from  R.  V.  I.  189.  11.  Waters.'  of  air, 

20  Vishnu : the  Sacrifice. 

21  Thee : he  deposits  the  cup. 


VERSE  26.] 


.miTE  YA  JURY  EDA. 


55 


22  Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  For  Tndra  Lord  of  the  Brihat, 
strong  with  vital  vigour,  I take  thee  lover  of  the  invu 

Indmr’what 

I take  thee,  take  thee  for  Vishnu 
This  16  thy  home.  Thee  for  the  recitations. 

For  the  Gods  take  I thee,  the  Gods’  protector ; yea,  for  m 
sacrifice’s  life  I take  thee. 

33  For  Mitra-Varuna  thee,  the  Gods  protector,  yea,  for  the 

sacrifice’s  life  i take  thee.  ^ i?  „ T-arira 

For  India,  thee,  etc.  For  Iudia-Aj;ni,  thee,  etc.  ’ 

Varuna,  thee,  etc.  For  Indra-lSnhaspati  thee,  etc,.  1 oi 
ludra-Vishnu  thee,  etc. 

24  Him,  messenger  of  earth  and  head  of  heaven,  Agni  Vaisva- 

narti,  born  in  holy  Order,  , 

Tlie  S.ige,  the  King,  the  Guest  of  men,  a vessel  fit  foi  their 

mouths,  the  Gods  have  generated. 

25  Taken  upon  a baee  art  then.  Firm, 

tirmcet  of  the  (inn,  the  moat  eecurcly  grounded  ot  ihoM 

who  never  have  been  shaken. 

This  IS  thy  home.  Thee  for  Vai?vanar«. 

1 pour  forth  with  firm  mind,  with  voice,  fir  . m . 
now  may  India  verily  m.cke  our  people  all  of  one  la.rri 
and  mind  and  free  from  foemeu. 

20  Whatever  drop  of  thine  Ic.ipe  forth,  whatever  stalk  from 
the  bowle’  lap,  al.akei.  hy  the  ^ 



Thou  art  th!' way  by  which  the  Goda  ascended.  

22  FormuiafortUeUkthyaOraha.  - ‘he  f’i'2\ikM'frL'o'’K  V 

. 

Rha.,,,aohha.u,t.'’ 

to  the  AchhAv^ka.  rv  v,  «!•  Wirm  T ibation  ; probably  i^o  oall'fl 

2*  Formula  for  the  Dhruy.  Graha,  or  F.  m L.b^»  . 
because,  dmwn  in  the  morning,  it  remains  ua 
text  in  taken  from  U V.  VI.  7.  !• 

25  Firm  : dhrnva.  , rr  nr  Dron-Oblation,  to  expiate  any  drop- 

26  FnrnmlafortUeViprnd-HomaorDro^bla^^^^ 

pmg  of  Soma  during  the  ceremony  p (it  to  the  Gods). 

VWittf ; the  sacrificial  exclamation,  May  he  (Ag  ) ^ 

The  text  is  taken,  with  two  j Adh^ary'*  throws  one  of  two 

Ohitvala  or  pit,  into  or  toward.^  wbn.h  ^ . ^^ritjce  to  heaven, 

blades  of  glass  Ukeu  from  the  altar.  Asetndi^d . throu^n  saG 


56  THE  TEXTS  OP  THE  [BOOK  VII. 

27  Giver  of  Rplendour,  grow  thou  pure  for  splendour  for  my 

outward  breath. 

Giver  of  splendour,  grow  thou  pure  for  splendour  for  my 
spreading  breath. 

Giver,  etc for  my  upward  breath. 

Giver,  etc for  my  power  of  speech. 

Giver,  etc for  my  sense  and  will. 

Giver,  etc for  my  hearing  power. 

Givers  of  splendour,  grow  ye  pure  for  splendour  for  my 
orbs  of  sight. 

28  Giver  of  splendour,  grow  thou  pure  for  splendour  for  my 

living  self. 

Giver,  etc for  my  energy. 

Giver,  etc for  my  vital  power. 

Givers  of  splendour,  grow  ye  pure  for  splendour  for  al! 
sprung  from  me. 

29  Who  art  thou?  Which  of  all  art  thou?  Whose  art  thou? 

Who  art  thou  by  name  ? 

Even  thou  on  whose  name  we  have  meditated,  thou  whom 
we  have  delighted  with  our  Soma. 

30  Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  For  Madhu  thee.  Taken 

upon  a base  art  thou.  For  Madhava  thee. 

Taken,  etc.  For  Snkra  thee.  Taken,  etc.  For  Snchi  thee; 
Taken,  etc.  For  Nabhas  thee.  Taken,  etc.  For  Nabhasya 
thee.  Taken,  etc.  For  Food  thee.  Taken,  etc.  For 
Energy  thee.  Taken,  etc.  For  Sahas  thee.  Taken,  etc. 
For  Sahasya  thee.  Taken,  etc.  For Tapas  thee.  Taken,  etc. 
For  Tapasya  thee.  Taken,  etc.  For  Arnhasaspati  thee. 

27  The  AvakAsa  formulas,  the  Sacrificer  being  made  to  look  at  the  liba- 
tion cups  iu  the  order  in  which  the  offerings  have  been  made,  with  a slightly 
varied  formula  addressed  to  each.  Givers : he  looks  at  and  addresses  the 
Sukia  and  the  Man  thin  cups. 

28  Givers : he  looks  at  the  two  Soma  troughs,  Phtabhrit  and  Adhavanip. 

29  He  looks  at  the  Dronakalasa  or  large  wooden  Soma  reservoir.  Who  ?; 
Ka,  Prijiipati,  according  to  Mahidhara,  See  1. 6,  note.  Which  of  hll  ? ; or, 
Eminently  Prajftpati.  Whose  h or  Prajapati’s. 

30  Formulas  for  the  Ritu  Grahas  or  libations  to  the  deified  Seasons.  The 
cups  are  drawn  in  turn  by  the  Adhvaryu  and  the  Pratiprasth&tar.  Madhu  : 
Honey,  or  sweetness  ; here  a name  of  the  first  month  of  the  year,  Chaitra^ 
Mid-March  to  Mid-April.  Thee:  ‘I take’  understood.  Mddhava:  Honey- 
like, vernal  ; the  mouth  Vaisdkha,  April-May.  Sukra:  Bright;  the  month 
Jyaishtha, May- June,  Sacki:  Pure;  Ashadha,  June-July.  Nabhas:  Mist; 
SiAvana,  July -August. ' iVoiAasva : Misty;  Bhadn,  August-September. 
Food:  Ish;  Asvina,  September-October.  Energy:  Urj;  KArtika,  October- 
Noveraber  Sahas:  Strength;  Mirgaslrsha,  November-December.  Saha- 
sya: Strong;  Pushya, December- January.  Tapas:  Pain;  Migha, January- 
February.  Ta»a«ya .•  Painful ; Pkalguna,  February-March.  Arnhasaspati: 
Lord  of  Trouble  ; the  Genius  of  the  thiiteenth  or  intwcalary  month. 


WHITE  r AYURVEDA. 


57 


VERSE  36. 


31  Moved,  Indra-Agni,  by  our  hymns,  come  to  the  juice,  the 

pinions  dew. 

Drink  ye  thereof,  impelled  by  song. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  For  Indra-Agni  thee.  This 
is  thy  dwelling.  Thee  for  Indra-Agni. 

32  Hitherward!  they  who  light  the  flamo  and  straightway 

strew  the  sacred  grass, 

Whose  Friend  is  ludra  ever  young. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  For  Indra-Agni  thee.  This 
is  thy  dwelling.  Thee  for  Indra-Agni. 

33  Ye  Visvedevas  who  protect, reward,  and  cherish  men,approacifc 

Your  worshipper’s  drink-ofFering. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  Thee  for  the  Universal  God.s. 
This  is  thy  home.  Thee  for  the  Visvedevas. 

34  0 ye  All-Gods,  come  hitherward : hear  this  my  invocation : 

seat 

Yourselves  upon  this  sacred  grass.  , rt  i 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  Thee  for  the  Universal  (»od8. 
This  IS  thy  home.  Thee  for  the  Visvedevns. 

35  Here  drink  the  Soma,  Indra  girt  by  Maruts ! as  thou  dnlst 

drink  the  juice  beside  S^ryata. 

Under  thy  guidance,  in  thy  keeping.  Hero  I the  singers  serve, 
skilled  in  fair  sacritices. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  For  Indra  girt  by  Maruts  thee. 
This  is  thy  home.  For  Indra  girt  by  Maruts  ihec. 

36  The  Bull  whose  strength  hath  waxed,  whom  Maruts  follow, 

free-giving  Indra,  the  Celestial  Uulcr,  • i . 

Mighty,  all-eonquering,  the  victory-giver,  him  we  invoke  to 
give  us  new  protection. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  For  Indra  girt  by  Maruts  tliec. 
This  is  thy  home.  For  Indra  girt  by  Maruts  thee. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  Thee  for  the  Maruts  energy. 


31  Tlie  Adhvaryu  draws  the  Aindragiia  Cup,  or  libation  to 

Apni,  with  the  text  from  B.  V.  III.  12.  1.  Thu  : the  moumJ  ou  wbah 
depoaitu  the  cup.  , , 

32  This  text,  from  H.  V.  VIII.  46.  I,  is  also  rMited. 

33  He  draws  the  cup  for  the  Visvedevas,  the  All-Gods  or  Universal  Gods, 
with  the  text  taken  from  R.  V.  I.  3.  7. 

34  He  recites  another  text,  from  R.  V.  II.  41.  id. 

36  The  Moming-PressinK  having  been  finwM»  ♦ “illrrmia 

Midliyamdina-SHvana  or  Midday-Pressing  I^gin.  First  the 
are  drawn  for  Indra  Marutvin  or  Marut-girt.  The  text  for  the  first  cup  » 
taken  from  R.  V.  III.  61.  7.  Sdrydta:  that  is,  at  ^enfice  offered 

by  SAry&ta.  said  to  have  been  a king,  son  of  I7  ^ 

with  SaryAti  son  of  Mauu  Vaivasvata.  See  R.  V.  I.  pi.  12 , » i 2.  1/. 

36  He  draws  the  second  cup  for  Indra  Marutv&n  with  the  text  taken  from 

R.  V.  in.  47.  6. 


58 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  VII. 


37  Indra,  accordant  with  the  banded  Maruts,  drink  boma, 

Hero!  as  wise  Vritra-blayer. 

Slay  thoa  our  foomen,  drive  away  assailants,  and  make  us 
safe  oil  every  side  from  danger. 

Taken,  etc.  For  Indra  girt  by  Maruts  thee.  This  is  thy 
home.  For  Indra  girt  by  Maruts  thee. 

38  Drink,  Indra  Marut-girt,  as  Bull,  the  Soma:  for  joy,  for 

rapture  even  as  thou  pleasest. 

Pour  down  the  wave  of  meath  within  thy  belly  : thou  art 
the  King  of  juices  shed  fortnightly. 

Taken,  etc Maruts  thee  (as  above). 

39  Great,  hero-like,  controlling  men  is  Indra,  unwasting  in 

his  powers,  doubled  in  vastness. 

He,  turned  to  us,  hath  grown  to  hero  vigour : broad,  wide, 
he  hath  been  decked  by  those  who  serve  him. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  Thee  for  Mahendra. 

This  is  thy  dwelling-place.  Thee  for  Mahendra. 

40  Indra,  great  in  his  power  and  might,  and  like  Parjanya  rich 


in  ram, 

la  maguitied  by  Vatsa’s  lauds. 

Taken,  etc.  ( as  in  39  ). 

41  HU  bright  rays  bear  him  up  aloft,  the  God  who  knoweth 

all  that  lives, 

Surya,  that  all  may  look  on  him.  All-hail ! 

42  The  brilliant  presence  of  the  Gods  hath  risen,  the  eye  of 

Mitra,  Vanina,  and  Agni.  ^ c , 

Soul  of  all  moving,  soul  of  all  that  moves  not,  the  bun 
hath  filled  the  air  and  earth  and  heaven.  „ , . 

43  By  goodly  paths  lead  us  to  riches,  Agm,  thou  God  who 

knowest  every  sacred  duty. 

Remove  the  sin  that  makes  us  stray  and  wander : most 

ample  adoration  will  we  bring  thee. 

44  Wide  room  and  comfort  may  this  Agni  give  us,  an  g 

before  us  cleaving  down  our  foemen. 


37  An  ofFering-pvayer  taken  from  R V.  HI.  47.  ^ ^ ^ t 

39  He  draws  the  Mftheudra  Graha  ; the  Cup  for  Mahendra,  Gieat  Indra, 

with  the  text  taken  from  R V,  VI.  19.  1.  f r^i'n  Mnnd 

40  TUet«iti8«rom  R.  V.  VIII  6.  1.  />ar,anya;  Godo{  the  mm-cload. 

Vatsa:  the  seer  of  the  hymn.  /n-ikshina. 

41  The  text,  taken  from  R.  V.  1. 50. 1,  noootnpaniM  an  offering  (Ddkehina 

homa  or  oblation  in  the  Southern  fire)  to  Surya.  „nVTn^l 

42  Aeeoondoblationiaolfored  toSfirya  with  the  textfrora^V.^  • 

43  The  text,  from  B,  V.  1. 189. 1,  accoinpanie.  an  oblation  in  tne  Agiii 

dhra  fire  to  Agni.  , • ir 

44  He  oflere  again  with  the  text.  Venea  43,  44  occur  also  m V.  34  37. 


mSE  48.] 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA. 


59 


May  he  win  booty  in  the  fight  for  booty : may  lie  quell 
foes  in  his  triumphant  onset. 

45  I through  your  beauty  have  attained  to  beauty.  The  Tiitha, 

the  omniscient,  allot  you  ! 

Go  forth,  bright-gifted ! on  the  path  of  Order.  Look  thou 
upon  the  heaven  and  air’s  mid-region.  Unite  thee  with 
the  priests  who  keep  the  Sadas. 

46  This  day  may  it  be  mine  to  find  a Brahman  sprung  from  a 

lauded  father  and  grandfather, 

Offspring  of  Rishis  and  himself  a Rishi,  the  fit  recipient  of 
priestly  guerdon. 

Go  to  the  Gods,  bestowed  by  me,  and  enter  into  him  who 
gives. 

47  To  Agni,  yea,  to  me  let  Varuna  give  thee.  May  I gain  life 

that  shall  endure  for  ever. 

Be  thou  strong  vital  power  to  him  who  gives  thee,  and  com- 
fort unto  me  the  gift’s  receiver. 

To  Rudra,  yea,  to  me  let  Varuim for  over. 

Be  thou  the  breath  of  life  to  him  who  gives  thee,  and  vigour 
unto  me  the  gift’s  receiver. 

To  me  Brihaspati  let  Varuna ....for  ever. 

Be  thou  a covering  skin  to  him  who  gives  thee,  and  com  or 
unto  me  the  gift’s  receiver. 

To  Yama,  yea,  to  me  let  Varuna for  ever. 

Be  thou  a steed  to  him  who  gives  the  guerdon,  and  vital 
power  to  me  the  gift’s  receiver, 

48  Who  hath  bestowed  it  ? Upon  whom  bestowed  it  ? 

Desire  bestowed  it,  for  Desire  he  gave  it.  Desire  is  giver 

and  Desire  receiver.  This,  0 Desire,  to  thee  la  dedicated. 

45  The  Sacrificer,  having  some  gold  with  him, 
are  to  be  given  to  the  prieeta, 

mg  to  Maljldhara,  Pra]4pati  in  his  form.  Cf.  V.  31.  All  J j ^ 

you  among  the  officiating  priests.  Order:  the  j c^vvs, 

thou : he  addresses  the  representative  cow,  meaning,  I,  8 y • 
behold  the  heavenly  world.  Unite  thee  with:  or,  exert  y 

Oo  to  the  God,:  he  »Tte  down  beside  the  Agnidh  and  giree 

other  gifts  which  are  thus  addressed.  Ente>'  mto . retur  , 

ficer,  in  the  shape  of  earthly  and  heavenly  blessings.  cuerdon  of 

47  The  Adhvaryu  recites  the  first  formula  as  he  ^ ^ 

gold.  Thee:  the  gold.  To  Rudra:  spoken  r vug  Dead  • 

Brika^pati : spoken  as  he  receives  a cloth.  To  Yama  : God  of  the  Dead  , 

ftpoken  as  he  receives  the  horse.  ^ 

48  Spoken  on  the  receipt  of  any  “ S^r^Lvin^ 

etc.  Zlwtre  ftcsloicerf  .*  the  reward  has  been  given  lu  P®  y ttt  oq  7 
sings  in  return.  The  text  is  taken,  with  variatious,  from  A.  v.  m.  t. 


BOOK  THE  EIGHTH. 


Tak*n  upon  a base  art  thou.  Thee  for  the  Adityas. 

Here,  0 Far-striding  Vishnu,  is  thy  Soma.  Guard  it  from 
injury.  Let  them  not  harm  thee. 

2 Ne’er  art  thou  fruitless,  Indra;  ne’er  dost  thou  desert  thy 

worshipper.  , 

But  now,  0 Liberal  Lord,  thy  bounty  as  a^God  is  poured 
forth  ever  more  and  more.  Thee  for  the  Adityas. 

3 Never  art  thou  neglectful : thou  guardest  both  races  with 

The  Soma  feast,  0 Fourth  Aditya,  is  thy  strength.  Amrit 
is  stablished  in  the  heavens.  Thee  for  the  Adityas. 

4 The  sacrifice  obtains  the  Gods’  acceptance.  Be  graciously 

inclined  to  us,  Adityas. 

Hitherward  let  your  favour  be  directed^and  be  our  best  de- 
liverer from  trouble.  Thee  for  the  Adityas. 

6 This  is  thy  Soma  draught,  0 bright  Aditya : take  delight 

To  this  mine  utterance,  0 ye  men,  give  credence,  what  good 
the  man  and  wife  obtain  by  praying : 

A manly  son  is  born  and  gathers  riches,  and  thrives  for  ever 
sinless  in  the  dwelling. 

6 Fair  wealth,  0 Savitar,  to^iay,  to-morrow,  fair  wealth  pro- 
duce for  us  each  day  that  passes.  ri  a i f 

May  we,  through  this  oar  song,  be  happy  gainers,  God.  of 
a fair  and  spacious  habitation.  

This  Book  contains  the  formulaa  required  for  the  Third  or  Evening  Som^ 
Prosaing.  and  drey,  as  a preliminary  ceremony,  for  the  Aditya  Graha  or 

’'‘^The  PraUpittStar  draws  the  Soma  from  ‘!>« 

vesael  Thtt  * ‘ I pour  out  ’ understofxl  Here  : in  the  bthAll,  bowl,  or  pot 
into  which  he  pour^the  juice  from  the  Aditya  vessel  which  i3  then,  placed 
on  it  as  a cover.  Them : the  evil  Bpirits, 

2 He  draws  the  Aditya  cup  with  the  text  from  R V.,  V&lakhilya  IH.  7 . 

3 He  withdraws  the  cup,  and  again  takes  the  juice  with  ^ 

with  a vjjriation  from  R.  V.  Vulaklulya  IV.  7.  Both  ram  : ^ “mi. 

^Fourtklditya:  next  to  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman.  AmrU.  or  Ambroaia , 

Aditya  libation  with  sour  milk  with  the  text  froM  R.  V. 

IdAty^:  Sdrya  the  San  i.  addre«ed.  Fo  iW.;  the  Sa«rificer'a 

wife  recites  the  text  which  is  taken  partly,  and  with  variations,  fiom  . 

^6\^e  draws  the  SAvitra  Graha  or  Cup  for  Savitar,  with  the  text  from 
R.  V.  VI.  71.  6. 


VERSE  12  ] 


WHITE  YAJURVEBa. 


7 Taken  upon  a base  art  thou. 

Savitar’s  giver  of  delight  art  thou.  Giver  of  joy  art  thou: 

vouchsafe  me  joy.  > i j 

Speed  thou  the  sacrifice,  speed  thou  the  sacrifice  s lord  to 
win  his  share.  Thee  for  the  God,  for  Savitar. 

8 Taken  upon  a base  art  thou. 

Thou  art  a good  protector,  firmly  stablished.  To  the  Great 
Bull  be  reverential  homage.  Tlee  for  the  Visvcdevas. 

This  is  thy  home : Thee  for  the  Viavedevas. 

9 Taken  upon  a base  art  thou. 

May  it  be  mine  to  prosper  the  libstions  of  thee  Bnhaspati  s 
son,  0 radiant  Soma,  of  thee,  strong  Indu,  mated  with 

thy  Consorts.  , 

I am  in  heaven  above,  on  earth  beneath  it.  The  intermedi- 
ate region  was  my  father.  , , n i 

I saw  the  Sun  both  from  above  and  under.  I am  what  Gods 
in  secret  hold  the  highest. 

10  Agni,  associate  with  tlie  Dames,  accordant  with  the  Goa 

Tvashtar,  drink.  All-hail  t • 

Thou  art  Prajapati,  strong  male,  impregner : 

from  thee,  strong  male,  inepregner,  a son  who  shall  him- 
self  become  a father 

1 1 Taken  upon  a base  art  thou. 

Thou  art  bay-coloured,  Yoker  of  Bay  Coursers.  Jhee  for 
the  pair  of  tawny-coloured  horses. 

United  with  the  Soma,  ye,  :or  liidra,  are  corn  for  his  two 
tawny  steeds  to  feed  on. 

12  'fhat  draught  of  thine  ivhich  winneth  cows  or  horses,  ofttred 

with  sacrificial  text  and  lauded  

7 He  addre-sses  the  Soma  in  the  cup.  ^ . . . 

8 He  draws  from  the  Ptebhrit,  a ve«l  contamiog  stmnwi  Som. 
the  Mahdvaisvadeva  Cup  or  Libation  to  the  (.rea 

?;rri;i>a«o„  to  Him  with  Consort,,  here 
meaning  Soma.  >on  : pourd  forth  by  ^ 

(he  God,;  with  a reference  -J-"  ™ f tv 

From  fhee : through  thy  favour.  Trv.lm  Hampaser  of  the 

“‘irTke  priest,  smell  the  grains  taken  from  the  cup,  end  throw  them  on 
the  high  riltar. 


THE  TEXTS  OP  THE 


62 


[BOOK  vni. 


With  chanted  hymps  and  songs  of  adoration— of  that  per- 
mitted do  I take  permitted. 

,13  Of  sin  against  the  Gods  thou  art  atonement.  Of  sin  against 
mankind  thou  an  atonement. 

For  sin  against  the  Fathers  thou  atonest.  Of  sin  against 
oneself  thou  art  atonement. 

Of  every  sort  of  sit.  thou  art  atonement.  The  sin  that  I 
have  knowingly  ccmmitted,  the  sin  that  unawares  I have 
committed,  of  all  tiiat  wickedness  thou  art  the  atonement. 

14  We  with  our  bodies  h»ve  again  united,  with  lustre,  vital  sap, 

and  happy  spirit. 

Giver  of  boons,  may  Tvashtar  grant  us  riches  and  smooth 
whate’er  was  injured  in  our  body. 

15  Lead  us  with  thought  to  wealth  in  kine,  0 Indra,  to  princes, 

Lord  of  Bounty  ! and  to  welfare. 

Lead  thou  us  on  to  God-inspired  devotion,  to  favour  of  the 
Gods  who  merit  worship.  All-hail ! 

16  Verse  14  repeated. 

17  May  this  please  Savitar  and  liberal  Dhatar,  Prajapati  the 

Treasure-Guard,  bright  Agni, 

Tvashtar,  and  Vishnu  : blessing  him  with  children,  grant 
store  of  riches  to  the  Sacrificer. 

18  Gods,  we  have  made  your  seats  easy  of  access,  who,  pleased 

with  us,  have  come  to  this  libation. 

Bearing  and  bringing  hitherward  your  treasures,  grant  to 
this  man,  good  Lords,  abundant  riches.  All  hail ! 

19  The  willing  Gods  whom,  God,  thou  hast  brought  hither,  send 

them  to  their  own  dwelling-place,  0 Agni. 

As  all  of  you  have  eaten  and  have  drunken,  approach  the 
air,  the  heat,  the  light  of  heaven. 

13  Thou;  a splinter  of  the  Sacrificial  Stake.  Six  of  theae  Bplintersare 

thrown  on  the  fire  and  severally  addressed  with  a formnla. 

14  The  priests  touch  the  Chainnsas,  cups  or  bowls,  filled  with  water,  and 
recite  the  text  taken  from  A.  V.  VI  63.  3. 

15  He  makes  nine  ofiferinj^s  called  Samisbteyajuses  or  final  sacrificial  texts 
and  oblations,  and  with  the  first  he  recites  the  text  taken  from  R.  V.  V.  42.  4. 
Prinm  : wealthy  sacrificers  who  will  liberally  reward  our  services. 

16  The  second  offering  is  made  with  repetition  of  verse  14. 

17  The  third  offering,  with  the  text  from  A V.  VII.  17.  4.  TAis.^our 
oblation.  lAbtral : or  rdti  may  mean  the  Oblation  personified.  DhdUir : 
the  Creator,  or  Ordainer.  ^ran« ; ye,  the  Deities  mentioned. 

18  The  fourth,  with  the  text  whose  first  three  Padas  are  taken  from  A.  V. 
VII.  97.  4.  Easy  of  accea:  sacrifice  leading  the  worshipper  to  heaven.  ^ 

19  The  fifth,  Trith  the  text  from  A.  V.  Yll.  97.  3.  Euttn ; the  sacrificial 
rice -cakes,  Dvunktn : libatioos  of  Soma,  * 


VERSE  26.J 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


63 


20  Here,  Agni,  as  this  sacrifice  procecdeth,  have  we  elected  thee 

to  be  our  Hotar. 

Special  have  been  thine  ofterings  and  thy  labour.  Well 
knowing  sacrifice,  as  sage,  come  near  us. 

21  Do  ye,  0 Gods,  discoverers  of  the  Pathway,  go  forward  on 

the  path  when  ye  have  found  it. 

0 God,  thou  Lord  and  Master  of  the  Spirit,  beatow—All- 
hail ! — this  sacrifice  on  Vata. 

22  Go,  Sacrifice,  to  the  sacrifice  : seek  thou  the  sacrifice’s  lord, 

seek  thine  own  home.  All-hail  I 
Lord  of  the  sacrifice,  this  is  thy  sacrifice,  follow-ed  by  many 
heroes,  loud  with  hymns  of  praise.  Accept  it  thou.  All- 
hail  ! 

23  Become  no  serpent  thou,  become  no  viper. 

King  Varuna  hath  made  a spacious  pathway,  a pathway  for 
the  Sun  wherein  to  travel. 

Where  no  way  was  he  made  him  set  his  footstep,  and  warn- 
ed afar  whatever  afflicts  the  spirit. 

To  Varuna  be  reverential  homage!  Vanina’s  noose  beneath 
our  feet  is  trampled. 

24  The  waters,  face  of  Agni,  have  I entered,  0 Waters’  Child, 

repelling  evil  spirits. 

Offer  the  fuel  in  each  home,  0 Agni.  Let  thy  tongue  dart 
— All-hail ! — to  meet  the  blotter. 

25  Thy  heart  is  in  the  flood,  within  the  waters.  With  thee  let 

plants  and  waters  be  commingled, 

That,  Lt>rd  of  Sacrifice,  we  may  adore  thee  with  singing 
praise  and  telling  forth  our  homage.  All-bail  I 

26  This,  0 celestial  Waters,  is  your  offspring.  Support  him 

dearly  loved  and  gently  nurtured. 

20  The  sixth,  with  the  text  whose  first  line  is  tHkeo  fioin  A.  V.  Vil.  97. 1. 

21  The  seveuth,  with  the  text  repeated  from  II  21.  Pathway:  the  sac- 
rifice. The ‘path:  your  own  homewaid  way.  0 Ood : PrajApiati. 

22  The  eighth,  with  the  text.  This  is  thy  sacrifice : he  oifeis  the  oiiith 
and  last  oblation  of  the  series. 

23  After  this  set  of  oblations,  the  Adhvaryii  throws  the  black-buck’s  horn 
(see  IV.  10,  note)  and  the  girdle  into  the  Ch4tvAla  or  pit.  Thou  : the  girdle 
of  rope  (see  VI  12).  The  Sacnficer  then  recites  the  text  from  R.  V I.  24.  8. 
To  Varvna:  spoken  by  the  Sacnficer  as  he  steps  into  the  Avabhritha  or 
other  water.  Varuna' s noose;  affliction  sent  as  a punishment  for  sin  by 
the  Moral  Governor  of  the  woild. 

24  The  Siicrificer  throws  a kindling-stick  into  the  water  and  makes  an 
offering  thereon  with  four  ladlefuls  of  butter. 

25  The  Adhvaryu  float#  a jar  containing  the  dregs  of  the  Soma,  and  re- 
cites the  text.  Thy  heart : 0 Soma. 

2fi  This : Soma.  Bring ward  off:  I follow  Mahfdhara.  Prof.  Egge- 

ling  refers  vahhva  in  both  cases  to  vaksh  instead  of  vuk : * thrive  thou  well 
therein  and  thrive  thou  thoroughly,' 


{BWH  Vlll. 


^4  THE  TEXTS  OP  THE 

This  is  thy  station,  0 celestial  Soma  j therein  bring  happiness 

and  ward  off  evil.  ji.ii 

27  0 restless  Purifying  Bath,  thou  glidest  onward  restlessly,  j 
May  I with  aid  of  Gods  remove  the  stain  of  sin  against  the 

Gods,  and  wash  away  with  mortals’  help  the  wrong  that 
hath  been  done  to  men.  Preserve  me,  God,  from  injury, 
from  the  loud-roaring  demon  foe.  Thou  art  the  fuel  of 

the  Gods.  r n 

28  Let,  still  unborn,  the  ten-month  calf  move  with  the  follow- 

ing after-birth.  , « j r 

Even  as  the  wind  is  moving,  as  the  gathered  flood  of  ocean 

So  may  this  ten-month  calf  come  forth  together  with  the 

after-birth.  , , . i.  r., 

29  0 thou  who  hast  a womb  of  gold  and  offspring  meet  tor 

all  linilis  unbroken  have  I brought  together  with 

his  dam.  All-hail ! . 

30  Multiform,  rich  in  wondrous  operation,  the  strong  juice 

hath  enrobed  itself  with  greatness.  , 

Ut  the  worlds  praise  her  uniped  and  biped,  three-footca 
and  four-footed  and  eight-footed.  All-hail  1 

31  Verily,  best  of  guardians  hath  he  in  whose  dwelling-place 

ye  drink, 

0 Maruts,  giants  of  the  sky.  , , . 

32  May  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Mighty  Pair,  besprinkle  this 

our  sacrifice, 

And  feed  us  full  with  nourishments.  

"^271^  immeraeH  the  jar.  Purifying  Bath  : he  addresaes  the  Avftbhpth.x 
Tlw  text  is  repeated  from  III.  48.  Thou  art  the  fuel : he  puts  a kindling 

28  A to  be  followed  when  a sacrihcial  cow,  8up^«e( 

^Ten.v^onth:  ‘ although  tb 
embryo  be  not  of  ten  months;  growth’,  says  Mahtdhara,  ‘the  priest  make 

the  Vasa  or  Sacrificial  Cow  is  addressed,  ffim : the  embryo  calj 

30  Multiform:  the  fat  juice  of  the  embryo,  ' 

is  offered  i an  oblation.  Greatness:  denved  from  the  cow.  Pram,  c 
celebrate;  prakhydtdm  kurvantu:  Mahldhara.  Umped;  as  contami^on 
chief  eleme^  of  sacrifice,  the  omentum.  Biped : containing  onaentum  a ^ 
^bs  for  sacrifice.  Three-footed:  with  elements  of  by  offerings  in  additioi 
Eight-footed:  when  in  c.il£.  Cf.  R.  V.  II.  7.  5. 

31  When  the  Samishtayajus  oblations  are  finished,  he  ^^es  the  mb  J 

wrapp^  m a bandage  and  offers  it  on  the  sacrificial  hearth  to  the  Marut 
with  the  text  from  R.V.  I.  86.  1.  j ..  . . r ...  u v i 92  1 

82  The  embiyo  is  covered  up  with  coals,  and  the  text  from  R.  Y.  1.  * • 
is  recited. 


VERSE  33.] 


WEITE  YAJURVEDA. 


65 


33  Slayer  of  Vritra,  mount  thy  car : thy  Bay  Steeds  have  been 

yoked  by  prayer.  , l- 

May,  with  its  voice,  the  pressing-stone  draw  thine  attention 

hitherward.  ^ r.,  i . 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  For  Indra  thee,  for  Shodasi. 
This  is  a dwelling-place  for  thee.  For  Indra  thee,  tor 

Shodasi.  « , , , , 

34  Harness  thy  pair  of  strong  Bay  Steeds,  long-maned,  whose 

bodies  fill  the  girths, 

And,  Indra,  Soma-drinker,  come  to  listen  to  our  songs  ol 


Taken  upon  a base,  etc.,  as  in  33. 

35  His  pair  of  tawny  Coursers  bring  Indra  of  unresisted  might 
Hither  to  Rishis’  songs  of  praise  and  sacufice  performed  by 

men. 

Taken  upon  a base,  etc.,  as  in  33. 

36  Than  whom  there  is  none  other  born  more  mighty,  who 

hath  pervaded  all  existing  creatures— 

Prajapati,  rejoicing  in  his  offspring,  he,  Shortasi,  maintains 
the  three  great  lustres. 

37  Indra  chief  Lord  and  Varuna  the  Sovran  have  made  this 

draught  of  thine  the  first  and  foremost. 

I,  after,  drink  their  draught.  .May  she,  the  Goddess  ct 
Speech,  rejoicing,  sate  herself  with  Soma— All-hail  '-with 
Prana  as  her  feast-companion. 

38  Skilled  in  thy  task,  0 Agui,  pour  lustre  and  hero  strength 

on  us, 

Granting  nie  wealth  and  affluence.  , . ,1 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  For  Agni  thee,  for  splendour. 

This  is  thy  home.  For  Agni  thee,  for  splendour 

Thou,  lustrous  Agni,  mid  the  Gods  art  splendid.  M y 
among  mankind  be  bright  with  lustre.  

33  FormuUs  ^r  ^ 

GfeDiu8  of  Vital  Breath.  T«filv«.DaT  CeremooUl,  of  which  the 

38  Formulas  for  the  Dvid^ha  or  Twelve-Day  Ur^^ 

PriaiithyMbadaha.a  penod  of  (Additional  or  Superiority 

three  days  of  thii  penod  the  three  y V Shrva.  TL*? 

!)up8)  are  drawn  with  appropriate  te^  or  > Y gg  21, 
iret  cup  i.  for  Agni,  with  the  test  in  Olyatrt  from  R.  V.  IX.  m. 

5 


Cl 

fn 


66 


THE  TEXTS  VF  THE 


IISUVA  YHl, 


Arising  in  thy  might  thy  jaws  thou  shookest,  Indra,  having 
drunk 

I’he  Soma  which  the  mortar  pressed. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  For  Indra  thee,  for  mighty 
strength. 

This  is  thy  home.  For  Indra  thee,  for  might. 

Among  the  Gods  thou  art  the  mightiest,  Indra.  Among 
mankind  I fain  would  be  most  mighty. 

40  His  herald  rays  are  seen  afar  refulgent  o'er  the  world  of 

men, 

Like  flames  of  fire  that  burn  and  blaze. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  For  Sflrya,  for  the  Bright  One, 
thee. 

This  is  thy  home.  For  Sdrya,  for  the  Bright  One,  thee. 
Thou  among  Gods  art  brightest,  brightest  Snrya.  Among 
mankind  I fain  would  be  the  brightest. 

41  His  herald  rays  bear  him  aloft,  the  God  who  knoweth  all 

that  lives,  Sflrya,  that  all  may  look  at  him. 

Taken  upon  a base,  etc.,  as  in  40. 

42  Smell  thou  the  vat.  Let  Soma  drops  pass  into  thee,  0 

Mighty  One. 

Keturn  again  with  store  of  sap.  Pour  for  us  wealth  in  thou- 
sands thou  with  full  broad  streams  and  floods  of  milk. 
Lot  riches  come  again  to  me. 

43  Idil,  delightful,  worshipful,  loveable,  splendid,  shining  One, 
Inviolable,  full  of  sap,  the  Mighty  One,  most  glorious, 

These  are  thy  names,  0 Cow ; tell  thou  the  Gods  that  I act 

righteously. 

39  The  second  Atigrdhya  U drawn  for  Indra  with  the  test  in  Gdyatrl 
from  R.  V.  VIII.  65. 10.  Shookest : in  delight. 

40  The  third  cup  is  drawn  for  SOrya  with  a GAyatrl  text  from  R.  V.  I 50. 3, 

41  A Gayatri  text  from  R.  V.  60. 1 to  accompany  the  drawing  of  an 
Atigrfthya  Cup  for  Sfirya  on  the  middle  day  of  the  great  twelve-months 
safnficial  Sattra  or  Session  called  Gavimayana  or  Procession  of  the  Cows. 
The  rest  of  the  formula  is  repeated  from  verse  40. 

42  Formulas  for  the  GargatriWitra,  a festival  of  three  diys,  in  which  a 
thousand  cOws  are  given  to  the  officiating  priests,  three  hundred  and  thirty- 
three  each  day.  The  full  number  of  a thousand  is  to  be  completed  with  a 
red  cow  who  is  led  ‘up  to  the  sacrificial  enclosure  and  statioued  between  the 
Havirdhaua  shed  and  the  Aguldhra  hearth  where  she  is  made  to  smell  the 
Dronakalasa  or  large  wooden  Soma  vat  or  reservoir.  0 Mighty  One : the  red 
cow  is  addressed. 

48  IM : one  of  the  cow’s  sacrificial  names  : see  III.  27 ; IV.  22,  /nvio- 
table : more  literally,  ‘unrestrained,  or  Aditi,’  another  name  of  the  cow  ; 
see  III.  27.  Full  of  tap : or  SarasvRtb  also  a name  of  the  cow. 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


67 


VERSE  49.] 


44  OIndra,beat  our  foes  away,  humble  the  men  who  challenge  us: 
Send  down  to  nether  darkness  him  who  seeks  to  do  us  injury. 
Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  For  Indra,  foe-dispeller,  thee. 
This  is  thy  home.  For  Indra,  foe-dispeller,  thee. 

45  Let  us  invoke  to-day,  to  aid  our  labour,  the  Lord  of  Speech, 

the  thought-swift  Visvakarman. 

May  he  hear  kindly  all  our  invocations,  who  gives  all  bliss 
for  aid,  whose  works  are  righteous. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  For  Indra  Visvakarman  thee. 
This  is  thy  home.  For  Indra  Visvakarman  thee. 

46  With  strengthening  libation,  Visvakarman,  thou  raadest 

Indra  an  undying  guardian. 

The  people  of  old  time  bowed  down  before  him  because  the 
Mighty  One  was  meet  for  worship. 

Taken  upon  a base,  etc.,  as  in  45. 

47  Taken  upon  a base  art  thou. 

I take  thee  lord  of  Gayatri  for  Agni.  For  Indra  take  I thee 
the  lord  of  Trishtup. 

I take  thee  lord  of  Jagati  for  All-Gods.  Anushtup  is  the 


song  that  sings  thy  praises. 

48  I stir  thee  for  the  fall  of  cloud-borne  waters.  I stir  thee  for 

the  fall  of  streams  that  gurgle.  I stir  thee  for  the  fall  of 
those  that  gladden.  I stir  thee  for  their  full  who  are  most 
lovely.  I stir  thee  for  their  fall  that  are  the  sweetest.  I 
stir  thee  for  the  waters’  fall,  I stir  thee,  pure  one,  in  the 
pure,  in  the  day’s  form,  in  Sdrya’s  beams. 

49  The  Bull's  majestic  form  is  shining  brightly,  the  pure  the 

pure’s  preceder,  Soma  Soma’s. 

Whatever  name  invincible,  stimulating,  is  thine,  U boma, 
for  that  name  I take  thee. 

AU-hail  to  Soma,  unto  thee,  0 Soma. 


‘“IK  Wvakarman,  theOmmfic  Udra,  oalledsUo  Vdeh- 

47  the  Oly.trl 

d"l«.  ThT “pn> 

waters  with  the  Soma  sprigs.  I stir  tn^.  00m  r 

49  The  Bull's  majestic  form ; the  Sun,  identified  with  Som 


tee  texts  op  the  [BOOS  VIJL 


50  0 radiant  Soma,  eagerly  draw  nigh  to  Agni’a  well-loved  food. 
0 radiant  Soma,  willingly  go  to  the  food  that  ludrn  loves 
Go,  radiant  Soma,  as  our  friend,  to  the  All-Gods  belovM  food. 

51  Here  is  delight:  enjoy  yourselves;  here  surety,  surety  of 

your  own.  All-hail ! , . n 

Loosing  the  suckling  to  his  dam,  the  suckling  as  he  milks 

his  dam—  , t,  -i  • 

May  he  maintain  the  growth  of  wealth  among  us.  All-hail . 

52  Thou  art  the  Session’s  happy  termination. 

We  have  attained  the  light  and  grown  immortal. 

We  have  gone  up  from  earth  to  sky,  have  found  the  Gods 
and  heaven  and  light. 

53  Indra  and  Parvata,  our  champions  in  the  fight,  drive  ye  away 

the  man  who  faih  would  war  with  us,  drive  him  far  from 

us  with  the  bolt.  , i • xi.  i.  u 

Welcome  to  him  concealed  afar  shall  be  the  lair  that  he 

hath  found. 

So  may  the  Render  rend  our  foes  on  every  side,  rend  them, 
0 Hero,  everywhere.  , . 

Earth!  Ether!  Sky!  May  we  be  rich  in  offspring,  rich  m 
bravo  sous  and  rich  in  food  to  feed  us. 

54  Pararaeshthin  when  contemplated.  Prajdpati  in  uttered 

speech. 

Food  when  approached.  Savitar  in  the  partition.  Visva- 
karraan  in  Consecration.  PAshan  in  the  Soma-purchasing 
cow. 


51  Formulas  for  the  SattrotthAna^or  Rising  up  from  the  Sacrificial 

Session.  Two  oblations  are  offered  in  the  SaUdvarya,  or  Sacrificial  H.i  I 
Poor  fire,  and  two  texts  are  recited.  Htre  w : the  cows  aie 

dressed.  Loosing  the  suckling:  he  offers  the  second  ©blation.  TJc  suckling  >s 
Agni  and  his  dam  is  the  Earth  whose  moisture  he  drams,  or  whose  produce 
in  the  shape  of  sacrificial  food  he  consumes.  He : Agni. 

52  TAom:  the  Soma  in  the  cup.  We  have  attained,  etc.:  cf.  R.  V.  VIII.  48.3, 

53  The  Sacrificers  creep  eastward  under  the  axle  of  the  ^outhern 
HavirdhAna  or  Soma  cart  with  the  text  from  R.  V.  1. 132.  6.  Parvata  / 
mountain  ; the  presiding  Genius  of  mountains  and  clouds,  frequently  asso- 
ciated with  Indra,  or,  according  to  SAyana,  another  form  of  that  God. 

54  This  and  the  four  following  verses  contain  thirty-four  formulas  for 
rectifying  and  expiating  any  neglect,  error  or  miBcbance  in  the  sacnficial 
performance.  If  the  cow  who  should  supply  milk  for  the  Gharma  or  Warm 
Libation  fails  to  give  any,  another  is  to  be  milked  and  thirty-four  oblanona 
of  butter  are  to  be  offered  on  her  right  tail-bone.  See  Sacred  Books  of  the 
East  XXVI.  411.  412.  The  sacrifice,  Soma,  is  identified  with  each  of  to® 
Peities  and  sacrcti  objects  whose  names  are  mentioned.  Parameshthm  • 
Supreme  Lord ; an  epithet  applied  to  various  Deities.  Soma-purchnsing-cow : 
see  IV.  19,  26. 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA. 


69 


VERSE  59.] 


55  As  Indra  and  the  Maruts  he  is  stationed  ready  for  the  sale  : 

Asura,  being  bought  and  sold.  Mitra  when  purchased ; 
Vishnu  Sipivishta  when  on  the  Sacrificer’s  thigh  he  resteth ; 
Vishnu  Narandhisha  brought  on  the  barrow ; 

56  Soma  when  come  : when  seated  on  the  platform,  Varuin; 

Agui  in  the  sacred  fire-place ; 

Indra  upon  the  sacrificial  barrow;  Atharvan  when  deposited 
for  pounding ; 

57  All-Gods  when  offered  in  the  scattered  fragments ; Vishnu, 

the  guard  of  those  who  soothe  his  anger,  when  he  is  filled 
and  swelling  in  the  waters;  Yama  in  pressing;  Vishnu 

in  collection ; ■ i ■ v 

Vayu  what  time  they  cleanse  and  purify  him ; the  bright 
when  cleansed;  the  Bright  with  milk  about  him;  Man- 
thin  commingled  with  the  meal  of  barley  ; 

58  All-Gods  when  he  is  drawn  away  in  beakers;  Life  when  up- 

lifted for  the  fire-oblation;  Kudra  when  offered;  Vata 
when  reverted ; Man-viewer  when  beheld ; drink  when 
they  drink  him;  deposited,  the  Narfisanisa  Fathers; 

59  Sindhu  when  ready  for  the  bath  that  cleanses ; the  sea 

when  he  is  carried  to  the  waters;  Water  is  he  when  he  is 

ulunged  beneath  it.  . 

To  those  most  mighty  hath  it  gone,  most  manly  in  vigoiu, 
by  whose  strength  the  worlds  were  stablishcd. 

Who  rule  as  Lords  resistless  in  their  grandeur,  Vishnu  and 
Varuna,  at  the  prayer  of  morning. 


55  Atura:Lord;  Divine  Beiog.  f 

fttymology  and  meaning.  ‘ Invested  with  rays  of  light,  according  to  y ^ 
siTheHymnsofthe  Rigveda,VlI.  100.  G,  no^ 

IV.  27,  note.  Narandhisha  : variously  explained  by  Mahidbara  as 
destrovinc  ’ ‘ not  iniuriug  men,’  and,  in  XXII.  20,  as  ‘ man-prai.mg.  Accord  ^ 
lag  to^tbe  St.  Peteriburl  Lexicon  the  meaning  is  probably  mau-ubserung. 

56  Athaivan:  an  ancient  priest,  the  first  who  obtained  fire  and  instituted 

the  worship  of  Agni.  ' , , . n-u  i ^ 

57  Fragments the  severed  stalks  or  filaments  of  the  plant.  Pilk  an  > 

nxlliiw  M«V  7 note.  hcoUectien:  when  he  is  being  procured  and  pro- 

ITredlr  ea^rfficl’  mBriglU.-  8«kr^  See  VII.  13.  llantkrn:  mi  to  mean 
the  Moon.  See  VII.  16.  . , * 

58  Vdta—Y\yn  the  Wind-God.  Reverted:  earned  away,  for  partition 

to  the  pKthed.  Wrd,a^.«  ■ •» 

Soma  libations  at  which  the  nameot  Agni  NarSeamea,  or  1 raise  ot  aicn, 
is  mentioned.  , , 

59  Sindhu:  the  Indus,  or,  River  Water  is  now  bo  » 7^ 

Soma  that  h«  been  spilt  during  the 

tuxt  taken,  with  variation,  from  A.  V.  Vll.  i,  nw  j 
portion  of  Soma. 


warm  iajukyeua. 


[hUUK  VIII. 


# V 

60  To  Gods,  to  sky  the  sacrifice  hath  gone : come  riches  thence 

to  me ! 

To  men,  to  air  the  sacrifice  hath  gone  : come  riches  thence 
to  me ! 

To  Fathers,  earth,  the  sacrifice  hath  gone : come  riches 
thenpe  to  me ! 

Whatever  sphere  the  sacrifice  hath  reached,  may  wealth 
come  thence  to  me. 

61  The  threads  that  have  been  spun,  the  four-and -thirty,  which 

stablish  this  our  sacrifice  with  Svadhfi, 

Of  these  I join  together  what  is  broken.  All-hail ! to  Gods 
go  the  warm  milk  oblation ! 

62  Spread  far  and  wide  is  sacrifice’s  milking : eightfold  along 

the  heaven  hath  it  extended. 

Pour,  Sacrifice ! in  plenty  on  mine  offspring : may  I obtain 
prosperity  for  ever.  All-hail  1 

63  Soma,  send  wealth  in  gold  and  steeds  and  heroes.  All-hail ! 

bring  hitherward  booty  in  cattle. 

61  The  threads:  the  aaarificial  formulas  which  have  now  come  to  an  end. 
See  v^rse  64.  With  Svadhd : with  the  appropriate  oblation. 

62  The  Sacrificer  recites  the  text.  Eightfold:  directed  to  the  quarters  of 
the  sky  and  the  intermediate  points. 

63  He  touches  the  spilt  Soma  as  he  recites  the  text. 


BOOK  THE  NINTH. 


OuB  sacrifice,  God  Savitar,  speed  onward : speed  to  his  share 
the  sacrifice’s  patron. 

May  the  celestial  Gaiidharva,  cleanser  of  thought  and  will, 
make  clean  our  thought  and  purpose  : the  Lord  of  Speech 
sweeten  the  food  we  offer. 


2 Thee,  firmly  set,  settled  in  man,  in  spirit. 

Taken  U[)OU  a base  art  thou.  I take  thee,  draught  acceptable 
to  Indra.  This  is  thy  home.  I’liee,  wclcomest  to  Indra. 
Thee  set  in  waters,  butter,  realm  of  ether.  Taken  upoti 
Indra. 

Thee  seated  in  the  sky,  earth,  air’s  mid-region,  among  the 
Gods  and  in  the  vault  of  heaven.  Taken,  etc.  as  above. 


3 The  strength-arousing  essence  of  the  waters,  gathered  m 

the  Sun,  Essence  of  waters’  essence,  that,  most  eseellcut, 
I take  for  you. 

Taken,  etc.,  as  above. 

4 Cups  of  strength-giving  sacrifice,  inspirers  of  the  sngo’s 

hymn — 

Of  you,  the  haudleless,  have  I collected  all  the  sap  and 
strength. 

Taken,  etc.,  as  above. 

United  are  ye  twain  : with  bliss  unite  me.  Parted  are  yo  : 
keep  me  apart  from  evil. 


Books  IX  andX.  contain  the  formulas  reqiiiio(Hor  the  perform  meo  «L 
two  important  modifications  of  the  Soma  sacrifice,  the  Viijapcya,  Dr.uijjlit 
of  Strength  or  Cup  of  Victory,  and  the  Hdjasuya,  Inauguration  or  (JmsecM- 
tiou  of  a King.  For  the  V.ljapeya,  see  Sacred  Books  of  the  Last,  X LI  p|; 
1—40;  Hillebraadt,  Ritual-Litteratur,  pp.  141— 143;  Weber,  Lber  den 
Vfljapeya  (Sitzuugsberichte  der  K.  Preuwischeu  Akademie  der  Wiskpih- 

chaften,  pp  765—813).  i.  /r  ? ,•,/ 

1 The  Sacrificer  offers  an  oblation  of  butter  and  recites  the  text.  UfestmC 

Oatidharva : the  God  in  the  form  of  the  Sun’s  disc,  according  to  Mahldtura. 
Lord  of  Speech:  Prajdpati.  The  food:  vdjam.  r t i r/  . 

2 Thee:  the  first  of  the  five  VAjapeya  Cups  which  he  draws  for  Indra.  J 
»et  in  waters : be  draws  the  second  cup.  The  rest  of  the  formula  is  repeated 
from  lines  2 and  3.  In  the  sky,  etc. : he  draws  the  third  cup.  The  rest 
as  in  lines  2 and  3.  Soma  is  considered  as  pervading  the  three  worlds, 

Earth,  Air,  and  Sky.  . ... 

3 He  draws  the  fourth  cup.  Gathered  in  the  Sun : meaning  the  P”rityint, 
Viiyii  or  Wind.  Tftat  most  excellent:  meaning  Piaj^pati.  Lor  you  : y lioos. 

The  rest  of  the  formula  is  repeated  as  above.  * n 

4 He  draws  the  fifth  cup.  Handkless : or  noseless,  or  jawless ; wthoub 
spouts  or  side-handles.  Ye  twain:  a cup  of  Sor^  and  another  of  Sur.^,  a 
kind  of  wine  or  beer  made  from  rice  or  barW  ^**^1'  a smd  of  leaven  to  make 
it  ferment.  See  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Leben,  p.  280. 


ri  TUE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  IX 

5 Thou  art  the  thunderbolt  of  Indra,  winner  of  wealth  : with 

thee  may  this  man  win  him  riches. 

In  gain  of  wealth  we  celebrate  with  praises  her,  Aditi  b} 
name,  the  Mighty  Mother, 

On  whom  this  Universe  of  life  hath  settled.  Thereon  God 
Savitar  promote  our  dwelling ! 

6 Amrit  is  in  the  Waters,  in  the  Waters  healing  medicine 

Yea,  Horses!  at  our  praises  of  the  Waters  grow  \e  fleet 
and  strong. 

Whatever  wave,  0 ye  celestial  Waters,  wealth-giving 
towering  high,  and  swiftly  rushing,  is  yours,  therewith 
may  this  man  win  him  riches. 

7 It  was  the  wind,  or  it  w^as  thought,  or  the  Gandharvas 

twenty-seven — 

These  at  the  fiist  harnessed  the  horse  : they  set  the  power 
of  speed  m him. 

8 Steed,  being  yoked  grow  wind-swift : be  beauteous  as  Indra’s 

right-hand  steed. 

Omnisoient  Maruts  harness  thee  I Tvasbtar  put  swiftness  in 
thy  feet  1 

9 What  speed,  0 Horse,  was  laid  in  thee  in  secret,  what 

passed  in  wind,  bestowed  upon  the  falcon. 

With  that  same  strength  be  strong  for  us,  0 Courser, 
wealth-wiuumg  aud  victorious  in  battle. 

Starting  to  run  your  course,  winners  of  riches,  smell  ye 
Brihaspati’s  portion,  0 ye  Horses. 

10  By  inipulse  of  God  Savitar,  true  Impeller,  may  I ascend 

Brihaspati’s  highest  heaven. 


5 Here  begin  the  formulas  for  the  chariot-racing  which  id  a characteri^tu 
and  important  part  of  the  Vdjapeya.  The  Sacrificer  addressees  the  Chariot 
which  he  takes  down  from  its  «tand,  draws  to  the  south  of  the  CbatviJa  or 
pit,  aud  places  by  the  altar  On  whom  : as  Earth. 

6 He  takes  water  and  8prinkl*-s  the  chariot  horses,  reciting  the  text  from 
A V.  I 4,  4.,  the  first  line  of  which  is  taken  from  R.  V,  I 23  19.  Amrit 
uectar  or  ambrosia 

7 He  harnesses  the  «ff  horse  with  the  text.  Wind  . , . thought  as  ein 
blems  of  rapidity.  Gandharvas : see  II.  3.  note  ; here  representing  the 
Nakshatras,  Lunar  Mansious  or  stages  through  which  the  Moon  passes,  and 
signifying  the  flight  of  time. 

8 He  yokes  the  near  horse  Omniscient : or,  All-possessing 

9 He  yokes  a third  horse  as  off  side-horse  In  secret:  m the  region  of 
thy  heart.  In  battle  : or,  at  the  gatheiing  (of  the  Gods  at  sacrifice),  accord 
ing  to  the  Satapatha-Brtbmane.  Brihaspati's  portion:  a mess  of  boiled 
wild-rice,  dedicated  to  Brihaspati  the  representative  of  the  priesthood.  The 
horses  are  made  to  smell  it  in  order  to  assure  their  victory. 

10  The  Brahman  mounts  a chariot-wheel  placed  on  a post,  with  the  fol- 
lowing line  of  text  if  the  Sacrificer  is  a Brahman.  Indra:  as  the  repreaen- 


VERSE  U ] 


WniTE  YAJVRVEDA 


By  impulse  of  God  Savitar,  true  Impeller,  may  I ascend 
the  highest  heaven  of  Indra. 

By  impulse  of  God  Savitar,  true  Impeller,  Brihaspati’s 
highest  heaven  have  I ascended. 

By  impulse  of  God  Savitar,  true  Impeller,  I have  ascended 
Indra’s  loftiest  heaven, 

1 1 Brihaspati,  win  the  prize.  Lift  up  your  voices  to  Brihaspati. 

Make  ye  Brihaspati  win  the  prize. 

Do  thou,  0 Indra,  win  the  prize.  To  Indra  lift  your  voices 
up.  Miike  Indra  winner  of  the  prize. 

12  True  hath  been  this  your  league  whereby  ye  made  BnhawS- 

])ati  win  the  prize. 

Brihaspati  have  ye  caused  to  win  the  prize.  Bo  freed,  ye 
Forest-lords. 

Faithful  was  this  your  league  whereby  yc  have  made  Indra 
win  the  prize. 

Ye  have  made  Indra  win  the  prize.  Be  ye  set  free,  ye 
Forest-lords. 

13  Through  impulse  of  God  Savitar,  true  Impeller,  mine  be 

Brihaspati’s  prize  who  winneth  prizes. 

On  to  the  goal,  ye  Steeds,  winners  of  prizes,  blocking  the 
ways  and  meting  out  the  courses ! 

14  Bound  by  the  neck  and  at  the  flanks  and  in  the  mouth, 

that  vigorous  Courser  leads  new  swiftness  to  his  8[)eed. 

titive  of  the  Kahatra  or  nobility  ; this  part  of  the  text  being  used  wlion 
the  Sacnticer  is  a Uajanya,  a man  of  the  princely,  noble,  or  military  cLibs. 
The  third  line  also  is  to  be  used  when  the  Brahman  descends  from  the  wheel, 
if  the  Sacrificer  be  a BrSbmao  and  the  fourth  when  he  is  a Hflj.inya. 

Seventeen  being  the  number  sacred  to  Prajapati,  whose  favour  is  to  be 
Won  in  the  ceremony,  seventeen  four-horse  ebariote  have  been  prepared  and 
as.sembled,  the  goal  round  which  they  have  to  turn  being  the  branch  of  an 
Udumbara  tree  (Ficus  Glomerata)  planted  in  the  ground  at  a distance  or 
seventeen  bowshots  from  the  starting-place. 

1 1 The  Brahman  beats  one  of  the  seventeen  drums  ranged  along  the 

edge  of  the  altar  ground,  and  recites  the  text,  the  rest  of  the  drums  being 
considered  to  be  simultaneously  beaten.  Brihaspati:  this,  if  the  Sacrificer 
is  a Brahman.  Lift  up : 0 Drums.  0 Indra  • this,  if  the  Sacrificer  is  a 
lUjanya  ... 

12  After  the  racing  he  takes  down,  with  the  text,  the  drum  that  has  wen 

beaten,  and  the  others  in  silence.  Your  league  ' the  union  of  your  voices. 
Brihaspati  . . . Indra:  as  in  verse  11.  Forest-lords:  trees,  the  drums 
made  chiefly  of  wood.  , o -c 

13  This  refers  to  an  earlier  stage  of  the  proceedings  when  the  Sacrihcer 
mounts  the  chariot. 

14  The  Adhvaryu  makes  an  offering  of  butter,  or  addresses  the  running 
horses  with  two  verses  taken  respectively  from  E,  V.  IV,  40.  4,  3.  Dadhikrds, 
or  in  the  crude  form,  Dadhikri  . a kind  of  divine  horse,  probably  a perso- 
niflcatioo  of  the  morning  Sun.  The  word  appears  to  be  an  apocopated  form 
of  Dadhikravan  in  the  following  verse,  with  which  it  is  interchangeable. 


74 


TU£  TEKTiS  OE  THE 


[BOOK  IX. 


Drawing  himself  together  as  his  strength  allows,  Dadhikras 
speeds  along  the  windings  of  the  paths.  All-hail  I 

15  His  pinion,  rapid  runner,  fans  him  on  his  way,  as  of  a bird 

that  hastens  onward  to  its  aim, 

And,  as  it  were  a falcon's  gliding  through  the  air,  strikes 
Dadhihr^vau's  side  as  he  speeds  on  with  might.  All-hail ! 

16  Bless  us  the  Coursers  when  we  call,  while  slowly  they  move, 

strong  singers,  to  the  Gods’  assembly. 

Crushing  the  wolf,  the  serpent,  and  the  demons,  may  they 
completely  banish  all  affliction.  All-hail ! 

17  May  all  those  vigorous  Coursers  listen  to  our  cry,  hearers 

of  invocation,  speeders  on  their  way  ; 

Winners  of  thousands,  fain  to  win  where  meed  is  won,  who 
gather  of  themselves  great  wealth  in  every  race. 

18  Deep-skilled  in  Law  Eternal,  wise,  immortal,  0 Coursers, 

help  us  in  each  fray  for  booty. 

Drink  of  this  meath,  be  satisfied,  be  joyful:  then  go  ou 
paths  which  Gods  are  wont  to  travel. 

19  To  me  come  plenteous  growth  of  wealth  I Approach  me 

these,  Heaven  and  Earth,  who  wear  each  form  and  figure ! 
Hither  may  Father  come  to  me,  and  Mother.  Soma  with 
immortality  approach  me  1 

20  To  the  Friend,  Hail ! To  the  Good  Friend,  Hail ! To  the 

Later-born,  Hail ! To  Resolution,  Hail ! To  the  Vasu,  Hail ! 
To  the  Lord  of  Days,  Hail ! To  tiie  Failing  Day,  Hail ! 
To  the  Failing  sprung  from  the  Transitory,  Hail ! To  the 
Transitory  sprung  from  the  Final,  Hail ! To  the  Final 
Mundane,  Hail ! To  the  Lord  of  the  World,  Hail ! To  the 
Sovran  Lord,  Hail ! 


16  He  addresses  the  horses  with  the  text  from  R.  V.  VII.  38.  7.  Strong 
fingers:  or,  perhaps,  high-mettled. 

17  He  addresses  them  again  with  the  text  from  R.  V.  X.  64.  6.  Meed:  the 
priestly  fee. 

18  He  addresses  them  a third^  time  with  the  text  from  R.  V.  VII., 38  8 
This  meath : a mess  made  of  wild-rice  which  the  horses  are  made  to  smell 
before  the  race  and  to  drink  after  it.  See  verse  9. 

19  The  Sacrificer  having  dismounted  from  the  chariot  touches  the  mess  of 
wild-rice  and  recites  the  text.  Father:  Heaven.  Mother:  Earth;  or  per- 
haps the  Sacrifioer’s  parents  are  intended. 

20  The  Adhvaryu  makes  twelve  oblations  with  the  dipping  -spoon,  or 
makes  the  Sacrificer  recite  the  following  twelve  formulas,  one  for  each 
month,  addressed  to  PrajHpaH  as  the  Presiding  Genius  of  the  Year.  The 
Friend:  perhaps  the  first  month  after  the  winter  solstice  when  the  weather 
becomes  milder.  The  Lord  of  Days : the  month  containing  the  longest  day. 
The  meaning  of  some  of  these  fanciful  expressious  is  obscure,  and  th«*ir 
applicability  to  the  respective  months  is  not  apparent.  Cf.  XVIil.  28 ; 
XXII.  32. 


VERSE  26.] 


WHITE  YA^URVEDA. 


75 


21  May  life  succeed  through  sacrifice.  May  life-breath  thrive 

by  sacrifice.  May  the  eye  thrive  by  sacrifice.  May  the 
ear  thrive  by  sacrifice.  May  the  back  thrive  by  sacrifice. 
May  sacrifice  thrive  by  sacrifice. 

We  have  become  the  children  of  Prajapati.  Gods,  wo  have 
gone  to  heaven.  We  have  become  immortal. 

22  In  us  bo  your  great  might  and  manly  vigour,  in  us  be  your 

intelligence  and  splendour. 

Obeisance  to  our  Mother  Earth ! Obeisance  to  our  Mother 
Earth ! 

This  is  thy  Sovranty.  Thou  art  the  ruler,  thou  art  control- 
ler, thou  art  firm  and  stedfast. 

Thee  for  land-culture,  thee  for  peace  aflid  quiet,  thee  for 
wealth,  thee  for  increase  of  our  substance. 

23  Of  old  the  furtherance  of  strength  urged  onward  this  Sovran 

Soma  in  the  plants  and  waters. 

For  us  may  they  be  stored  with  honey : stationed  in  front 
may  we  be  watchful  in  the  kingdom.  All-hail ! 

24  The  furtherance  of  strength  extended  over  this  heaven  and 

all  the  worlds  as  sovran  ruler. 

He,  knowing,  makes  the  churl  a bounteous  giver:  wealth 
may  he  grant  us  with  full  store  of  heroes.  All-hail ! 

25  Surely  the  furtherance  of  strength  pervaded  all  these  exist- 

ing worlds  in  all  directions. 

From  olden  time  the  King  moves  round,  well  knowing, 
strengthening  all  the  people  and  our  welfare. 

26  As  suppliants,  for  aid  we  grasp  Soma  the  King,  and  Agni,  the 
Adityas,  Vishnu,  Sflrya,  and  the  Brahman-priest  Brihaspati. 

21  He  offers  six  oblations,  or  makes  the  Sacrificer  recites  the  followiag 
six  formulas,  one  for  each,  season,  belonging  to  Prajftpati  as  Lord  of  the 
Year.  Sacrifice:  meaning  the  Vftjapeya  now  in  course  of  performance. 
The  hack:  or,  possibly,  a special  arrangement  of  SAmans  called  Prishtha. 
We  have  gone  to  heaven : or,  to  light ; here  the  Sacrificer,  mounting  by  a 
ladder,  touches  the  dough  cap  or  head-piece  of  the  sacrificial  stake.  Become 
immoftal:  he  mounts  higher  till  his  head  is  above  the  top  of  the  stake. 

22  He  looks  towu-ds  the  four  q^urters  of  the  sky  and  the  intermediate 
points,  and  addresses  the  text  to  them  or  to  their  presiding  deities.  Ohek- 
ance:  here  he  looks  on  the  ground.  Thy  Sovranty:  he  points  to  a seat  of 
Udumbara  wood,  on  which  he  spreads  a goat-skiu.  Thou : addressed  to  the 
Sacrificer  whom  he  seats  on  the  Asandi  or  throne.  Thee: ' I seat  ’ understood. 

23  He  offers  oblations  of  milk,  rice  and  other  grain  collected  in  a vessel 
of  Udumbara  wood,  and  recites  seven  texts.  These  offerings  are  called 
Vijaprasavanfya,  Strength-Furthering,  the  first  three  texts  beginning  with 
Vfija^  „ . . ;pra«awi^,  the  furtherance  of  strength.  Of  old : in  the  be- 
ginning  of  creation.  The  churl : literally,  ‘ him  who  is  unwilling  to  give.’ 

26  Taken  with  a variation  from  R.  V.  X.  141.  3. 


76 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  IX 


27  Urge  Aryamau  to  seud  us  gifts,  and  Indra,  and  Brihaspati, 
Vak,  Vishnu,  and  Samsvati,  and  the  strong  Courser  Savitar. 

28  Agui,  speak  kindly  to  us  here,  be  graciously  inclined  to  us. 
Winner  of  thousands,  grant  us  boons,  for  thou  art  he  who 

giveth  wealth. 

29  Let  Aryaman  vouchsafe  us  wealth,  and  Pdshan,  and  Brihas- 

pati. 

May  Vak  the  Goddess  give  to  us.  All-hail ! 

30  Thee  by  the  radiant  Savitar’s  impulsion,  with  arms  of 

Asvins,  with  the  hands  of  Pushan. 

To  Vak  Sarasvati’s  controlling  guidance,  hers  the  controlling 
leader,  I consign  thee. 

1 with  Brihaspati’s  supreme  dominion  endow  thee  by  the 
balm  of  consecration. 

31  With  the  monosyllable  Agni  won  vital  breath : may  I win 

that.  With  the  dissyllable  the  Asvins  won  bipeds ; may 
I win  those.  With  the  trisyllable 
Vishnu  won  the  three  worlds:  may  I win  those.  With 
(piadrisyllabic  metre 

Soma  won  four-footed  cattle  : may  I win  those. 

32  With  five-syllable  metre  PAshan  won  the  five  regions  : may 

T win  them. 

With  six-syllable  metre  Savitar  won  the  six  seasons  : may 
I win  them. 

With  seven-syllable  metre  the  Maruts  won  the  seven  domes- 
tic animals : 

May  I win  them.  With  octosyllabic  metre  Brihaspati  woo 
the  G&yatri : may  I win  that. 

33  With  nine-syllable  metre  Mitra  won  the  Trivrit  Stoma: 

may  I win  that.  With  decasyllabic  metre  Varuna  won 
Viraj : may  I win  that 

27  Taken  from  R.  V X.  141.  5,  VAk,  the  Goddess  of  Speech,  being  sub- 
stituted for  Vata  the  Wind-God. 

28  Taken  with  a slight  variation  from  R V.  X.  141. 1.  i 

29  The  first  line  is  Uken  from  R.  V.  X.  141.  2,  Piishan  being  substituted 
for  Bhaga  the  Distributor  of  food  or  wealth. 

30  Thet:  * I besprinkle’  understood.  The  priest  sprinkles  the  Sacrificer 
with  the  remainder  of  the  sacrificial  elements,  I endow  thee : addressing 
him  by  his  name. 

31  He  offers  oblations,  or  makes  the  Sacrificer  recite  the  Ujjitis  or  Victory. 
Formulas.  MonotyllabU:  metre  of  one  (^liable.  Six  Seaeom:  Spring, 
Summer,  Rains,  Aul^umn,  Winter,  Dews.  See  II.  82. 

32  Seven  domestic  animals:  ox,  horse,  sheep,  goat,  mule,  ass,  man.  See 
The  Hymns  of  the  Atharva-veda,  II.  84, 1,  note ; III.  10.  6 and  note. 

38  Trivrit  Stoma : Triple  Praise-Song ; a recitation  in  which  first  the  firet 
three  verses  of  each  triplet  of  R.  V.  IX.  11  are  sung  together,  then  tho 
second  verses,  and  lastly  the  third. 


VERSE  37.1 


WFITE  YAJUEVEDA 


77 


With  hendecasyllabic  metre  Indra  won  Irish  tup : may  I 
win  that. 

With  dodecasyllabic  metre  the  All-Goda  won  Jagati : may 
I win  that. 

84  The  VasuB  by  thirteen-syllable  metre  won  the  Thirteenfold 
Stoma:  may  I win  that.  The  Riidrasby  fourteen-syllable 
metre  won  the  fourteenfold  Stoma : may  I win  that.  The 
Adityas  with  fifteen-syllable  metre  won  the  Fifteenfold 
Stoma  : may  I win  that.  Aditi  with  sixteen-syllable  metre 
won  the  Sixteenfold  Stoma : may  I win  that.  Prajapati 
with  seventeenfold  metre  won  the  Seventeenfold  Stoma  : 
may  I win  that. 

35  This  is  thy  portion,  Nirriti ! Accept  it  graciously.  All-liail » 

To  Gods  whose  guide  is  Agni,  to  the  eastward-seated  Gods, 

All-bail ! 

To  Gods  whose  guide  is  Yama,  to  the  southward-seated 
Gods,  All-hail ! 

To  Gods  whose  guides  are  the  All-Gods,  those  who  are  seated 
westward,  Hail ! 

Hail  to  the  northward-seated  Gods,  to  those  whoso  guides 
are  Mitra  and  Vanina  or  the  Marut  host  • 

To  Gods  whose  guide  is  Soma,  who,  worshipful,  sit  on  high, 
All-hail ! 

36  Gods  who  have  Agni  as  their  guide,  whose  seat  is  eastward, 

Hail  to  them ! 

Gods  who  have  Yama  as  their  guide,  whose  seat  is  southward, 
Hail  to  them  ! 

Gods  who  have  All-Gods  as  their  guides,  whose  seat  is  west- 
ward, Hail  to  them  ! 

Gods  who  have  Mitra-Varuna  for  guides,  north-seated,  Had 
to  them ! 

Gods  who  have  Soma  as  their  guide,  high-seated,  worshipful, 
Hail  to  them ! 

37  Agni,  subdue  opposing  bands  and  drive  our  enemies  awaj'. 

Invincible,  slay  godless  foes : give  splendour  to  the  worshipper. 


35  Here  begin  the  formulas  for  the  Rftjasuya  or  King's  Inauguration, 
die  Ceremony  in  verse  30  being  merely  an  entr'acte.  A rice-cake  la  prepared 
for  Anumati  or  Divine  Favour  ; then  the  Sacrificer  takes  a firebrand,  R 
towards  the  south,  and  having  made  up  a fire  in  a natural  cleft  in  tlie 
ground,  or  on  barren  land,  offers  to  JJirriti,  or  Earth  in  her  lowest  depthn, 
taess  of  meal.  He  offers  in  five  fires,  or  in  five  parts  of  the  fire,  to 
the  five  classes  of  Gods  mentioned,  with  an  address  to  each  class. 

37  He  then  offers  the  ApAm<arga  oblation,  an  exorcising  ceremony  j^er- 
formed  with  aeeds  of  the  AplmArga  plant  (Achyranthus  Aspera : see  The 
dymns  of  the  A.  V.  I'V.  17. 6),  having  taken  a firebrand  from  the  southern 
Ire,  and  reciting  the  text  from  11.  V.  III.  24.  1. 


78  WHITE  YAJURYEDA.  [BOOK  IX. 

38  Thee  at  the  radiant  Savitar’s  impulsion,  with  Asvina’  arms 

and  with  the  hands  of  Phshan, 

I offer  with  the  strength  of  the  Upamsu.  Slain  is  the  demon 
brood.  All-hail ! 

Thee  for  the  slaughter  of  the  brood  of  demons.  The  demons 
have  we  slain,  have  slain.  So-and-So,  So-and-So  is  slain. 

39  Savitar  quicken  thee  for  sway  of  rulers,  Agni  of  householders, 

of  the  trees  Soma, 

Brihaspati  of  Speech,  for  lordship  Indra,  Rudra  for  cattle, 
Mitra  for  true-speaking,  Varuna  for  the  sway  of  Law’s 
protectors. 

40  Gods,  quicken  him  that  none  may  be  his  rival,  for  mighty 

domination,  mighty  lordship, 

Him,  son  of  Such-a-man  and  Such-a-woman,  of  Such-a-tribe. 
This  is  your  King,  ye  Tribesmen.  Soma  is  Lord  and  King 
of  us  the  Brahmans. 


38  He  puts  the  fire  together  and  offers  an  oblation  of  Apdmarga  seeds. 
Updmsu : the  Soma  libation  so  named.  See  VI.  30.  Thte  for  the  slaughter 
with’these  words  he  throws  the  dipping-spoon  towards  the  place  where  he 
offers  oblation.  So-and-So:  in  the  performance  of  the  ceremony  the  name 
of  the  enemy  whom  the  Sacrificer  wishes  to  destroy  is  to  be  substituted  for 
the  asau  (iste)  of  the  text.  Cf.  VII.  3. 

39  Oblations  are  prepared  for  the  eight  Devashs,  Quickening  or  Further- 
ing Gods,  and  the  Adhvaryu  recites  the  formulas  holding  the  Sacrificer  by 
the  right  arm,  and  proplaiming  his  name  and  parentage.  Rulers : or  ‘orders, 
according  to  Mahidhara ; savdndm,  from  su  ‘ to  impel/  the  root  of  Savitar, 
Impeller.  Householders:  Qrihapati,  Lord  of  the  Household,  being  a little 
of  Agni.  Trees : Soma  being  called  Vanaspati,  Tree  or  Plant  par  excellence. 
Speech : Brihaspati  being  Lord  of  Speech,  i.  e.  Prayer.  Lordship : or  pre- 
eminence, ’ Indra  representing  royalty  and  being  King  of  Gods. 

Kudra  being  Pasupati,  Lord  of  Beasts  or  Cattle.  True-speaking : Mitra,  ^ 
the  Sun,  being  called  the  Truthful  (Solem  quis  dicere  falsum  Audeat*)- 
Law's : Varuna  being  the  Moral  Governor  of  the  world. 

40  Him : he  pronounces  the  name  of  the  Sacrificer.  Snch-a-man,  etc. 
he  declares  the  names  of  the  Sacrificer’s  parents.  Me or  people.  Tnbes 
men . or,  people  : here  the  name  of  the  tribe  or  people,  e.  g.  Ye  Kurus,  oi 
Pafich&lae,  or  Bharatas,  as  the  case  may  be,  is  to  be  substituted  m the  per 
formance  of  the  ceremony. 


BOOK  THE  TENTH. 


The  Gods  drew  waters  with  their  store  of  sweeuieas,  ouccn- 
lent  and  observant,  king-creating, 

Wherewith  they  sprinkled  Vanina  and  Mitra,  wherewith 
they  guided  Indra  past  his  foemem 

2 Wave  of  the  male  art  thou,  giver  of  kingship.  Do  thou — 

All-hail  ! — b?stow  on  me  the  kingdom. 

Wave  of  the  male  art  thou,  giver  of  kingship.  Do  thou  on 
So-and  So  bestow  the  kingdom. 

Thou  hast  a host  of  males,  giver  of  kingship.  Do  thou — 
i\ll-hail !— bestow  on  me  the  kingdom. 

A host  of  males  hast  thou,  giver  of  kingship.  Do  thou  on 
So-aud-So  bestow  the  kingdom. 

3 Swift  at  your  work  are  ye,  givers  of  kingship.  Do  ye— All- 

hail !— bestow  on  me  the  kingdom. 

Swift  at  your  work  are  ye,  givers  of  kingship.  Do  ye  on 
So-and  So  bestow  the  kingdom.  ^ 

Endowed  with  strength  are  ye,  givers  of  kingship,  etc. 

O'ei’flowing  floods  are  ye,  etc. 

The  Waters’  Lord  art  thou,  giver  of  kingship.  Do  thou,  etc. 

The  Waters’  Cliild  art  thou,  etc. 

The  R&jaaaya  Ceremony  is  continued,  with  formulas  for  the  collection 
and  mixing  of  waters  from  different  streams  and  sources  for  the  Abhishoka, 
Aspersion  or  Consecration  of  a King.  For  fuller  details  of  th«  Sacrifice,  see 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  XLI.  pp.  73  seq  ; Weber,  Gber  den  KajosUya  ; 
fiillebrandt,  Ritual-Litteratur,  pp.  143—147. 

1 The  Adhvaryu  first  takes  water  brought  from  the  Sarasvatl,  the  sacred 

river  of  the  earlier  Hindus,  and  recites  the  text.  Varuna  and  Mitra:  pre- 
decessors, as  Kings,  of  Indra.  * 

2 Of  the  male : raised  by  a male  animal,  beast  or  man.  He  steps  into  the 
Water,  and  takes  the  ripple  that  rises  in  front  of  him.  On  me:  to  be  trans- 
ferred to  the  Sacrificer.  So-and-So : the  Sacrificer  who  is  to  be  consecrated 
King,  and  whose  name  he  mentions.  Uoet  of  malez:  the  lipplea  are  likened 
to  an  opposing  band  of  armed  men.  With  this  formula  he  takes  up  the 
wavelet  that  rises  behind  him. 

3 Stanzas  1 and  2 are  formulas  for  taking  water  from  a tank  or  pool— 
that  in  stanza  1 being  mixed  with  Sarasvatf  water ; he  now  takes  water 
from  a stream.  So-atm-So : as  in  verse  2.  Endowed  with  ttrengtk : which^  is 
to  be  conferred  upon  the  Sacrificer.  He  takes  water  that  runs  iu  the  opposite 
direction  O'erfiowing : signifying  abundant  wealth.  He  takM  water  that 
escapes  from  its  channel.  Waters'  Lord:  he  takes  water  that  has  been 
brought  from  the  sea.  Wattvs'  child ; he  takes  water  from  an  eddy. 


80 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  X 


4 With  sun-bright  skins  are  ye,  givers,  etc. 

Brilliant  as  Suns  are  ye,  etc. 

Bringers  of  joy  are  ye,  etc. 

Dwellers  in  cloud  are  ye,  etc. 

Desirable  are  ye,  etc. 

Most  powerful  are  ye,  etc. 

Endowed  with  might  are  ye,  etc. 

Man-nourishing  are  ye,  etc. 

All-nourishing  are  ye,  etc. 

Self-ruling  Waters  are  ye,  giving  kingship.  On  So-and-So 
do  ye  bestow  the  kingdom. 

Together  with  the  sweet  let  sweet  ones  mingle,  obtaining 
for  the  Kshatriya  mighty  power. 

Rest  m your  place  inviolate  and  potent,  bestowing  on  the 
Kshatriya  mighty  power. 

5 Brilliance  of  Soma  art  thou : may  my  brilliance  grow  like 

thine. 

To  Agni  Hail ! To  Soma  Hail ! To  Savitar  Hail ! To  Sara- 
svati  Hail ! To  Pushan  Hail ! To  Bnhaspati  Hail ! To 
Indra  Hail ! To  the  Noise  Hail ! To  Fame  Hail ! To  Anisa 
Hail ! To  Bhaga  Hail ! To  Aryaman  Hail ! 

6 Ye  are  two  strainers,  Varuna’s  own  possession.  I make  you 

pure  at  Savitar’s  impulsion,  with  flawless  strainer,  with 
the  beams  of  Sflrya. 

Thou,  friend  of  speech,  heat-born,  art  undefeated.  Soma’s 
share  art  thou.  Hail,  ye  king-producers  1 

4 With  Mun-brigkt  skins:  he  takes  water  from  a pool  on  which  the  sun 
shines,  .•  rain-water  that  falls  in  sunshine.  Bringers  of  joy  water 

from  a lake.  Dwellers  in  doud:  ‘ fold-dwellers’  : Eggelinfj  ; waters  from  .t 
well.  Desirable:  or,  perhaps,  obedient ; the  water  of  dew-drops.  Most  potiir- 
ful:  he  takes  flowing  honey.  Endowed  with  might : fluids  of  an  unborn  cah. 

milk.  All-nourishing:  clarified  butter.  Self-ruling: 
motes  which,  after  taking  seventeen  kinds  of  water,  he  takes  and  mingles 
with  them.  Together*:  he  mixes  them  all  in  a vessel^ of  Udumbara  w(»o(l. 
The  Kshatriya : the  prince  who  is  being  consecrated  King. 

He  spreads-  a tiger-skin,  one  of  the  emblems  of  royalty,  before  thf 
Maitravaruna’s  dhishnyi  or  fire-beartb,  and  recites  the  formulas.  Of  Soma 
because  Indra  became  a tiger  after  he  bad  drunk  Soma,  says  the  Comment 
tator.  The  tiger,  in  the  Atharva-veda,  is  the  king  of  beasts  and  the  type  of 
heroic  strength  and  courage.  See  A.  V.  IV,  8.  4,  7.^  The  Noise : of  his  pn  - 
clamation  as  king.  Am^a : the  name  of  one  of  the  Adityas. 

6 He  makes  two  strainers  (see  I.  3),  and  interweaves  them  with  gold. 
Friend  of  speech:  the  mingled  waters  are  addressed  in  the  singular  number. 
Man,  it  is  said,  has  the  power  of  speech  so  long  as  there  is  water  in  his 
vital  airs  or  breathings.  Head-born : from  fire  smoke,  from  smoke  cloud, 
from  cloud  water.  Soma’s  share : when  the  priests  moisten  the  plant  with 
water. 


VERSE  10.] 


W'HITE  YAJURVEDA. 


8 1 

7 Sharers  in  joy  are  these  majestic  Waters,  inviolate,  indus- 

trious, investing. 

In  these  as  homes  hath  Vanina  made  his  dwelling,  he,  ('liild 
of  Waters,  in  the  best  of  mothers. 

8 Thou  art  the  inner  caul  of  princely  power.  Thou  art  tlie 

outer  caul  of  princely  power.  Of  princely  power  thou  art 
the  womb,  the  navel. 

Thou  art  the  Vritra-slaying  arm  of  Indra.  Mitra’s  art  thou, 
thou  Vanina’s  possession.  With  thee  to  aid  may  thus  man 
slaughter  Vriira, 

Cleaver  art  thou  ; thou  Render  ; thou  art  Shaker.  I’rotrct, 
him  ye  in  front,  protect  him  rearwards;  protect  hiui  skU- 
wards ; from  all  quarters  guard  him. 

9 Visible,  0 ye  men.  Informed  is  Agni,  Master  of  the  House 

hold.  Informed  is  Indra  of  exalted  glory.  Informed  :ue 
Mitra-Variina,  Law-Maintainers.  Informed  is  FAshan,  Loni 
of  all  Possessions.  Informed  are  Heaven  and  Earth,  the 
All-propitious.  Informed  is  Aditi  who  gives  wide  slieltei 

10  Appeased  by  sacrifice  are  biting  creatures.  Ascend  the  Ka<t. 
May  Gayatrt  protect  thee,  the  psalm  Rathantar.i,  tlu' 
triple  praise-song,  the  season  Spring,  and  the  rich  trea 
sure,  Priesthood. 


7 Sharers  in  joy : ‘playmate«’:  Rggeling.  He  moves  them  into  various 
cotisecration  vessels  of  PaUsa  and  U.luml»ara  wood.  Jmnlinf/  lorinm-  tl,- 
laiment  of  Varuna  iu  the  oceau  of  air.  Rest  of  mothers:  or,  most  inatormu, 
as  nourishing  all  life. 

8 The  royal  Sacrificer  puts  on  various  garments,  first  a tfirpya,  peihrips  .i 
silk  under-garment  (See  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  Xld.  note)  who  li  n. 

addressed  in  the  first  formula  of  the  verse.  Inner  caoh  or  amnion  Unt,r 
caul;  or  chorion  ; he  puts  op  a woollen  garment  winch  is  thns  addr-v  U. 

The  womb : he  puts  on  a mantle.  The  navel  hejuts  on  a turban  wnh  he 

ends  banging  down,  which  is  thus  .ad.lressed.  These  garments  .ymholin- 
the  development  of  an  embryo  till  it  reaches  maturity,  and  the 
stages  of  the  King’s  Consec. ation.  Vritra  slaym/  «m.-  the  Adhvaryu  strinK'^ 
a bow,  an  emblem  of  military  and  princely  rank.  » ; he  arldio-M 

the  right  epd  of  the  bow.  Varuna’s  • the  left  end.  Thee : the  bow.  1 / dtn  . 
the  typical  enemy  ; all  foes.  He  then  gives  the  King  hreo  am-w.  .nd 
addresses  each  by  name.  Shaker:  ; causing  the  f<.e  to  ticmble. 

9 He  recites  the  formulas  announcing  and  iutrodu^cing  the  newly-. 

crated  King.  Visibly:  he  stends  before  yop.  M of  all  possessions  or,  all- 

Samans,  consisting  of  verses  U,  ot  it.  v v u 
Triple  pram-song : or  Trivrit  Stoma.  See  iX.  io. 

$ 


82 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  X. 


11  Ascend  the  South.  Be  thy  protectors  Trishtiip,  the  Brihat 

Saman,  the  fifteenfold  praise-song,  the  season  Summer, 
and  the  treasure  Kingship. 

12  Ascend  the  West.  May  Jagati  protect  thee,  the  psalm  Vai- 

rupa,  the  seventeeiifold  praise-song,  the  Rain-time,  and 
that  store  of  wealth,  the  People. 

13  Ascend  the  North.  'I'hy  guardians  be  Anushtiip,  Vairaja 

psalm,  the  twenty-onefold  praise-song,  the  season 
Autumn,  that  rich  treasure  Fruitage. 

14  Ascend  the  Zenith.  Pankti  be  thy  keeper,  Sakvara,  Raivata 

the  pair  of  Sainans, 

Praise-songs  the  thirty-threefold  and  thriee-niiiefold,  both 
seasons,  Winter,  Dews,  that  treasure  lustre. 

The  head  of  Namuchi  hath  been  cast  fioin  me. 

15  Brilliance  of  Soma  art  thou,  may  my  brilliance  grow  like  thine. 
Save  me  from  death.  Vigour  art  thou,  victory,  everlasting  life. 

16  Witii  golden  bodies,  at  the  flush  of  morning,  }e  rise  on 

high,  two  Sovran  Lords,  and  Surya. 

Ascend  your  car,  0 Varuna  and  Mitra  : thence  view  infinity 
and  limitation. 

Tiiou  art  Mitra,  thou  art  Varuna. 

17  Thee  with  the  strength  of  Soma,  Agni's  lustre,  with  Surya's 

splendour,  Indra’s  might  1 sprinkle. 

Be  lord  of  princes  : safe  past  arrows  guard  him. 

11  The  King  is  now  called  on  to  ascend,  that  is,  to  master,  the  four  quar- 
ters of  the  sky  and  the  zenith  and  so  to  assume  universal  sovranty,  Jirikat ' 
See  VII  22  note. 

1 2 FaivUpa . the  name  of  an  important  Sdrnan 

13  Anushtiip  ■ a Vedic  metie  of  tour  octosyllabic  PAdas  or  quarter- verses. 
Vairdja . another  important  SAinau. 

14  Pankti:  a metre  of  five  octosyllabic  PAdas.  Sdkvara,  Raivata  - two 
important  SAmaus.  l)cm:  one  of  the  six  seasons,  comprising  the  months 
MAghu  and  PhAlguna.  Lmtre  • spiritual  light.  The  hmd  of  Namuchi : he 
kicks  away  a piece  of  lead  which  has  been  placed  on  the  hinder  p^rt  of  the 
tiger -skin  (see  X 5 ) The  lead  symbolizes  the  head  of  the  demon  Namuchi 
torn  off  by  Iiidra.  See  The  Hyuyos  of  the  Wgreda,  liidsx. 

15  The  first  line  is  repeated  from  X 5,  The  King  steps  on  the  tiger-skin. 
Save  mt:  he  addressee  a fnece  of  gold  placed  untler  his  foot,  Viyout  art 
thou  • another  piece  of  gold,  pierced  with  nine  holes,  and  placed  on  the 
King’s  head. 

16  The  Adbraryu  raises  the  King’s  arms,  with  the  text  taken,  with  vari- 
ations, from  R.  V.  V.  62.  8.  Injinity  and  limitation : or  Aditi  and  Diti, 
the  former  being  infinite  Nature  and  the  latter  a vague  abstracs  conception 
regarded  as  a Goddess  in  contrast  to  her  \ the  two  together  meaning  the 
entire  aggregate  of  visible  nature, 

IT  The  Purohita  (the  King’s  household  priest)  or  the  Adhvaryu  sprinkles 
him  as  he  stands  looking  eastward.  He  is  also  sprinkled  by  his  brother, 


verse  22.] 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


23 


18  =IX.  40. 

19  Forth  from  the  summit  of  the  bull,  the  mountiiin,  pouring 

spontaneously,  the  ships  keep  moving. 

They,  lifted  up,  have  turned  them  back  and  downward,  still 
flowing  onward,  after  Ahibudhnya. 

Thou  art  the  stepping-forth  of  Vishnu:  thou  art  'Vishnu’s 
outstep  ; Vishnu’s  step  art  thou. 

20  Prajapati,  thou  only  comprehendest  all  these  created  forms, 

and  none  beside  thee. 

Give  ns  our  heart’s  desire  when  we  invoke  thee.  So-and-So’s 
father  is  this  man.  Sire  of  this  man  is  So-and-So. 

May  we— Albhail !— be  lords  of  rich  possessions. 

What  active  highest  name  thou  hast,  0 Rudrs,  therein  thou 
art  an  offering,  art  an  offering  at  home.  All-hail ! 

21  India’s  bolt  art  thou.  I by  the  direction  of  Mitra-Varuna, 

Directors,  yoke  thee. 

I the  uninjured  Arjunn,  mount  thee  for  Brmness,  thee  for  food. 
By  quickening  of  the  Maruts  be  thou  victor.  May  we  obtaiu 
by  mind  : with  power  united. 

22  Let  us  not,  Indra,  conqueror  of  the  mighty,  unfit  through 

lack  of  prayer  fail  to  obtain  thee. 

Ascend  the  car  which  thou  whose  liand  bears  thunder 
controllest,  and  the  reins  with  noble  horses. 


a friendly  lUinnya,  and  a Vaisya,  man  o(  the  people  or  third  claSH  from  tbo 
three  other  vLseh  of  consecrating  water,  made  re-^pcctively  of  Udumb.ira, 
A,v.ttba  (fkue  Relig.-)  Ou.ri 

meaning  and  be,. 

“ Mahldhare.  Thou,  be  a,ldr»,eee  the  oblation  oi  the 

r«,due  of  the  “ valloeya  chariot  from  it»  stand  (aeo  IX.  5)  and 

21  He  takes  down  the  Vftjapcy  aUop  Ariuna  ' a name  of 

yokes  the  four  ho^  at  jie  thou  vidor ; he  addresses 

seuibled  cows.  By  power : Mother  as  many  as  or  moro 


U THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  X. 

23  All  hail  to  Agni,  Master  of  the  Household!  All-hail  to  Soma, 

Sovran  of  the  Forest  ! 

All-hail  to  the  great  vigour  of  the  Maruts ! All-hail  to  the 
effectual  might  of  Indra  ! 

‘ Injure  me  not,  0 Mother  Earth,  and  may  I never  injure  thee. 

24  The  Hamsa  throned  in  light,  the  Vasu  in  mid-air,  the 

Priest  beside  the  altar,  Guest  within  the  house, 

Dwelling  in  noblest  place,  mid  men,  in  truth,  in  sky,  born 
of  flood,  kine,  truth,  mountain,  he  is  mighty  Law. 

25  So  groat  art  thou : life  art  thou ; give  me  life. 

Mate  art  thou:  thou  art  splendour;  give  me  splendour. 
Strength  art  thou : give  me  strength.  I draw  you  down- 
ward, two  arms  of  India  mighty  in  achievement. 

2G  Fair  art  thou,  good  to  sit  on,  womb  of  kingship. 

Sit  on  the  fair  one,  sit  on  that  which  offers  a pleasant  seat  : 
sit  in  the  womb  of  kingship. 

37  Varuna,  Law’s  maintainer,  hath  sat  down  among  his  people,  he 
Most  wise,  for  universal  sway. 

28  Supreme  Lord  art  thou.  May  these  five  regions  of  thine  be 
prosperous.  Brahman  ! Thou  art  Bi  ahman.  Savitar  art 
thou,  faithful  in  impulsion.  Varuna  art  tlnui,  he  whose 
power  is  real.  Indra  art  thou,  whoso  strengtii  is  of  the 
people.  Kudra  art  thou,  the  very  kind  and  giacious. 


then  passes  on  in  front  of  the  Sacrificial  Stake  and  stops  the  oliariot  before 
the  hall  where  he  recites  the  text  which  is  partly  taken,  witli  variations, 
from  R.  V.  V.  33.  3. 

23  He  oflfers  the  four  Rathavimochaniya  or  Oar-unharuessin'j  oblations 
with  their  respective  formulas. 

24  He  dismounts  from  the  chariot  reciting  the  text  taken  from  R.  V.  IV. 
40.  5.  Hamm : or  Swan  ; the  Sun  who  floats  through  the  sky. 

I)X  ’truth:'  or  in  the  sacrifice.  Kine:  or  rays  of  light,  Mountain  ■ cloud 
behind  which  ho  rises.  Might}/  Law:  ‘ the  great  truth’:  Eggeling. 

25  The  Sacrifice!-  touches  one  of  two  gold  discs  or  be^ids  fastened  on  the 
right  wheel  of  the  car-stand,  and  addresses  it  with  the  text,  Life:'  cf,  X.15. 
Strength  art  thou:  he  touches  and  addresses  a branch  of  an  Udumbara  tree 
which  has  been  hidden  in  the  wheel-track.  I draw  • the  Adhvaryu  draws 
the  Sacrificer's  arms  down  to  the  mess  of  curds  placed  on  the  tiger-skin. 

•26  Fair  art  thou:  the  Adhvaryu  addresses  a throne  of  KUadira  wood 
(Acacia  Catechu)  which  has  been  placed  on  the  tiger-skin.  Giwd  to  sit  on 
he  spreads  a mantle  on  the  seat.  irewA  of  kingship : investing  the  embiyo 
King.  Sit : he  addresses  the  Sacrificer. 

*27  The  Adhvaryu  touches  the  Sacrificer’s  breast  with  the  text  from  R.V. 
J.  25.  10.  Varuna:  the  moral  Governor  of  the  world,  typifying  the  new 

" 2S  He  puts  five  dice  into  the  Sacrificer’s  hand,  in  the  shape  of  golden 
shells,  representing  the  four  quarters  of  the  sky  and  the  zenith.  See  S.  B R. 
XLI.  10.  6.  note.  Brahman  ! : the  Sacrificer  addi esses  the  Brahman  priest. 


ritm’32]  WHITE  YAJURVEDA, 

Doer  of  mncli,  Improver,  AVcalth-increasei* ! 

India’s  bolt  art  thou.  Be  therewith  my  vassal* 

29  May  spacious  Agni,  Lord  of  Duty,  gladly,  vast  Agiii,  DiUn  ’s 

Lord,  accept  the  butter.  All-had  ! 

Hallowed  by  Svaha,  with  the  beams  of  Sbrya,  strive  for  lus 
central  place  among  the  kinsmeiu 

30  I creep  forth  urged  onward  by  Savitar  the  Impeller  ; by 

Sarasvati,  Speech;  by  Tvashtar,  created  forms;  by  I’ushan, 
cattle;  by  this  ludra;  by  Brihaspati,  Devotion;  by 
Varuna,  Power ; by  Agm,  Brilliance  ; by  Some,  the  King  , 
by  Vislmu  the  tenth  Deity. 

31  Get  dressed  for  the  Asvins.  (tet  dressed  for  Sarasvati. 

Get  dressed  for  Indra  the  Good  Deliverer. 

Soma  the  Wind,  purified  by  the  strainer,  Iiidra’s  meet 
friend,  bath  gone  oertlowing  backward. 

32  What  then  ? As  men  whose  fields  are  full  of  liarley  rea[) 

tlic  ripe  corn,  removing  it  in  order, 

So  bring  the  food  of  these  men,  bring  it  hither,  who  pity 
the  Sacred  Grass  their  spoken  homage. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  Thee  for  the  Asvins. 

Thee  for  Sarasvati,  and  thee  for  liidra,  fur  tlic  Bicelleiit 
Protector* 

thou  art  Hrakmin  : the  piiest’ji  rfj))y*  Varnna,  itr.  . the  .v'conii 

ie|)ly  to  tho  8acrilicer’«  second  address.  Indra  art  t/i»n  the  third  ivply  to 
llie  address  repeated  f-»r  the  third  time.  Rmha  • as  above,  the  fniiith  time, 
Ihicr  (if  muck  : the  prini-t  addres>je.s  the  Sacriiicer  i >i  the  tifrh  time  Iiitlra'ti 
holt ; tlie  wooden  sacrificial  sword  is  a<hlresaed,  whioli  the  l*moliita  or  tli<- 
Adhvaryu  hands  to  the  Hacrificer.  It  is  to  l)e  u.sc*d  for  luaikmg  out  tlie  gam 
lug-giouud;  on  which  the  dice  ate  thrown,  an<l  the  wiunmg  numbers  )u-' 
seiited  to  the  King  as  token.s  of  victory  and  supieiiiacy 

30  Fortmilas  for  the  Dasapeya  (To  be  Drunk  by  Ten)  Libatioii'i  or  Sat  1 1- 
ficei.  Tne  priests,  officiating  and  others,  a hundred  in  number,  meet  toge 
ther  at  the  ceremony  on  a Soma-picssing  day,  and  having  ea(Ji  counted  ten 
auce.stors  who  have  offered  Soma  .sacrifices,  perform  the  S^nn^rip  or  Cicep- 
ing  oblation,  so  called  because  the  prie.sts  cteep  along  to  their  respective 
tirediearths*  The  formula  is  recited  hy  each  of  the  priests. 

31  Formula.s  follow  for  the  performance  of  the  .Sautnlmapi,  a ceremonv 
originally  instituted  to  obviate  or  atone  tor  excess  in  Soma  drinking,  subse 
vpiently  a supplement  to  other  sacrificial  rites.  Uct  dremd  he  addresscM 
the  Suii  (see  IX.  4)  piepare<l  for  the  ceremony.  Oaod  Ddiccrer 

man,  wlience  the  name  of  the  sacrifice  i.s  formed.  Honia  he  jmrifie.s  the 
Sura  in  a ve.sHel  with  blades  of  Darbha  gra3.s.  The  Wind  uuannig,  accoid- 
ing  to  Mahidhara,  (purified)  by  the  wind.  Acc<irding  to  the  St.  Peteisbnrg 
Lexicon,  vdyti  here  means  ‘ inviting,’  a rendering  adopted  by  Prof.  Eggeliiig. 
The  woid  may,  perhaps,  mean  ‘punfying,'  Cf.  the  plural  vdyavak,  ‘breezes/ 

32  He  throws  meal  of  Badart  or  Jujube  fruit  into  the  purified  Sur4  and 
draws  a draught  of  the  liquor  in  a vessel  of  Vaikankata  (Flacourtia  SapidaJ 
wood,  with  the  text,  taken,  with  au  important  variatiou  in  the  last 
from  R.  V.  X.  131.  2. 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA.  [BOOK  X 


33  Ye  Asvins,  Lords  of  Splendour,  drank  full  draughts  of 
rateful  Soma  juice, 

And  aided  Indra  in  his  deeds  with  Namuchi  of  Asura  birth. 
As  parents  aid  a son,  both  Asvins  aided  thee,  Indra,  with 
their  wondrous  powers  and  wisdom.  , ^ .1  . 

Whon  thou  with  might  badst  drunk  the 

gladdens,  Sarasvati,  0 Bounteous  Lord,  refreshed  thee. 


33  The  Sacrificer  recites  two  Inviting  Texts  taken 
6.  Namuchi:  see  X.  14.  This  Asura,  the  friend  of  ^ 

drunk  up,  with  Su.a  and  Soma,  the  manly  strength  of  Indra  ^ ^ 

complaining  to  the  Asvins  and  Sar;vsvatt,  received  from  them  a th’  nderb 
in  the  shapf  of  the  waters’  foam  with  which  he  cut  or  tore  otf  ^ amuchi  s head , 


BOOK  THE  ELEVENTH. 


Harnessing,  first  of  all,  the  mind,  Savitar  having  stretched 
the  thought 

With  reverent  look  upon  the  light  of  Agni  bore  them  up 
from  eartli. 

2 By  impulse  of  God  Savitar  we  with  our  spirit  harnessed  strive 
With  might  to  win  the  heavenly. 

3 Savitar,  having  harnessed  Gods  who  go  to  light  and  heaven 

ly  thought, 

Who  will  create  the  lofty  light— Savitar  urge  them  on  then- 
way  ] 

4 The  priests  of  him  the  lofty  priest  well  skilled  in  hymns, 

harness  their  spirit,  yea,  harness  their  holy  thoughts 
Ho  only,  skilled  in  rules,  assigns  their  priestly  tasks.  Yea, 
lofty  is  the  praise  of  Savitar  the  God. 

5 I yoke  with  prayer  your  ancient  inspiration  : may  the  laud 

rise  as  on  the  prince’s  pathway. 

All  Sons  of  the  Immortal  One  shall  hear  it,  who  have  resorted 
to  celestial  dwellings. 


' B(K)k8  XL— XVIir  c aitain  forinuU  for  the  cmhlructiou  of  altarH  or 
hearths  for  the  v.trioua  HacnHei!il  firef',  and  and  clnoily  tor  hiiildiii^  uj 
with  about  10,800  bricks,  all  laid  with  spcci.d  oonsccratuiK  texts  the 
LtUravedi  or  High  Altar  which  represent-  the  IJniveive  aioi  la  id.-ntitie.l 
with  Agni  himself.  This  ceremony,  called  the  Agniclia.v.ma  re^pmev  ^ 
vear  for  its  complete  performance  and  is  of  corre-*p"nding  imp<»rlBnce  { s. 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  XLIII  , Introduction  ).  The  High  Altar  is  cou- 
structed  m the  .shape  of  an  out-pread  bird,  piobahly  an  «agle  oi  a falcon. 

1 Harnestwg.  applying  to  the  holy  work  San, far:  the  Impe^llet,  i**r<* 
meaning  Piaj-ipati,  the  Loul  of  cieature.-,  whoi.s  ideiitdied  with  Agm,  tuai 
i«  the  Fire  Altar  which  in  now  to  be  built.  Tkem  oblation-;  or  bricks 
acairding  to  Mahldhara.  With  this  and  the  seven  following  formulas  the 
Adhvaryu  offers  all  eightfold  oblation,  that  is,  a Kingle  oblation  of  eigm, 
dipping-spoonfuls  of  clarified  butter  poured  into  the  offci  ing-ladle. 

2 To  win  the  heavenly : to  merit  heaven  by  the  due  performance  of  our 

Z naving  harneBsed ; engaged  them  in  Agni’s  service,  fiy  ihought  or 
devotion,  or  skill.  Lofty  light,  the  Sun,  Agni.  On  thar  way  • to  perform 
their  task.  . „ 

4 Tiiken  from  R.  V.  V 81.  1.  Tlue  lofty  Prmt  bayiti' ; or  Agn'  I 3“ 

pati.  IKeH  «n  Jjfmns  ; or  ‘ inspirer  of  devotion 

that  regulate  sacrifice  ...  ^ 

5 Taken  fiom  R.  V X.  13.  1.  Your  • referiing  to  the  Sacnficer  and  k 
wife,  accoiding  to  Mahldhara.  Inspiration,  hrahnia;  according  to  Maiu- 
dhara,  the  vital  airs,  the  Seven  Rishi-,  and  BrAhmaiiH  who  are  engaged  m 
the  holy  work.  The  prince's  pathway  . the  prince  <>r  noble  is  the  Saenne  s. 
whose  praise  is  to  perva.k  earth  and  beaven.  Sons  of  the  Immortal  One. 
the  Gods  whose  father  i-b  Prajipati. 


as  THU  TEXfS  OF  fllE  [BOOK  Xt. 

6 Even  he,  the  God  whose  going  forth  and  majesty  the  other 

Deities  have  followed  with  their  might, 

He  who  hath  measured  the  celestial  regions  out  by  his  great 
power,  he  is  the  Coutser  Savitar. 

7 Our  sacrifice,  God  Savitar ! speed  forward  { speed  to  his  share 

the  sacrifice’s  patron. 

May  the  celestial  Gaudharva,  cleanser  of  thought  and  will, 
make  clean  our  thoughts  and  wishes. 

The  Lord  of  Speech  sweeten  the  words  we  utter ! 

8 God  Savitar,  speed  this  God-loved  sacrifice  of  ours,  friend- 

finding,  ever-conquering,  winning  wealth  and  heaven. 
Speed  praiae-song  with  the  sacred  verse,  Rathantara  with 
Gayatra,  Hrihat  that  runs  in  Gayatra.  All-hail ! 

;j  By  impulse  of  God  Savit-u- 1 take  thee.  With  arms  of  Asviiis, 
witli  the  hands  of  Pushan,  in  Angiras’  manner,  with 
Gayatri  metre. 

Krom  the  earth’s  seat  bring  thou  Purishya  Agni,  as  Angiras 
was  wont,  with  Trishtup  metre. 

10  Spado  art  thou  ; woman  art  thou.  Ours  be  power  with  thee 

to  dig  out  Agiii  ill  his  dwelling,  as  Angiras  was  wont, with 
Jagati  metre. 

11  Savitar,  bearing  in  his  hand  the  gold  spade  which  he  took 

therewith, 

Looking  with  reverence  on  the  light  of  Agni,  raised  it  fnaa 
the  earth, 

With  the  Anushtup  metre  and  as  Angiras  was  wont  to  do. 

1 Run  hither,  urged  to  speed,  0 Horse,  along  the  most  extend- 
ed space. 

fj  Taken  from  11.  V.  V.  81.  3 _ 

r Repeated  fioni  IX.  1.  Celestial  Gaudharva.:  Savitar,  the  Sun-Qod 
S Praise-soii;i  stovia  Sacred  rerse . rich ; recited  verse  of  praise,  /fd- 
thaatara:  see  X.  10.  Bflhat:  .see  VII.  22  ; X 11. 

0 Thee:  the  spade  ( see  V 22 ; VI.  1. ) that  is  to  be  used  f..r  digging  up 
eirth  and  clay  for  the  coiistructiou  of  the  Altar,  /n  Awjiraa'  maiuicr : as 
.Gigiras,  one  of  the  in-stitutors  of  Agiii’s  Worship,  and  the  priestly  metnbeii 
of  his  family  did  aforetime.  Partskua:  an  epithet  of  Agni  identified  with 
Hie  Altar,  abiding  in  the  loose  earth  or  rubble  used  as  mortar  to  fill  the 
Buaces  between  the  bricks  and  to  bind  tliem  together.  Mahiilhara  gi\w 
another  meaiiiug  aKo  . good  to  purUhas,  that  is,  cattle.  See  IH.  40. 

10  Woman  . ndr! ; the  word  for  spade,  abhri,  beiu^  feminine.  According 
h)  Mahidhara,  ndri-ua->rarih,  may  mean,  not  having  an  enemy.  See\. 
22.  note. 

11  A formula  to  be  used  on  taking  un  the  spade. 

12  Holding  the  spade,  he  addresses  the  animals,  a horse,  an  ass,  and  a 
be-goat,  that  have  been  posted  looking  eastward.  First  the  horse  is  ad- 
dressed aa  repreaeatins  Suaia  heavea,  Vayu  in  naid-air,  aad  Agai  on 
earth. 


^YnlTE  YAJVRVEDA. 


89 


VERSE  18<1 


Thy  loftiest  birthplace  is  in  heaven,  thy  navel  is  in  air’s 
mid-realm,  the  womb  that  bare  thee  is  ou  earth. 

13  Upon  this  course,  0 lords  of  wealtli,  haViiess,  ye  twain,  the 

Ass  who  bears 
Agni,  and  kindly  favours  us. 

14  In  every  need,  in  every  race  we  call,  as  friends,  to  succour  us, 
Indra,  the  mightiest  of  all. 

15  Come,  speeding  on  and  trampling  imprecations,  come  glad- 

dening to  the  chieftainship  of  Kudra. 

Speed  through  the  wide  air  thou  whose  paths  are  pleasant, 
with  Phshan  for  thy  mate,  providing  safety. 

10  From  the  Earth’s  seat,  like  Angiras,  bring  thou  rurishya 
Agni  forth. 

After  the  wont  of  Angiras  wc  to  Turtshya  Agni  go. 

Agni  Furishya  we  will  bear  after  the  wont  of  Angiras. 

17  Agni  hath  looked  along  tlio  van  of  Mornings,  looked  ou  the 
days,  the  earliest  J:\tavedas, 

And  many  a time  along  the  beams  of  Silrya : along  the  hea- 
ven and  earth  hast  tliou  extended. 

IS  The  Courser,  started  ou  his  way,  shakes  from  bltu  all  hosti 

lities.  , . 

He  longs  to  look  with  reverent  eye  on  Agni  in  tlic  mignty 

seat. 


13  Lords  of  wealth  . the  Sacriticer  and  tlie  Adhvarya. 

14  He  addresses  the  goat  with  the  text  taken  from  H.  V.  I.  30  /. 

15  Without  touching  the  animals  he  makes  them  go  east wa id  He  ajh 
dresses  the  liorse.  Imprecations:  ill-wishes.  or  slaiiduiuas  woids  ot  tie 
Sacriticer's  enemies.  Mudra:  as  Pasupati,  Loid  of  lie.ists.  lipecd.  lure 
he  addresses  the  ass,  the  steed  of  the  Asvius.  PUshan : here  said  to  mean 

' It)  He  addresses  the  goat,  sacred  to  Aglii.  Thou  : the  spade.  JIc  tho 
three  fires  having  been  lighted,  the  Sacrificer,  the  Hiahmau,  and  the  Ad  - 
varyu  go  to  the  lump  of  clay,  representing  Ag.ii  P.irlshya,  which  has  b i 
I.iepared  for  maUng  the  Ukhd  or  liro-P'^n  <'n*d  pl«‘c«d  m a ; 

m the  giound.  Will  we  bear:  with  this  formula  the  A.lhvaryu 
puppet  or  mockUiiali,  the  anaddMpurushu  ( one  of  no  use  to  Uods,  me  , 
Manes),  to  which  a passive  part  in  the  ceremony  is 

Hillebraiidt,  ( Ritual-Litteratur,  p.  16.'))  suggests  tliat  tins  dol  . ctti  y 
Tnav  be  a figure  representing  some  enemy  of  the  Sacrihce)  , sm  > • • 

Weber  that  it  is  a sort  of  corpus  rile,  intended  to  bear  the  blame  f • > 
accidental  bitches  and  oversights  in  the  i)erforuiance  of  the  ceremony^ 

17  A hollow  ant-hill  is  placed  between  the  lump  of  ““'I 

niya  fire,  and  through  the  cavity  the  Adhvaryu  looks  at  the  clay,  reciting 
the  text  taken,  with  variations,  from  A.  V.  VII.  8A  5. 

18  He  addresses  the  horse.  attecks,  toils 

evils  of  all  kinds.  Agni : repre«ented  by  the  lump  of  clay,  On  iU  mgMg 
manifested  on  the  sacrificial  ground, 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


90 


[BOOK  XL 


19  0 Courser,  having  come  to  earth,  seek  Agni  with  a longing 

wish. 

Tell  us  bj  trampling  on  the  ground  where  we  may  dig  him 
from  the  earth. 

20  Heaven  is  thy  back,  the  earth  thy  seat,  the  air  thy  soul, 

the  sea  thy  womb. 

Looking  around  thee  with  thine  eye  trample  the  adversaries 
down. 

21  Wealth-giver,  Courser,  from  this  place  step  forth  to  great 

felicity. 

May  we  enjoy  Earth’s  favour  while  we  dig  forth  Agni  from 
her  lap, 

22  Down  hath  he  stepped,  wealth-giver,  racer,  courser.  Good 

and  auspicious  room  on  earth  thou  madest. 

Thence  let  us  dig  forth  Agni,  fair  to  look  on,  while  to  the 
loftiest  vault  we  mount,  to  heaven. 

23  I thoughtfully  besprinkle  thee  with  butter,  thee  dwelling 

near  to  all  existing  creatures. 

Broad,  vast  through  vital  power  that  moves  transversely, 
conspicuous,  strong  with  all  the  food  that  feeds  tliee. 

24  I sprinkle  him  who  moves  in  all  directions  : may  he  accept 

it  with  a friendly  spirit. 

Agni  with  bridegroom's  face  and  lovely  colour  may  not  be 
touched  when  all  his  form  is  fury. 

25  Round  the  oblation  hatli  he  paced,  Agni  the  wise,  the  Lord 

of  Strength, 

Giving  the  offerer  precious  boons. 

26  We  set  thee  round  us  as  a fort,  victorious  Agni,  thee  a Sage, 
Of  hero  lineage,  day  by  day  destroyer  of  our  treacherous  foes. 

27  Thou,  Agni,  with  the  days,  fayi  to  shine  hitherward,  art 

brought  to  life  from  out  the  waters,  from  the  stone, 


19  He  puts  tbe  horse’s  near  forefoot  on  the  lump  of  clay.  IVitA  a longing 

wish : ruokd ; or,  perhaps,  with  thy  light,  or  eye.  ‘ 

20  He  holds  his  hand  over  the  horse's  back.  The  sea : the  ocean  of  air  in 
which  the  Sun,  represented  by  the  horse,  springs  to  birth. 

21  He  removes  the  liorse’s  foot  from  the  clay  lump. 

23  He  sits  down  and  offers  two  oblations  on  the  lump  of  clay  and  the 
horse’s  hoof  print,  and  recites  two  texts  taken  (the  first  with  variations) 
from  R.  V.  II  10.  4,  5.  Thee:  Agni,  lepresented  by  the  clay.  Line  1 of  verse 
23  is  rti-st  recited,  then  line  2 of  24 ; then  line  2 of  23  and  line  1 of  24. 

24  With  bridegroom's  grace  • or,  ‘revered  by  men.' 

2o  He  draws  a line  with  the  srnde  three  times  round  the  lump  of  dev, 
and  recites  the  texts  taken  respectively  from  R,  V.  IV.  16  3 ; X.  37.  22 ; II, 
3.  1. 

27  The  waters : of  tlie  firroameint,  as  lightning,  Fomi  trees  : in  the  con- 
fiagiatious  caused  by  the  fiiction  uf  dry  bianchea. 


VEJISE  53.] 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


91 


From  out  the  forest  trees  an(]  herbs  that  grow  on  ground, 
thou,  Sovran  Lord  of  men,  art  generated  pure. 

28  At  Savitar’s,  the  Shining  One’s,  impulsion,  with  aims 

Asvins  and  with  hands  of  Pushan, 

As  Angiras  was  wont  to  do,  1 dig  thee  forth  from  the  seat 
of  Earth,  Agni  Purishya.  , , , a 

Thee  A^mi,  luminous  and  fair  of  aspect,  resplendent  with 
imperishable  lustre,  gracious  to  living  creatures,  never 

As  Angiras  was  wont  to  do,  wc  dig  thee  forth  from  the  scut 
of  Eartli,  Agni  Purishya. 

29  Thou  art  the  Waters’  bach,  the  womb  of  Agni,  around  the 

ocean  as  it  swells  and  surges. 

Waxing  to  greatness,  resting  on  the  lotus,  spread  thou  iii 
amplitude  with  heaven’s  own  measure. 

30  Yea  are  a shelter  and  a shield,  uninjured  both,  and  widely 

Do"yre*P»''sive.  cover  him  : bear  ye  Puriehya  Ai-i.i  np 

31  Cover  him,  finders  of  the  light,  niiited  both  with  breast  and 

Hearing  between  you  Agni,  tlic  refulgent,  evei  lasting  One. 

32  Thou  art  Purishya,  thou  support  of  all.  Atliarvan  was  the 

first,  Agni,  who  ruhhed  thee  into  life. 

Agni,  Atharvan  brought  thee  forth  by  nibbing  from  the 

lotus,  from 

The  head  of  Visva,  of  the  Priest. 

33  Thee  too  as  Vr.tra-slayer,  thee  breaker  of  forts,  tlie  huge 

Dadhvach, 

Son  of  Atharvan,  lighted  up. 

he  address  the  lotin  leaf  as  the  Sun  fill  the  whole  heaven  with 

hy  the  lump  of  clay.  Spread  forth  : as  the  J5un,  nii 

thy  grandeur  , - , e jje  touches  ak 

30  Ye:  rhe  antelope  skin  and  the  lotus-leaf,  both  ot  wuicf. 

he  recites  the  two  texts.  ,.  r taken, 

32  He  touches  the  lump  of  clay 
in  part,  from  R V VI.  16. 13  •' 

favouivible  to  cattle.  See  Xl.  the  skv,  oi  tlie 

takes  hold  of  the  lump  of  clay  with  both  hands  j llmvero.. 

w..ter8  i>t  the  air.  Yiim:  perba(«  „.i„  explaineii.  See 

The  last  line  of  the  text  i«  "l-cnre  and  hi»  been  vanooely  explain 

Sacred  Books  of  the  East.  XII- 217,  2 , no  ■ Hymns  oi  the 

33Takenfrom«.  V.VI.  16.  H.  Dodhjat*  . aee  Ihe  iijmns 

Rigveda,  I.  84.  13. 


92  1'HE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  A7. 

34  Piithya  the  Biillj  too,  kindled  thee  tlie  Dasyus’  most  destruc 

tive  foe, 

Winner  of  spoil  in  every  fight, 

35  Sir,  Hotar,  in  the  ttotar’s  place,  observant : lay  down  tin 

sacrifice  in  the  place  of  worship. 

^hi>ii,  dear  to  Gods,  shalt  serve  them  with  oblation.  Agni, 
give  long  life  to  the  Sacrificer. 

3G  Accustomed  to  the  Hotar’s  place,  the  Hotar  hath  seated  him, 
bright,  splendid,  passing  mighty, 

Whose  foresight  keeps  the  Law  from  violation,  excellent, 
pure-tongned,  bringing  thousands,  Agni. 

37  Seat  thee,  for  thou  art  mighty : shine,  best  entertainer  of 

the  Gods. 

Worthy  of  sacred  food,  praised  Agni ! loose  the  smoke,  rud- 
dy and  beautiful  to  see* 

38  Pour  heavenly  Waters  honey-sweet  hero  for  our  health,  for 

progeny. 

Forth  from  the  place  whereon  they  fall  let  plants  with  good- 
ly berries  spring. 

39  M.iy  Vayu  Matari§van  heal  and  comfort  thy  broken  heart  ay 

there  supine  thou  liest. 

Thou  unto  whom  the  breath  of  Gods  gives  motion,  to  Ka, 
yea,  unto  thee,  0 God,  be  Vashat ' 

40  He,  nobly  born  With  lustre,  shield  and  refuge,  hath  sat  down 

ill  light. 

0 Agni,  Rich  in  Splendour,  robe  thyself  in  many-hued  attire 

41  Loid  of  fair  saenhee,  arise  I With  Godlike  thought  protect 

us  well. 


34  From  Jl  V V[  16.  1.5,  Fdthya  the  Bull  - or,  the  hero  Pithya,  ju  j 
bably  &ome  celebrated  Sacriticer,  Prof,  Max  Muller  (Ve<lic  Hyiniid,  Part  1. 
p.  1.53)  tikes  ijishd  heie  as  a Proper  Name,  Vrishau  Pdthya.  Dusyin 
hostile  aborigines. 

35  Hotar:  Agni, the  Sacrificing  Priest,  or  Invoker,  of  the  Gods.  The 

text  is  t.iken  from  It.  V.  HI.  29.  8.  ' 

36  The  text  is  taken  from  R.  V.  II.  9 1. 

37  Taken  from  R V.  I.  36.  9.  Seat  thee:  on  the  lotus-leaf. 

38  He  pours  water  into  the  hole  from  which  the  lump  of  clay  Was  taken. 
Pouv . 0 Spade,  or  0 Heaven,  or  0 Adhvaryu  : Mahldhara. 

39  He  fans  air  into  the  hole,  and  with  the  first  line  of  the  text  addressc-i 
the  wounded  earth,  Mdtanpan:  m the  R V.  generally  a name  or  form  oi 
Agui,  here  a designation  of  Wind  as  breathing,  moving,  or  growing  in  hn 
mother  the  Air.  See  1.  2,  note.  Ka : Pra jdpati  ( see  1.  6,  note  ),  that  i-i, 
Vayu  in  his  form,  Vashat:  a sacrificial  exclamation ; benediction. 

40  He  takes  up  the  edges  or  comers  of  the  antelope-skin  and  the  lotus-leaf, 
ties  them  together,  and  wraps  them  round  the  lump  of  clay,  reciting  the  text- 

41  He  takes  the  wrapped  up  lump  of  clay  aud  stands  up  reciting  the  text. 
Cf.  R.  Y.  YIU.  23.  5. 


VERSE  47.1  WHITE  YAJURVEDA.  PS 

With  great  light  splendid  to  behold  come,  Agni,  tlirougli 
sweet  hymns  of  praise. 

42  Rise  up  erect  to  give  us  aid,  stand  up  like  Savitnr  the  God  , 

Erect  as  strength-bestower  when  we  call  aloud,  with  un- 
guents and  with  priests  on  thee. 

4.3  Thou,  being  bom,  art  Child  of  Earth  and  Heaven,  parted,  fair 
Babe,  among  the  plnnts,  0 Agni. 

The  glooms  of  night  thou,  brilliant  child,  subduost,  and  art 
come  forth,  loud  roaring,  from  the  Mothers. 

44  Steady  be  thou,  and  firm  of  limb.  Steed,  be  a racer  fleet  ol 
foot. 

Broad  bo  thou,  pleasant  as  a seat,  bearing  the  store  which 
Agni  needs. 

4.5  Be  thou  propitious,  Angiras,  to  creatures  of  the  human  race 

Set  not  on  fire  the  heaven  and  earth,  nor  air’s  mid-regum, 
nor  the  trees. 

4G  Forth  with  loud  neighing  go  the  Steed,  the  Ass  that  shontetli 
as  he  runs. 

Rearing  Purishya  Agni  on,  let  him  not  perish  ere  his  time, 

Male  bearer  of  male  Agni,  Child  of  Waters,  Offspring  of  the 
Sea.  Agni,  come  hither  to  the  feast. 

47  The  Raw  the  Truth,  the  Law  the  Truth.  As  Angiras  was 
wont  to  do,  we  bear  Purishya  Agni  on. 

Ye  Plants,  with  joyous  welcome  greet  this  Agni,  anspicions 
One  who  cometh  on  to  meet  you. 

Removing  all  distresses  and  afflictions,  hero  settle  dowm  and 
banish  evil  purpose. 

42  With  uplifted  arms  he  holds  it  up  towards  the  ea.st,  and  loeites  tin- 
te^t  taken  from  R.  V,  I.  36. 13.  Uii>jvxnU...pr lasts,  or,  shiniuj^  iinnistrants; 
priests  who  bear  oblations, 

43  Among  the  plants:  the  shrubs  tliat  serve  as  fuel  ; or  |)}iospJit)reM-eid 

[>laut8  in  which  he  dwells  ; or,  according  to  Mabldharu,  rice  and  otiiei 
[ilauts  from  which  sacrificial  cakes  are  The  Mothers : the  tree^i  whus.t 

Iry  wood  feeds  him.  Tlie  text  is  taken  from  R V.  X.  1.  2. 

34  He  addresses  the  ass  (see  verse  12).  The  store'  the  e(jaipment  or 
Aj^ni,  all  that  is  retjuired  to  make  the  Altar  complete.  Hee  V.  13,  nf)te. 

He  addresses  the  goat,  here  called  Angiras,  a name  of  Agni  ( sec  III 
3 ),  as  sacred  to  that  God. 

46  He  holds  the  lump  of  clay  over  the  animals  without  touching  them, 
first  liver  the  horse,  reciting  the  text.  The  Ass  here  ironically  coupled  with 
die  horse.  Bearing:  the  horse.  Male'  the  ass,  over  which  he  now  lotldH 
die  lump  of  clay.  Offspring  of  the  Sea : born  a.s  lightning  in  the  aerial  ocean, 
dvai,  come  hither : he  takes  the  lump  down. 

47  He  holds  the  clay-lump  over  the  goat,  and  recites  the  first  P Ida  oi 
I'larter-division  of  the  text.  The  Zaiv,  etc.  medning  Agni  as  the  Suu,  being 
inniself  both  Law  and  Tiuth. 


[BOOK  XI, 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


48  Welcome  him  joyfully,  ye  Plants,  laden  with  bloom  and 

goodly  fruit.  , , . , • 

This  seasonable  Child  of  yours  hath  settled  m his  ancieut 

seat. 

49  Resplendent  with  thy  wide-extending  lustre  dispel  the  ter- 

rors of  the  fiends  who  hate  us. 

May  lofty  Agni  be  my  guide  and  shelter,  ready  to  hear  our 
call,  the  good  Protector. 

.50  Ye,  Waters,  are  beneficent,  so  help  ye  us  to  energy 
That  we  may  look  on  great  delight. 

51  Give  us  a portion  of  the  sap,  the  most  propitious  that  ye 

have. 

Like  mothers  in  their  longing  love. 

52  To  yon  we  gladly  come  for  him  to  whose  abode  ye  lead  us 


And,  Waters,  give  us  procreant  strength. 

53  Mitra,  having  commingled  earth  and  ground  together  with 

the  light — . . j 1 1 

For  health  to  creatures  mix  I thee  Omniscient  and  nobl^? 

bcrn. 

54  The  Rudras,  having  mixed  the  earth,  set  all  aglow  the  lofty 


Bright  and  perpetual  their  light  verily  shines  among  the 
Gods. 

55  The  lump  of  clay  that  hath  been  mixed  by  Vasns,  Rudras 

by  the  wise,  , „ . . o i 

May  Sinivali  with  her  hands  soften  and  fit  it  for  the  work, 

56  May  Sinivali  with  fair  braids,  with  beauteous  crest,  witli 

lovely  locks,  . . , 

May  she,  0 mighty  Aditi,  bestow  the  Fire  pan  mthy  hands 


49  The  lump  <.f  clay  has  beeu  deposited  on  a mound  sprinkled 

ed  with  It  is  now  fr«d  from  ita  wrapper  (eee  verse  40^  With  tb. 

wJuterfrom  R.  V.  III.  15. 1.  Some  of  tho  g«.fs  hmr  .8  tbeu  cut  off 
aud  the  three  animale  are  driven  towards  the  north-^t. 

50  He  pours  on  the  lump  of  cl.,  water  fl_3 

mim  of  the  Parna  or  PaWsa  tree,  and  recites  the  triplet  f rom  K.  V.  X.  9.1 
*“53  He  mLs  the  clay  with  rt.eg«ifs  hair  .nd  recites  the 

the  Sun  Earth:  meaning  sky,  according  to  MahMhara.  Ai^W.  ^ 
bolized  by  the  hair  of  the  goat  sacred  to  Agm.  Thee : Agni,ideatifi 

'"54' H^e  mixes  with  gravel  iron-filings  or  rust, 

text  Budras  : the  Maruts,  sons  of  Kudra  the  Storm -God. 

I5  He  mixes  tl»e  mass  more  thoroughly  and  recites  three 
the  presiding  Goddess  of  the  day  of  New  Moon,  associated  with  child-bnt 
ivfi  Firn  mu : ulchd  ; a sort  of  saucepan  j a pot  or  cookiug-vesseL 


VERSE  QO],  WHITE  YAJURVEDA.  95 

57  Aditi  shape  the  Fire-pan  with  her  power,  her  arms,  her  in- 

tellect, 

And  in  her  womb  bear  Agni  as  a mother,  in  her  lap,  her 
son, 

58  With  Gayatri,  like  Angiras  the  Vasiis  form  and  f.ishion  thee  ! 
Stedfast  art  thou,  thou  art  the  Earth.  Establish  in  me  pro- 
geny, command  of  cattle,  growth  of  wealth,  kinsmen  for 
me  the  worshipper. 

With  Trishtup  may  the  Rudras,  like  Angiras,  form  and 
fashion  thee. 

>Stedfast  art  thou,  thou  art  the  Air.  t]stal)lish  in  me,  etc., 
as  above. 

With  Jagati,  like  Angiras,  Adityas  form  and  fashion  thee  ! 
Stedfast  art  thou,  thou  art  the  Sky.  Establish  in  me,  etc. 
Friends  of  all  men,  the  All-Gods  with  Aimshtup  form  thee 
Aijgirus-like. 

Stedfust  art  thou,  thou  art  the  Quarters  E.stublish  in  me, 
etc. 

59  The  zone  of  Aditi  art  thou.  Aditi  seize  thy  hollow  space. 
She,  having  made  the  great  Fire-pan,  a womb  for  Agni, 

formed  of  clay, 

Aditi,  gave  it  to  her  Sons  and,  Let  them  bake  it,  weio  her 
words. 

60  The  Vasus  make  thee  fragrant,  as  Angiras  did,  with  Gayatri  f 
The  liudras  make  thee  fragrant  with  the  Trishtup,  as  did 

Angira.s  ! 

With'G:iyatri,  like  Angiras,  may  the  Adityas  peifiime  thee. 
Dear  to  all  men,  may  the  All-Gods  with  the  Ann.siihi[) 
sw^eeten  thee,  as  Angiras  was  wont  to  do. 

May  Indra  make  thee  odorous.  Muy  Vanina  make  thee 
odorous.  May  Vishnu  make  thee  odorous. 

57  Aditi : aa  Mother  of  the  Gods.  Thou : the  ItUHp  clay  out  of  which 
the  Fire- pair  ib  to  be  made,  representing  ihe  hearth 

Of  sacn'ijice : or  of  Maklia.  a certain  mythical  being.  Cf.  XXXV 11.  o—  1 , 
It.  V.  IX.  101.  13  ; X 171  2. 

58  He  spreads  the  clay  which  is  to  form  the  bottom  of  the  Fire-pan.  The 
Rudras : here  he  lays  down  the  first  lower  side  of  the  pan  Adiiyas . ere 
he  adds  the  upper  side.  With  the  rest  of  the  formulae  he  tontmues  the 
woik. 

59  He  puts  on  the  rim  and  addresses  it.  Aditi  seize  • he  takes  hold  of  the 
pan  by  the  mouth.  Sher  he  places  the  completed  pan  on  the  ground,  net 
^uus : tire  Gods. 

60  He  fumigates  the  pae  with  the  -moke  ef  seven  lump,  of  hor.e.dung, 
■’’'Citing  .even  formula.,  cue  for  each  lieity  or  cias.  of  Deitie.  lueuUoue  . 


06  the  texts  of  the  . [BOOK  XI. 

61  Pit!  Angiras-like  may  Aditi  the  Goddess,  beloved  by  all 

Gods,  dig  thee  in  Earth’s  bosom. 

Pan  I Angiras-like  may  the  Gods’  heavenlv  Consorts,  dear 
to  all  Gods,  in  the  Earth’s  bosom  place  thee. 

Pan  I Angiras-like  may  Dhishanas,  Divine  Ones,  dear  to  all 
Gods,  in  the  Earth’s  bosom  light  thee. 

Pan  ! Angiras-like  may  the  divine  Varntris,  dear  to  all  Gods, 
in  the  earth’s  bosom  heat  thee, 

Pan  ! Angiras-like  may  the  celestial  Ladies,  dear  to  all  Gods, 
in  the  earth’s  bosom  bake  thee. 

Angiras-like  may  the  celestial  Matrons,  beloved  bv  all  the 
Gods,  with  undipped  pinions,  within  the  lap  of  Earth, 
0 Fiie-pan,  bake  thee. 

62  The  gainful  grace  of  Mitra,  God,  supporter  of  the  race  ot 

man. 

Is  glorious,  of  most  wondrous  fame. 

63  With  lovely  arms,  with  lovely  hands,  with  lovely  fingers 

may  the  God  Savitar  make  thee  clean,  yea,  by  the  power 
ho  hath. 

Not  trembling  on  the  earth  611  thou  the  regions,  611  tht 
Quarters  full. 

64  Having  arisen  wax  thou  great,  yea,  stand  thou  up  im 

movable. 

To  thee,  0 Mitra,  1 entrust  this  Fire-pan  for  security.  May 
it  remain  without  a break. 

65  Thee  may  the  Vasus,  Angiras-like,  611  with  the  metre 

Gayatri. 

Thee  may  the  Rudras,  Angiras-like,  611  with  the  Trishfut^ 
metre  full. 


61  He  digs  a square  hole  and  addresses  it  with  the  first  line  of  th«  text. 
Pan! : he  deposits  it,  with  the  mouth  downwards,  in  the  hole,  on  the  north 
side  of  the  Invincible  brick,  the  first-laid  brick  of  the  Altar.  Consorts  tlie 
wives  of  the  Gods  are  here  said  to  be  the  life-supporting  Plants.  Dili  shams 
apparently  regarded  as  Goddesses  of  Wealth  and  Abundance,  See  Prj)f.  H. 
Oldenberg,  Vedio  Hymns,  Part  II.  pp.  120— .-122.  Here  he  deposits  .silently 
in  the  hole  the  biicks  called  All- lights,  and  heats  the  Fire-pan  with  fire  froia 
the  Dakshina  or  southward  hearth,  reciting  the  three  following  formulas. 

Protecting  Goddesses,  said  to  be  the  Nychthemera  or  Days-and- 
Nights.  CeleilkU  ladles : the  Gnls,  or  Pivine  Dames,  said  to  be  the  deitie-. 
of  the  sacred  Metres.  Celestial  Matrons ; the  presiding  deities  of  the  stars 
With  undipped  pinions  : moving  freely  and  without  interruption. 

62  He  trims  the  fire,  reciting  the  text  from  R.  V.  Ill  59.  6. 

63  He  removes  the  ashes,  and  recites  the  text.  Not  tren\hUng : he  turn- 
the  pan,  and  sets  it  down  with  the  mouth  upwards. 

64  He  takes  up  the  Fire-pan  with  both  hands,  reciting  the  first  line.  T' 
thee  • he  deposits  it  on  another  vessel  that  has  been  placed  for  the  purpobi 

65  He  pours  goat’s  milk  into  it,  and  recites  the  formulas. 


VERSE  72.J 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA. 


97 

Thee  may  Adityas,  Angirae-liko,  fill  with  the  metro  Jagati. 
With  the  Aimshtup  metre  may  the  All-Gods,  dear  to  all 
men,  fill  thee  full,  as  Aiigiras  was  wont. 

60  Intention,  Agni,  Motive,  Hail ! Mind,  Wisdom,  Agni,  Motive, 
Hail ! 

Thought,  Knowledge,  Agni,  Motive,  Hail ! liule  of  Speech, 
Agni,  Motive,  Hail ! 

To  Manu  Lord  of  creatures,  Hail ! To  Agni  dear  tb  all  men 
Hail ! 

€7  May  every  mortal  man  elect  the  friendship  of  the  guiding  God. 
Each  one  solicits  him  for  wealth : let  him  seek  fame  to 
prosper  him.  All-hail  1 

€8  Brea^  not,  nor  suffer  any  barm.  Endure,  0 Mother,  and 
be  brave ; 

This  work  will  thou  and  Agni  do. 

^9  Be  firm  for  weal,  0 Goddess  Earth.  Made  in  the  wonted 
manner  thou 
Art  a celestial  design. 

Acceptable  to  Gods  be  this  oblation.  Arise  thou  in  this 
sacrifice  uninjured. 

70  Wood-fed,  bedewed  with  sacred  oil,  ancient.  Invoker, 

excellent, 

The  Son  -of  Strength,  the  Wonderful. 

71  Abandoning  the  foernan’s  host,  pjiss  hither  to  this  company  : 
Assist  the  men  with  wliom  I stand. 

72  From  the  remotest  distance  come.  Lord  of  the  Bed  Steeds, 

hitherward. 

Do  thou  Purishya,  Agni,  loved  of  many,  overcome  our  foes. 


66  Having  offered  tlie  five  Audgrabbana  oblations  cuatumary  at  Sonia 
sacrifices  (see  IV.  7 ),  he  now  offcis  seven  connected  with  the  building  of 
the  Fire-altar,  and  recites  the  appropriate  formulas.  Intention : our  detor- 
mination  to  build  the  altar.  Mann ; the  representative  Man,  identified  with 
PrajApati. 

67  He  offers  to  Savitar  with  the  text  fiom  K V.  V.  50.  1,  repeated  from 
Book  IV.  8. 

68  The  Sacrificer  or  the  Adhvaryu,  standing  towards  the  north-caHt, 
places  the  Fire-pan  embedded  in  Muftja  grass  and  hemp,  on  the  Almv.mSya 
fire,  and  addresses  it  with  the  two  texts. 

■<9  Earth : the  Fire-pan  being  made  of  clay. 

70  When  the  fire  has  burnt  up,  he  places  on  it  a kindling-stick  of  Krimnka 
wood  ( a tree  unknown  to  Kuropean  botanists ) with  the  text  taken  from 
H.  V.  il.  7.  8.  Sen  of  Sti'tnyth  : Agni,  as  sprung  from  the  violeut  agitution 
of  the  fire-drill. 

7 1 He  puts  on  a stick  of  Vaikankata  (Flacourtia  Sapida ) with  the  text 

from  R.  V.  VIII.  64.  15.  , 

72  He  puts  00  a third  stick,  of  Udnmbara  ( Ficus  Olnmeriita ) with  the 
^xt.  Our  /oes  * mriduh  , ‘the  scorners’.  Egg»»liTig. 

7 


98 


THE  TEXTS  OP  THE 


[BOOK  XI 


73  0 Agni,  whatsoever  be  the  fuel  that  we  lay  on  thee, 

May  that  be  butter  unto  thee.  Be  pleased  therewith,  Most 
Youthful  God. 

74  That  which  the  termite  eats  away,  that  over  which  the 

emmet  crawls — 

Butter  be  all  of  this  to  thee.  Be  pleased  therewith,  Most 
Youthful  God. 

75  Bringing  to  him,  with  care  unceasing,  fodder  day  after  day 

as  to  a stabled  courser, 

Joying  in  food  and  in  the  growth  of  riches,  may  we  thy 
neighbours,  Agni,  ne’er  be  injured. 

76  While  on  earth’s  navel  Agni  is  enkindled,  we  call,  for 

ample  increase  of  our  riches. 

On  Agni  joying  in  the  draught,  much-lauded,  worshipful, 
victor  conquering  in  battle. 

77  Whatever  hosts  there  are,  fiercely  assailant,  charging  in 

lengthened  lines,  drawn  up  in  order. 

Whatever  thieves  there  are,  whatever  robbers,  all  these  I 
cast  into  thy  mouth,  0 Agni. 

78  Devour  the  burglars  with  both  tusks,  destroy  the  robbers 

with  thy  teeth. 

With  both  thy  jaws,  thou  Holy  One,  eat  up  those  thieves 
well  champed  and  chewed. 

79  The  burglars  living  among  men,  the  thieves  and  robbers  in 

tho  wood, 

Criminals  lurking  in  their  lairs,  these  do  I lay  between  thy 
jaws. 

80  Him  who  would  seek  to  injure  us,  the  man  who  looks  on 

us  with  hate 

Turn  thou  to  ashes,  and  the  man  who  slanders  and  would 
injure  us. 

73  He  pula  on  a stick  of  some  sacrificial  tree,  that  has  not  been  cut  off 
but  has  fallen  or  been  blown  off  by  the  wind,  and  recites  the  text  from 
K.  V.  Vm.  91.  20. 

74  He  adds  a fifth  stick,  that  has  been  found  lying  on  the  ground,  with 
the  text  from  R.  V.  VIII.  91.  21.  Termite:  commonly  called  white  ant,  a 
great  devourer  of  wood  and  a moat  destructive  pest  in  bouses. 

75  He  puts  on,  with  eight  texts,  eight  kindlingosticks  of  Pal^M  wood. 
The  first  text  is  taken  from  A.  V.  XIX  55.  1,  ‘day  after  day'  being  sub- 
stituted for  ‘night  after  night.’ 

76  Earth' t navel:  the  central  and  most  important  spot  where  Agni 
now  kindled. 


7SRSB  83,] 


WHITE  YAJVRYEDA. 


99 


81  Quickened  is  this  my  priestly  rank,  quickened  is  manly 

strength  and  force;  ^ 

Quickened  is  his  victorious  power  of  whom  I am  the  House- 
hold priest. 

82  The  arms  of  these  men  have  I raised,  have  raised  their 

lustre  and  their  strength. 

With  priestly  power  I ruin  foes  and  lift  my  friends  to  high 
estate. 

83  A share  of  food,  0 Lord  of  Food,  vouchsafe  us,  invigorating 

food  that  brings  no  sickness. 

Onward,  still  onward  lead  the  giver.  Grant  us  maintenance 
both  for  quadruped  and  biped. 


81  He  puts  on  eleven  sticks  in  ordinary  cases,  but  twelve  for  a Kshatriya 
or  a Purohita.  In  the  latter  case  he  recites  the  text  taken,  with  variationa, 
from  A.  V.  III.  19.  1.  (Quickened : or,  sharpened,  intensified. 

82  In  the  case  of  a prince  or  noble  (Rajanya,  Kshatriya)  being  the  Sacri- 
ficer,  he  recites  tiiis  text,  the  second  line  of  which  is  taken  from  A V.  III.  19. 3. 

83  He  dips  a kindling-stick  in  the  vow-milk  (see  IV.  11,  note)  presented 
by  the  Adhvaryu,  lays  it  on  the  fire,  and  recites  the  text. 


BOOK  THE  TWELFTH. 


Far  hath  he  shone  abroad  like  gold  to  look  on,  beaming  im- 
perishable life  Tor  glory. 

Agui  by  vital  powers  became  immortal  when  bis  prolific 
Father  Dyaus  begat  him. 

2 Night  and  Dawn,  different  in  hue,  accordant,  meeting  to 

gether,  suckle  one  same  infant. 

Golden  between  the  heaven  and  earth  he  shineth.  The 
wealth-possessing  Gods  supported  Agni. 

3 The  Sapient  One  arrays  hinjself  in  every  form : for  quadrup- 

ed and  biped  he  hath  brought  forth  good. 

Excellent  Savitar  hath  looked  on  heaven's  high  vault  : he 
shineth  after  the  outgoings  of  the  Dawn. 

4 Thou  art  the  goodly-pinioned  Bird  : thou  hast  the  Trivrit  for 

thy  head. 

Gayatra  is  thine  eye,  thy  wings  are  Brihat  and  Rathantara. 

The  hymn  is  self,  the  metres  are  his  liml^,  the  formulas  bis 
namoi 

The  Vamadevya  Saman  is  thy  form,  the  Yajfiayajfiiya  thy 
tail,  the  fire-hearths  are  thy  hooves. 

Thou  art  the  goodly-pinioned  Bird : go  skyward,  soar  to 
heavenly  light. 

This  BooV  contains  formulas  relating  chiefly  to  the  treatment  of  Ukhy.i 
Agni  or  Agni  of  the  Fire-pan,  and  the  preparation  of  the  Ahavanlya  Fire 
Altar. 

1 The  Sacritcer  binds  on  his  neck  a circular  piece  of  gold  with  twenty-one 
knobs  sewed  up  in  the  black-antelope’s  skin  and  strung  above  bis  navel  on 
a hempen  string  cf  three  strands.  The  gold  plate  symbolizes  the  Sun,  that 
is,  Agni,  and  the  kaobs  represent  the  months,  five  seasons,  the  three  worlds, 
and  the  Sun.  He  then  recites  the  text  taken  from  R.  V.  X.  45.  8. 

2 With  two  small  round  mats  of  Muhja  grass  he  takes  hold  of  the  Fire- 
pan and  recites  the  text  taken,  with  variations,  from  R.  V.  I.  96.  5,  setting 
it  down  on  a seat  or  stool  of  Udupibara  wood  as  he  recites  the  last  sentence. 
The  two  mats  symbolize  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Fire-pan  is  Agni  or  the  Sun, 
and  the  seat  is  the  ground.  One  same  infant : Agni  as  the  Sun. 

3 He  ties  round  his  neck  the  main  curd  of  the  suspensory  sling  in  which 
the  Fire-pan  is  to  be  carried  about,  and  recites  the  text  from  R.  V.  V.  81  2. 
The  Sapient  One:  the  Sun,  Agni  Every  fot'n:  every  object  that  he  dis- 
closes ^ter  the  darkness  of  night. 

4 He  raises  up  the  sling,  and  addresses  Ukhya  Agni  with  the  text.  Tri- 
vrit: the  hymn  of  three  triplets  (see  IX.  32).  The  hymn:  meaning  the 
Pafichadasa  Stoma  or  form  of  recitation  in  fifteen  verses.  Formulae : sacri- 
ficial prayers  and  texts.  Vdmadevya : belonging  to  Vdmadeva,  the  Rishi  or 
inspiired  seer  of  Book  IV.  of  the  R.  V.,  the  name  given  to  various  ^mans. 
YajiidyajAiya : a SAman  named  after  the  beginning  ( YajftA-yajfiA,  at  every 
sacrifice ) of  R.  V,  I.  168. 1.  The  text  expresses  the  form  (that  of  an  eagh) 
m which  the  Fire  altar  is  to  be  built. 


VERSE  12  1 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


101 


5 Thou  art  the  rival-alaying  stride  of  Vishnu.  Mount  the 

Gayatra  metre  : stiide  along  the  earth. 

Thou  art  the  foe-destroying  stride  of  Vishnu.  Mount  the 
Trishtup  metre  : stride  along  mid-air. 

Thou  art  the  traitor-slaying  stride  of  Vishnu.  Mount  the 
Jagati  metre  : stride  along  the  sky. 

Thou  art  the  foeman-slaying  stride  of  Vishnu.  Mount  Anush- 
tup  metre  : stride  along  the  Quarters. 

6 Agni  roared  out  like  Dyaus  what  time  ho  thunders  : licking 

full  oft  the  earth  round  plants  he  flickered. 

At  once,  when  born,  ho  looked  about,  enkindled  t ho  shineth 
forth  between  the  earth  and  heaven. 

7 Return  to  me,  thou  still-returning  Agni,  with  life,  with 

lustie,  progeny,  and  treasure, 

With  profit,  wisdom,  riches,  and  abundance. 

8 A hundred,  Agni  Angiras ! be  thy  ways,  a thousand  thy  re- 

turns. 

With  increment  of  increase  bring  thou  back  to  us  what  we 
have  lost.  Again  bring  hitherward  our  wealth. 

9 Return  again  with  nourishment ; Agni,  again  with  food  and 

life.  Again  preserve  us  from  distress. 

10  Agni,  return  with  store  of  wealth.  Swell  with  thine  over- 

flowing stream  that  feedeth  all  on  every  side. 

1 1 I brought  thee : thou  hast  entered  in.  Stand  stedfast  and 

immovable. 

Let  all  the  people  long  for  thee.  Let  not  thy  kingship  fall 
away. 

12  Varuna,  from  the  upraost  Iwnd  release  us,  let  dpwn  the 

lowest  and  remove  the  midmo.st. 

So  in  thy  holy  law  may  we  made  sinless  belong  to  Aditi,  0 
thou  Adttya. 

5 He  makes  four  strides  representing  the  course  of  Vwhnu  as  the  Suu, 
with  an  address  to  each  stride. 

6 He  holds  up  Ukhya  Agni  towards  the  east,  redting  the  text  taken  from 
R.  V.  X.  45,  4.  Round  plarUa  he  fiick&’ed : ‘ strokiug  the  plants,’  ‘ literally 
anointing  ( ? either  furbishing,  or  impregnating  ’ ; Eggoling. 

7 He  brings  the  Fire-pan  lower  and  lower  four  times,  reciting  a text  each 
time. 

11  Holding  the  Fire-pan  above  his  navel  he  addresses  Agni  with  the  text 
taken,  with  the  exception  of  the  first  Pilda,  from  R.  V.  X.  173. 1. 

12  He  unties  the  cord  of  the  suspensory  sling  and  the  string  of  the  gold 
disc,  reciting  the  text  taken  from  R.  V.  I.  24.  16.  Varuna : addressed  m 
the  original  hymn  as  the  Moral  Governor  of  the  world,  armed  with  a noose 
or  cord  with  which  he  binds  the  wicked, 


^02  THE  TEXTS  OP  THE  [BOOK  XU, 

13  High  hath  the  Mighty  risen  before  the  Mornings,  and  come 
to  us  with  light  from  out  the  darkness. 

Fair-shapen  Agni  with  white-shining  splendour  hath  filled 
at  birth  all  human  habitations. 

14:  The  Hamsa  homed  in  light,  the  Vasu  in  mid-air,  the  Priest 
beside  the  altar,  Guest  within  the  house, 

Dweller  in  noblest  place,  mid  men,  in  truth,  in  sky,  born 
of  flood,  kine,  truth,  mountain,  he  is  holy  Law.  The  Great. 

15  Knowing  all  holy  ordinances,  Agni,  be  seated  in  the  lap  of 

this  tby  mother. 

Do  not  with  heat  or  glowing  flame  consume  her : shine  thou 
within  her  with  refulgent  lustre. 

16  Within  this  Fire-pan  with  thy  light,  0 Agni,  in  thy  proper  seat, 
Glowing  with  warmth,  be  gracious  thou,  0 Jatavedas,  unto  her. 

17  Being  propitious  unto  me,  0 Agni,  sit  propitiously. 

Having  made  all  the  regions  blest,  in  thine  own  dwelling 

seat  thyself. 

18  First  Agni  sprang  to  life  from  out  of  heaven,  the  second 

time  from  us  came  Jiltavedas. 

Thirdly  the  Manly-souled  was  in  the  waters.  The  pious 
lauds  and  kindles  him  Eternal. 

19  Agni,  we  know  thy  three  powers  in  three  stations,  we  know 

thy  forms  in  many  a place  divided. 

We  know  what  name  supreme  thou  hast  in  secret : we  know 
the  source  from  which  thou  hast  proceeded. 

20  The  Manly-souled  lit  thee  in  sea  and  waters,  Man’s  Viewer 

lit  thee  in  the  bteast  of  heaven. 

There  as  thou  stoodest  in  the  third  high  region  the  Bulls 
increased  thee  in  the  waters’  bosom. 

^13  He  holda  Agui  up  to  the  south-east  with  the  text  taken  from  R.  V. 

TTr  (repeated  from  X.  24)  taken  from  R.  V. 

1 V.  40.  5,  and  a saorificial  formula  of  one  word.  The  Great : hrihat ; Truth, 
understood ; that  is,  AgnL  As  he  pronounces  this  formula  he  lays  Aani  un 
the  seat. 

15  He  stands  by  Ukhya  Agni,  reverencing  him  with  three  texts. 

18  He  worships  with  the  Vdtsapra  rite,  the  recitation  of  Hymn  46  of  Book 
X.  of  the  Rigveda,  ascribed  to  the  Rishi  Vatsaprt  son  of  Bbalanda.  Prom 

of  Heaven : or,  from  Dyaus  or  Heaven  bis  father,  in  the  shape  of  the 
Sun.  Prom  us;  produced  by  men  in  the  shape  of  sacrificial  and  domestic 
fire.  In  Vie  waters : of  the  firmament,  in  the  shape  of  lightning,  the  third 
form  of  Agni.  Manly-souled:  or,  Friend  of  men. 

19  /n  secret : unknown  to  those  who  know  not  the  Veda  : Sdyana, 

20  Manly-soul^ ; or,  Friend  of  men ; Vanina,  according  to  S&yana,  and 
Frajli^ti,  according  to  Mahldhara.  Prof.  Ludwig  thinks  that  Dyaus  ( cp. 
vem  8 ) may  be  meant,  and  Prof.  Orassmann  that  Indra,  the  kindler  of  the 
lightning,  is  intended.  The  Bulls:  or,  the  Mighty  Ones ; the  Maruts. 


TEnSE  30.]  WHITE  YAJVRVEDA.  m 

21  Agui  roared  out,  etc.  (verse  6 repeated). 

22  The  spring  of  glories  and  support  of  riches,  rouscr  cf 

thoughts  and  guardian  of  the  Soma, 

Good  Son  of  Strength,  a King  amid  the  waters,  in  forefront 
of  the  Dawms  he  shines  enkindled. 

23  Germ  of  the  world,  ensign  of  all  creation,  he  sprang  to  life 

and  filled  the  earth  and  heaven. 

Even  the  firm  rock  he  cleft  when  passing  over,  when  the 
Five  Tribes  brought  sacrifice  to  Agni. 

24  So  among  mortals  was  immortal  Agni  stablishcd  as  cleans- 

ing, wise,  and  eager  envoy. 

He  waves  the  red  smoke  that  he  lifts  above  him,  striving 
to  reach  the  heaven  with  radiant  lustre. 

25  Far  hath  he  shone,  etc.  (verse  1 repeated). 

26  Whoso  this  day,  0 God  whose  flames  are  lovely,  makes  tliee 

a cake,  0 Agni,  mixed  with  butter, 

Lead  thou  and  further  him  to  higher  fortune,  to  bliss  bt- 
stowed  by  Gods,  0 thou  Most  Youtlifiil. 

27  Endow  him,  Agni,  with  a share  of  glory,  at  every  song  of 

praise  sung  forth  enrich  him. 

Dear  let  him  be  to  Surya,  dear  to  Agni,  preeminent  with  son 
and  children’s  children. 

28  While,  Agni,  day  by  day  men  pay  thee  worship  tlicy  win 

themselves  all  treasures  worth  the  wishing. 

Allied  with  thee,  eager  and  craving  riches,  they  have  dis- 
closed the  stable  filled  with  cattle. 

29  Agni,  man’s  gracious  Friend,  the  Soma’s  keeper,  Vaisvanaia, 

hath  been  lauded  by  the  Kishis. 

We  will  invoke  benignant  Earth  and  Heaven  : ye  Deities, 
give  us  wealth  with  hero  childien.  ^ 

30  Pay  service  unto  Agni  with  your  fuel,  rouse  your  Guest 

with  oil : 

In  iiim  present  your  offerings. 

23  The  firm  roch  : the  massive  cloud,  according  to  SAy  ana  and  MaliMbsra. 
Some  extraordinary  forest  conflagration  may,  peihap»*,  be  referred  to.  1 it 
Pm  Tribes;  literally,  the  five  men;  according  to  Sftyana,  men  in  general, 
and  according  to  Mabidhara.  the  iustitutor  of  the  sacrifice  and  ihe  four  clnef 
priests.  But  some  special  and  remarkable  occasion  seems  to  be  referrnl  to, 
fiuchasthe  associated  sacrifice  offered  by  represeiit«tives  of  the  Five  Confe- 
derate Aryan  races  or  tribes.  See  The  Hymns  ,the  Rigverl.a,  Index. 

28  StahU  filled  with  cattle : a common  expression  for  great  possessions. 

29  Soma’s  keeper:  eui  connected  with  the  Moon,  the  great  recepticle  of 

the  celestial  Soma,  the  nectar  or  ambrosia  of  the  Gods.  See  A.  Hillebrandt, 
Vedische  Mythologie,  I.  330—336,  l 

30  Formulas  for  the  Vantv&banam  or  Driving  Hither  and  Thither  of  Agni. 
The  Sacrificer  stations  a car  noithward  of  TJkhya  Agni,  turned  towards  the 

and  lays  a kindling-stick  on  the  fire,  reciting  the  text. 


104 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  XU. 

31  May  all  the  Gods,  0 Agni,  bear  thee  upward  with  their  ear- 
nest thoiifjhts  : 

Not  to  be  looked  on,  rich  in  light,  be  thon  propitions  onto  us, 

31  Agni,  go  forth  reaplendcul,  thon  with  thine  anepicious  flames 
of  fire. 

Shining  with  mighty  beams  of  light  harm  not  my  people 
with  thy  form.  j t r 

33  Agni  roared  out,  etc.  (verse  21  repeated ) 

34  Far  famed  is  this  the  Bharata’s  own  Agni:  he  shineth  like 

the  Sun  with  lofty  splendour. 

He  who  hath  vanquished  Purii  in  the  battle,  the  heavenly 
Guest  hath  shone  for  ua  benignly. 

35  Receive  these  ashes,  ye  celestial  Waters,  and  lay  them  in  a 

fair  place  full  of  fragrance. 

To  him  bow  down  the  nobly  wedded  Matrons  ! Bear  this  on 
waters  as  her  son  a mother. 

36  Agni,  thy  home  is  in  the  floods  : into  the  plants  thou  forc- 

est  way. 

And  as  their  child  art  horn  anew. 

37  Thon  art  the  offspring  of  the  plants,  thon  art  the  offspring 

of  the  trees : 

The  offspring  tliouof  all  that  is,  thou,  Agni,  art  the  Waters' 
Child. 

38  With  ashes  having  reached  the  womb,  tho  waters,  Agni  f 

and  the  earth, 

United  with  tlio  mothers,  thou  blazing  hast  seated  thee  agam. 

39  Seated  again  upon  thy  seat,  the  waters,  Agni ! and  the  earth, 
In  her,  thou,  most  .auspicious  One,  liest  as  in  a mother's  lap. 

31  Ho  lifts  up  UkhyaAgui  together  with  the  seat  ( see  verse  2 ),  aud 
standing  on  the  south  side  puts  him  on  the  car. 

32  He  yokes  in  silence  two  oien,  aud  goes  eastward  reciting  the  text. 

i,  A mutters  the  text  repeated  from  XII.  6 aud  21, 

34  At  his  dwelling  ho  takes  down  Ukhya  Agni  on  a spot  that  ha.s  been 
raised  and  sprinkled,  lays  a kindling-stick  on  the  fire,  aud  recites  fhe  text 
Uken  from  R.  V.  VH.  8.  4.  Bharata's : God  of  Vasishtha,  the  Purohita  or 
Inbal  Priest  of  the  Bliaratas,  a warlike  tribe.  Fiiru  : the  Purus  (one  of 
the  Five  Aryan  Tribes)  who  opposed  the  Bharatas.  According  to  Mabi- 
dhara,  Pilru  was  a Rftkshasa  or  demon. 

35  He  takes  the  ashes  from  the  Fire-pan  in  a basket  or  tray  made  of  the 
leaves  of  a Pald^  Ficus  Indica  ( banyan ),  or  other  sacred  tree,  and  throwi 
them  into  water,  reciting  the  text.  To  Aim  ••  Agni  in  the  ashes.  iVod/y 
Viewed ; Consorts  of  Vanina  who  rules  over  the  waters. 

36  He  takes  ashes  in  the  basket  again,  and  throws  them  into  tho  water  as 
before,  with  two  texts,  the  firat  of  which  is  taken  from  K.  V.  VIII.  43.  9. 

38  With  bis  little  finger  he  takes  some  ashes  from  the  water,  and  thrown 
part  of  them  back,  reciting  the  fourtexts. 


VSRSE  46  ] JVJ//TE  rj/lTEVEDA.  ]0f> 

40,41  Return  again,  etc.  Agni,  return,  etc.  (verses  9 and  10 
repeated). 

42  Mark  this  my  speech,  Divine  One,  thou  Most  Yontlifnl, 

offered  to  thee  by  him  who  gives  most  freely  : 

One  hates  thee,  and  another  sings  thy  praises.  I thine 
adorer  laud  thy  form,  0 Agni. 

43  Be  thou  for  ua  a liberal  Prince,  Giver  and  Lord  of  precious 

things. 

Drive  those  who  hate  us  far  away. 

To  the  Omnific  One  All-hail ! 

44  Again  let  the  Adityas,  Rudras,  Vasus,  and  Brahmans  with 

their  rites  light  thee,  Wealth-bringer  ! 

Increase  thy  body  with  presented  butter:  effectual  be  the 
Sacrificer’s  wishes. 

45  Go  hence,  depart,  creep  off  in  all  directions,  both  ancient 

visitois  and  recent  comers. 

Yama  hath  given  a place  on  earth  to  rest  in.  This  place 
for  him  the  Fathers  have  provided. 

46  Knowledge  art  thou  : accomplishment  of  wi.shes.  In  mo  bo 

the  fulfilment  of  thy  wishes. 

Thou  art  the  ashes,  thou  the  mould  of  Agni.  Rankers  are 
ye,  rankers  around.  Rankers  right  upward,  be  ye  fixed. 

42  Having  returned  from  tho  pool  ho  throws  into  the  Fire-pan  some 
the  ashes  taken  from  the  water,  andataudH  hy  thn  lire  worshippiug  with  two 
tttxts  taken  reapoclively  from  It.  V.  I.  147.  2 and  II.  6.  4,  the  last  hnoof  the 
verse  being  an  original  Yajua  or  sacrificial  formula. 

43  Prince:  or  Patron. 

44  He  stinds  up  after  a burnt  offering  of  butter  and  replaces  the  same  (ii  i.‘- 
stick  on  the  Hkhya  Agni  reciting  tho  text. 

45  Formulas  for  the  construction  of  the  Qdrha|»tya  hearth,  representing 
tl»e  domestic  fire-place  of  the  houseliolder  who  institutes  sacrilLce.  Tlie 
Adhvaryu  sweeps  the  ground  where  the  hearth  i.s  to  be  built  with  a PalAsa 
branch,  and  throws  away  the  grass  and  rubbish,  reciting  a P4da  of  the  text 
fsee  R.  V.  X.  14.  9 ) as  he  sweeps  each  side  Iwgiuuiug  with  the  east. 
hence:  in  the  oiigmal  funeral  hymn  this  w,  aceonhug  to  S;lyana,  addi eased  to 
the  PiRltchas  and  other  evil  spirits  that  haunt  the  place  of  crcmatioii.  Ileie, 
says  Mahtdhara,  the  ministers  of  Vama,  Lord  Paramount  of  the  ground,  are 
meaut  Foi'  him : for  the  Sacrificer. 

46  Over  the  site  of  the  future  altar  he  scatters  saline  earth,  when  he 
thrown  out  the  PaRsa  branch  towards  the  north,  and  addresses  it  with  th'e 
text.  KHOwled</e:  of  tho  cattle,  inasmuch  as  they  smell  out  and  lick  the 
Boil  on  which  a saline  efflorescence  appears.  Completion  of  Ihf  ifnehu : mayi 
tepninvo  bhiiydsuh ; on  me  may  there  be  cattle  for  thee:  Mahtdhara.  Thuu 

1 ai't  i/te  atha : here  he  spreads  sand  over  the  saline  eai  th.  RanLera : he 
surrounds  the  altar  site  with  twenty-one  small  enchxiing  stones,  for,ming  a 
range  or  rank,  Round:  set  in  a circle.  Upward:  set  upright  in  the  ground. 


to  TEXTS  OP  THE 


106 


[BOOK  xn 


47  This  is  that  Agni  where  the  longing  Indra  took  the  pressec 

Soma  deep  within  his  body. 

Winner  of  spoils  in  thousands  like  a courser,  with  prayer  art 
thou  ezalted,  Jatavedas. 

48  The  splendour  which  is  thine  in  heaven,  0 Agni,  in  earth,  0 

Holy  One,  in  plants,  in  waters, 

Wherewith  thou  hast  o’erspread  mid-air’s  broad  region,  that 
light  is  brilliant,  billowy,  man-surveying. 

49  0 Agni,  to  the  flood  of  heaven  thou  mountest,  thou  callest 

hither  Gods,  the  thought-inspirers. 

The  waters,  those  beyond  the  light  of  Surya,  and  those 
that  are  beneath  it  here,  approach  thee. 

50  May  the  Purishya  Agnis  in  accord  with  those  that  spring 

from  floods, 

May  they,  benevolent,  accept  the  sacrifice,  full,  wholesome 
draughts. 

51  As  holy  food,  Agni,  to  thine  invoker  give  wealth  in  cattle, 

lasting,  rich  in  marvels. 

To  us  be  boru  a son  and  spreading  ofifspring.  Agni,  be  this 
thy  gracious  will  to  us-ward. 

52  This  is  thine  ordered  place  of  birth  whence,  sprung  to  life, 

thou  shonest  forth. 

Knowing  this,  Agni,  mount  on  high  and  cause  our  riches  to 
increase, 

53  Ranker  art  thoh  : Angiras-like  sit  steady  with  that  Deity. 
Ranker-round  art  thou  : Angiras-like  sit  steady  with  that 

Deity. 

47  Sitting  on  the  south  of  the  circle  ,'^nd  looking  northward  the  Adhvaryu 
lays  down  four  bricks  in  the  middle  of  the  circle,  the  first  with  the  text  from 
K.  V.  III.  22. 1, 

48  He  lays  the  second  brick  with  the  text  from  R V.  III.  22.  2. 

49  He  lays  the  third  brick  with  the  text  from  R.  V.  III.  22.  3. 

50  He  lays  the  fourth  with  the  text  from  R.  V.  III.  22  4.  Purtshya: 
according  to  Mahldhara,  friendly  to  cattle ; ‘ Fires  that  dwell  in  mist  ’ ; The 
Hynftis  of  the  R.  V,  Bom  from  Jloods : the  meaning  of  prdvandkih  is  un- 
certain. 

51  He  sits  on  the  north  side  facing  the  south,  and  lays  down  the  south- 
ward one  of  the  two  hinder  bricks  with  the  text  from  R.  V.  III.  22.  5. 

52  He  lays  down  the  northern  one  with  the  text,  repeated  from  III.  D, 
taken  from  R.  V.  III.  29.  10. 

53  Sitting  on  the  south  side,  facing  the  north,  he  lay#  the  northern  one 
of  the  two  front  bricks,  reciting  the  text.  Jingirat-like : as  thou  wast  wont 
to  do  with  the  ancient  Fire-priest  Angiras,  Eanker^round : he  lays  down 
the  second  southward  brick.  TkcU  Beity:  according  to  Mabtdhara,  that 
famous  deity  Vdyu. 


WnrFB  lAJVkXEDA. 


107 


YBEEE  62.] 

54  Fill  up  the  room,  supply  the  void,  then  settle  steady  in  thy 

place. 

Indr-Agni  and  Brihaspati  have  set  thee  down  in  this  abode. 

55  The  dappled  kine  who  stream  with  milk  prepare  his  draught 

of  Soma  juice — 

Clans  in  the  birthplace  of  the  Gods,  in  the  three  luminous 
realms  of  heaven. 

56  All  sacred  songs  have  magnified  Indra  expansive  as  the  sea, 
The  best  of  warriors  borne  on  cars,  the  Lord,  the  very  Lord 

of  Strength. 

57  Combine  ye  two  and  harmonize  together,  dear  to  each  other, 

brilliant,  friendly-minded, 

Abiding  in  one  place  for  food  and  vigour. 

58  Together  have  I brought  your  minds,  your  ordinances,  and 

your  thoughts. 

Be  thou  our  Sovran  Lord,  Agni  Purishya;  give  food  and 
vigour  to  the  Sacrificer. 

59  Thou  art  Purlshya  Agni,  thou  art  wealthy,  thou  art  prosper- 

ous. 

Having  made  all  the  regions  blest,  here  seat  thee  in  tlyne 
owm  abode. 

60  Be  ye  one-minded  unto  us,  both  of  one  thought,  free  from 

deceit. 

Harm  not  the  sacrifice,  harm  not  the  Patron  of  the  sacrifice. 
Be  gracious  unto  us  to-day,  ye  knowers  of  all  things  that  be. 

61  Even  as  a mother  bears  her  son.  Earth,  Ukh4  hath  borne 

within  her  womb  Purishya  Agni. 

Maker  of  all,  accordant  with  the  All-Gods  and  Seasons,  may 
Prajapati  release  her. 

B2  Seek  him  who  pours  not,  offers  not  oblation ; follow  the 
going  of  the  thief  aud  robber. 


64  He  lays  down  three  hkamprindi  or  Space-filling  bricks— those  thaUjave 
no  special  prayer  appropriated  to  them—,  and  addresses  each.  Indr^Ayni : 
the  two  Gods  combined  as  a dual  Deity. 

[ 55  As  he  settles  the  two  bricks  (verse  53)  he  recites  the  text  called  the 

SMadohas  from  the  word  tiUladoImah,  streaming  with  milk,  taken  from  K. 

I V.  VIII.  58  3. 

56  He  brings  mould  from  the  place  of  the  pit  and  throws  it  on  the  G&rha* 
patya  hearth  that  is  building,  with  the  text  taken  from  R,  V.  I.  11. 1. 

57  He  throws  the  Ukhya  Agni,  that  is  the  fire  in  the  pan,  on  the  Garha- 
patya  hearth,  with  the  four  Mowing  texts. 

61  He  fills  the  Fire-pan  with  sand,  looses  it  from  the  suspensory  slin^, 
and  sets  it  down  at  the  distance  of  a cubit  north  of  the  fire,  reciting  the  text 

62  Formulas  for  averting  Nirriti,  the  Goddess  of  Destruction.  He  lays 
down  the  black  bricks  dedicated  to  Nirriti,  that  have  been  baked  with  rice- 
husks,  Nirriti’s  perquisites,  in  some  natural  hollow  in  the  ground  or  a har- 
den place,  with  the  following  texts. 


108  THS  TEXTS  OP  THE  [BOOK  Xi 

This  is  thy  way  ; leave  us  and  seek  some  other.  To  the 
0 Goddess  Nirriti,  be  homage. 

63  To  thee,  sharp-pointed  Nirriti,  full  homage  1 Loose  an 

detach  this  iron  bond  that  binds  him. 

Unanimous  with  Yama  and  witti  Yarn!  to  the  sublimes 
vault  of  heaven  uplift  him. 

64  Thou,  Awful  One,  thou  in  whose  mouth  I offer  for  the  un 

loosing  of  these  binding  fetters, 

Whom  people  hail  as  Earth  with  their  glad  voices,  as  Nirril 
in  every  place  1 know  thee. 

65  The  binding  noose  which  Nirriti  the  Goddess  hath  fastenec 

on  thy  neck  that  none  may  loose  it, 

I loose  for  thee  as  from  the  midst  of  Ayus.  Sped  forwan 
now,  eat  thou  the  food  we  offer. 

To  Fortune,  her  who  hath  done  this,  be  homage. 

66  Establisher,  the  gatherer  of  treasures,  he  looks  with  mighi 

on  every  form  and  figure. 

Like  Savitar  the  God  whose  laws  are  constant,  like  Indrs 
he  hath  stood  where  meet  the  pathways. 

67  Wise,  through  desire  of  bliss  with  Gods,  tho  skilful  bind  the 

traces  fast,  and  lay  the  yokes  on  either  side. 

68  Lay  on  the  yokes  and  fasten  well  the  traces : formed  is  the 

furrow,  sow  the  seed  within  it. 

Through  song  may  we  find  hearing  fraught  with  plenty 
near  to  the  ripened  grain  approach  the  sickle. 


63  Yawa;  here  meaniDg  Agni.  Yowt;  Yama’s  sister.  See  The  Hyium 
of  the  Uigveda,  X.  10.  Him.:  the  Sacriticer.  Ivon  bond:  of  sin. 

65  He  throws  down  on  the  farther  side  of  the  bricks  the  suspensory  sling, 

the  cord  of  the  gold  plate  (see  1)  the  two  reed  mats  ( 2 ) and  the  wooden  seal 
(2),  and  addresses  the  Sacrificer  with  the  text.  From  the  midst  of  Aym 
from  the  Gdrhapatya  hearth  which  is  the  middle  of  Agni : Mahldhar^ 
‘ Ayn.s  may  rather  have  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  ‘ life  ’ or  ‘ vital  power’ 
Eggeliiig.  Sped  forward:  by  being  freed  from  the  bonds  of  Nirriti. 
Fwtune : he  pours  out  a jarful  of  water.  ' 

66  The  Brahman-priest,  the  Sacrificer,  and  the  Adhvaryu  return  to  the 

sacrificial  enclosure  from  the  place  where  the  Nirriti  bricks  were  laid  down, 
and  the  Adhvaryu  stands  worshipping  Agui,  in  the  form  of  the  Gilrhapatp 
hearth,  with  the  texts,  taken  with  variations,  from  R V.  X.  1 39.  3.  Path, 
ways:  the  R.  V.  has  dhcmdn<tm,  that  is  iu  the  meeting  or  conflict  for  boot}, 
and  Mahtdha;ra  explains  paMndm,  of  the  pathways,  by  ‘ with  robbers  or 
infesters  of  the  way.’  | 

67  Standing  behind  the  right  or  southern  hip  of  Agni  or  the  Fire-altar, 
the  Adhvaryu  addresses  the  plough  to  which  oxen  are  being  yoked  for  11“*! 
purpose,  with  two  texts  from  R.  V.  X.  101,  4,  3.  Through  denre  of  tUiss 
Oods:  or,  through  desire  of  pleasing  the  Gods  ; * with  mind  devoted  to  tl’*' 
Gods’:  Eggeling. 


7JiRS£  75.] 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


100 


59  Happily  let  the  shares  turn  up  the  ploughland,  happily  go 
the  ploughers  with  the  oxen  ! 

Sana  and  Sira,  pleased  with  our  oblation,  cause  ye  our 
plants  to  bear  abundant  fruitage. 

70  Approved  by  Visvedevas  and  by  Maruts,  balmed  be  the 

furrow  with  sweet-flavoured  fatness. 

Succulent,  teeming  with  thy  milky  treasure,  turn  hitherward 
to  us  with  milk,  0 Furrow. 

71  The  keen-shared  plough  that  bringeth  bliss,  good  for  the 

Soma-drinker’s  need, 

Shear  out  for  me  a cow,  a sheep,  a rapid  drawer  of  the  car, 
a blooming  woman,  plump  and  strong  ! 

72  Milk  out  their  wish,  0 Wishing-tW,  toMitraand  to  Vanina, 
To  Indra,  to  the  Asvins,  to  PQshan,  to  people  and  to  plants. 

73  Be  loosed,  inviolable,  Godward-farers ! Wc  have  attained 

the  limit  of  this  darkness : we  have  won  the  light. 

7t  The  year  together  with  the  darksome  fortnights;  Dawn  with 
the  ruddy-coloured  cows  aliout  her;  the  Asvins  with 
their  wonderful  achievements ; the  Sun  together  with  hi.s 
dappled  Courser ; Vaisvauara  with  Ida  and  with  butter. 
Svaha ! 

75  Herbs  that  sprang  up  in  time  of  old,  three  ages  earlier  than 
the  Gods,  — 

Of  these,  whose  hue  is  brown,  will  I declare  the  hundred 
powers  and  seven. 


i 69  On  the  site  of  the  Altar,  near  the  enclosing  stones,  he  ploughs  four  fur- 
rows, south,  west,  north,  and  east,  with  four  texts,  one  for  each  furrow  Tho 
first  text  is  from  A.  V.  III.  17.  6,  the  first  half  being  taken  fromU.  V IV. 

I 57.  8.  Sum  and  Sira:  two  deities  or  deified  objects  which  bless  or  are  clobely 
connected  with  agriculture.  See  A.  V.  III.  17,  5,  note. 

70  Taken  from  A.  V.  III.  17.  9.  c « vt  i ooo 

n Taken  from  A.  V.  III.  17.  3.  with  a variation.  See  S.  B E,  XLI.  328. 

72  0 Wishing-Cow : 0 Furrow,  productive  as  the  Cow  of  Plenty. 

73  He  looses  and  addresses  the  oxen.  Inviolable : aghnyd,  not  to  be  slain 
01  injured.  The  word  is  usually  applied  to  cows.  Oodxmrd  farm . as  assist- 
anhi  at  sacrifice.  Limit  of  this  darkness:  R.  V.  I.  92.  6,  Darkness  here 
meaning  distress  arising  from  hunger  and  thirst,  according  to  Mahtdhaia. 

74  He  places  a bunch  of  Kufv  grass  in  the  middle  of  the  Altar  site  and 
offers  an  oblation  with  five  takings  of  sacrificial  butter,  reciting  the  formula 
of  thirteen  utterances  (SvA  hA,  divided,  counting  at  two)  each  of  which  re- 
presents a layer  of  the  Fire-alUr.  See  S.  B.  E.  XLI.  334. 

75  Having  poured  fifteen  jars  of  water  on  tho  Altar  site  he  sows  the  seed 
of  various  plants  and  herbs  reciting  five  triplets.  Verses  75-96  are  Uken 
from  R.  V.  X.  97  which  is  a physician’s  charm  addressed  to  the  raedicmn! 
herbs,  some  of  which  he  is  about  to  apply  to  a patient,  fakdru  ■ perhaps 
dyspepsia  , or  some  disease  of  the  mouth;  abscess  or  gumboil. 


THi  TEXTS  OP  THE  [BOOK  X, 

76  Ye,  Mothers,  have  a hundred  homes,  yea,  and  a thousand  ai 

your  growths. 

Do  ye  who  have  a thousand  powers  free  this  my  patient  froi 
disease. 

77  Be^glad  and  joyful  in  the  Plants,  both  blossoming  and  bearini 

Plants  that  will  lead  us  to  success  like  mares  who  conquer  i] 
the  race. 

78  Plants,  by  this  name  I speak  to  you,  Mothers,  to  you  thi 

Goddesses ; 

Steed,  cow,  and  garment  may  I win,  win  back  thy  very  self 
0 man. 

79  The  Holy  Fig  tree  is  your  home,  your  mansion  is  the  Pama 

tree : 

Winners  of  cattle  shall  ye  be  if  ye  regain  for  me  this  man, 

80  He  who  hath  store  of  Herbs  at  hand  like  Kings  amid  a crowd 

of  men, — 

Physician  is  that  sage’s  name,  fiend-slayer,  chaser  of  disease. 

81  Herbs  rich  in  Soma,  rich  in  steeds,  in  nourishment,  in  strength- 

ening power,— 

All  these  have  I provided  here,*that  this  man  may  be  whole 
again. 

82  The  healing  virtues  of  the  Plants  stream  forth  like  cattle 

from  the  stall,— 

Plants  that  shall  win  me  store  of  wealth,  and  save  thy  vital 
breath,  0 man. 

83  Reliever  is  your  mother’s  name,  and  hence  Restorers  are  ye 

calledt 

Rivers  are  ye  with  wings  that  fly : keep  far  whatever  brinos 
disease.  ® 

84  Over  all  fences  have  they  passed,  as  steals  a thief  into  the  fold, 
The^  Plants  have  driven  from  the  frame  whatever  malady  was 

85  When,  bringing  back  the  vanished  strength,  I hold  these  herbs 

within  my  hand, 

The  spirit  of  disease  departs  ere  he  can  seize  upon  the  life. 

86  He  through  whose  frame,  0 Plants,  ye  creep  member  by 

member,  joint  by  joint, — 

From  him  ye  drive  away  disease  like  some  strong  arbiter  of 
strife. 

87  Fly,  Spirit  of  Disease,  begone,  with  the  blue  jay  and  king- 

fisher. 

iiapetuous  speed,  vanish  together  with 


VERSE  98.] 


WBITE  YAJURVEBA. 


Ill 


58  Help  every  one  the  other,  lend  assistance  each  of  you  to 
each, 

All  of  you  be  accordant,  give  furtherance  to  this  speech  of 
mine. 

89  Let  fruitful  Plants,  and  fruitless,  those  that  blossom,  and 

the  blossomless, 

Urged  onward  by  Bribaspati,  release  oa  from  our  pain  and 
grief  j 

90  Realese  me  from  the  curse’s  plague  and  woe  that  comes  from 

Varuna  ; 

Free  me  from  Yama’s  fetter,  from  sin  and  offence  against  the 
Gods. 

91  What  time,  descending  from  the  sky,  the  Plants  flew  earth- 

ward, thus  they  spake : 

No  evil  shall  befall  the  man  whom  while  he  liveth  we 
pervade. 

92  Of  all  the  many  Plants  whose  King  is  Soma,  Plants  of  hun- 

dred forms. 

Thou  art  the  Plant  most  excellent,  prompt  to  the  wish,  sweet 
to  the  heart. 

93  0 all  ye  various  Herbs  whose  King  is  Soma,  that  o’erspread 

the  earth. 

Urged  onward  by  Bribaspati,  combine  your  virtue  in  this 
Plant. 

14  All  Plants  that  hear  this  speech,  and  those  that  have 
departed  far  away. 

Come  all  assembled  and  confer  your  healing  power  upon 
this  Herb. 

95  Unharmed  be  he  who  digs  you  up,  unharmed  the  man  fpr 

whom  I dig : 

And  let  no  malady  attack  biped  or  quadruped  of  ours, 

96  With  Soma  as  their  Sovran  Lord  the  Plants  hold  colloquy 

and  say : 

0 King,  we  save  from  death  the  man  whose  cure  a BrAhman 
undertakes. 

97  Most  excellent  of  all  art  thou,  0 Plant ; thy  vassals  are  the 

trees. 

Let  him  be  subject  to  our  power,  the  man  who  seeks  to 
injure  us. 

98  Banisher  of  catanh  art  thou,  of  turnouts  and  of  hemorr- 

hoids ; 

Thou  banishest  Pikaru  and  Consumptioa  in  a hundred 
forms, 


n2  tUE  texts  op  the  [BOOK  xil 

99  Thee  did  Gandbarvas  dig  from  eartb,  thee  Indra  and 
Brihaepati. 

King  Soma,  knowing  thee,  0 Plant,  from  his  Consumption 
was  made  free. 

100  Conquer  mine  enemies,  the  men  who  challenge  me  do  thou 

subdue. 

Conquer  thou  all  unhappiness : victorious  art  thou,  0 Plant. 

101  Long-lived  be  he  who  digs  thee,  Plant,  and  be  for  whom  I 

dig  thee  up. 

So  nmyst  thou  also,  grown  long-lived,  rise  upward  with  a 
hundred  shoots. 

102  Most  excellent  of  all  art  thou,  0 Plant ; thy  vassals  are  the 

trees. 

Let  him  be  subject  to  our  power,  the  man  who  seeks  to 
injure  ua. 

103  May  he  not  harm  me  who  is  earth’s  begetter,  nor  he  whose 

laws  are  faithful,  sky’s  pervader; 

Nor  he  who  first  begot  the  lucid  waters.  To  Ka  the  God 
let  us  present  oblation. 

104  Turn  thyself  hitherward,  0 Earth,  to  us  with  sacrifice  and 

milk. 

Thy  covering  skin  Agni,  urged  forth,  hath  mounted. 

105  All,  Agni,  that  in  thee  is  bright,  pure,  cleansed,  and  meet 

for  sacrifice, 

That  do  we  bring  unto  the  Gods. 

]0C  I from  this  place  have  fed  on  strength  and  vigour,  the 
womb  of  holy  Law,  stream  of  the  mighty. 

In  cows  let  it  possess  me  and  in  bodies.  1 quit  decline  and 
lack  of  food,  and  sickness. 

107  Agni,  life-power  and  fame  are  thine : thy  fires  blaze  mightil;y, 

thou  rich  in  wealth  of  beams  ! 

Sage,  passing  bright,  thou  givest  to  the  worshipper,  with 
strength,  the  food  that  merits  laud. 

108  With  brilliant,  purifying  sheen,  with  perfect  sheen  thou 

liftest  up  thyself  in  light. 

Thou,  visiting  both  thy  Mothers,  aidest  them  as  Son  : thou 
joiucst  close  the  earth  and  heaven. 

103  Witli  the  wooden  sword  he  takes  from  outside  the  fire  altar  four 
bucks,  each  miuie  of  a lump  of  cUy,  and  lays  them  on  the  body  of  the  altar 
Bite,  reciting  a text  as  he  deposits  each.  The  first  is  from  the  front.  Eartits 
begetter;  Prajajiatt. 

104  He  lays  down  a brick  from  the  south.  Covering  skin  • the  surface  of 
the  earth. 

105  He  lays  down  a cl.ay  brick  from  behind. 

106  He  lays  down  a day  brick  fiom  the  north. 

107  He  tbiows  sand  on  the  High  Altai  with  six  verses  from  R,  V.  X 140 


VERSE  118.] 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


113 


109  0 Jiitavedas,  Son  of  Strength,  rejoice  thyself,  gracious,  in 

our  fair  hymns  and  songs. 

In  thee  are  treasured  various  forms  of  strengthening  food, 
born  nobly  and  of  wondrous  help. 

110  Agni,  spread  forth,  as  Ruler,  over  living  things : give  wealth 

to  us,  Immortal  God. 

Thou  shinest  out  from  beauty  fair  to  look  upon:  thou 
leadest  us  to  conquering  power. 

11  To  him,  the  wise,  who  orders  sacrifice,  who  hath  great  riches 

under  his  control. 

Thou  givest  blest  award  of  good,  and  plenteous  food,  givest 
him  wealth  that  conquers  all. 

12  The  men  have  set  before  them  for  their  welfare  Agni,  strong, 

visible  to  all,  the  Holy. 

Thee,  Godlike  One,  with  ears  to  hear,  most  famous,  men’s 
generations  magnify  with  praise-songs. 

13  Soma,  wax  great.  From  every  side  may  vigorous  powers 

unite  in  thee. 

Be  in  the  gathering-place  of  strength. 

14  In  thee  be  juicy  nutriments  united,  and  power  and  mighty 

foe-subduing  vigour. 

Waxing  to  immortality,  0 Soma,  win  highest  glory  for 
thyself  in  heaven. 

15  Wax,  0 most  gladdening  Soma,  great  through  all  thy 

filaments,  and  be 

A friend  of  most  illustrious  fame  to  prosper  us. 

16  May  Vatsa  draw  thy  mind  away,  even  from  thy  loftiest 

dwelling-place, 

Agni,  with  song  that  yearns  for  thee. 

17  Agni,  best  Angiras,  to  thee  all  people  who  have  pleasant 

homes 

Apart  have  turned  to  gain  their  wish. 

18  In  dear  homes,  Agni,  the  desire  of  all  that  is  and  is  to  be, 
Shines  forth  the  One  Imperial  Lord. 


118  He  touches  the  saud  th&t  has  been  spread  on  the  body  of  the  altar, 
eeiting  the  texts  taken  from  R.  V.  I.  91. 16,  18,  17. 

116  The  following  verses  are  addressed  to  the  Fires  as  they  are  led  for- 
?ard  preceded  by  a horse,  a white  one  by  preference,  representing  Agni  .ts 
he  SuS;  or,  if  no  horse  is  available,  by  a bullock  (see  S-icred  Books  of  the 
XIT  2971  The  first  verse  is  taken  from  R.  V.  Vlll.  U.  7. 
.U7TLlLB.V.Vin.43.18. 


8 


book  the  thirteenth. 


I  TAKB  within  me  Agui  first,  for  increase  of  my  wealth, 
good  offspring,  manly  strength  : 

So  may  the  Deities  wait  on  me. 

2 Thou  art  the  waters’  back,  the  womb  of  Agni,  around  the 

ocean  as  it  swells  and  surges. 

Waxing  to  greatness,  resting  on  the  lotus,  spread  forth  in 
amplitude  with  heaven’s  own  measure. 

3 Eastward  at  first  was  Brahma  generated.  Vena  o’erspread 

the  bright  Ones  from  the  summit, 

Disulosed  Ilia  deepeat  neareat  reveldtioiis,  womb  of  existent 
and  of  non-existent. 

4 In  the  beginning  rose  Hiranyagaibha,  born  Only  Lord  of  all 

crested  being. 

He  fixed  and  holdeth  np  this  earth  and  heaven.  Worship 
we  Ka  the  God  with  our  oblation. 

5 The  Drop  leaped  onward  through  the  earth  and  heaven, 

along  this  place  and  that  which  was  before  it. 


This  Book  contains  fonm.las  for  the  laying  down  of  the  Lotus-leaf,  the 
aoletnn  setting  of  various  bricks,  th«  burial  of  the  Tortoise,  the  dupossl  of 
the  Victims’  Heads,  aud  other  ceremonies  connected  with  the  construction 
of  the  Ahavaniya  File  altar. 

1 The  Sacnficer  standing  on  the  farther  side  of  the  High  Altar  offers  an 

oblation  and  recites  the  to  a I take.  Ayni : in  order  that  Agiu,  that  is,  the 
Fire- Altar,  may  be  made  out  of  Agni  himself.  , r,  r ir 

2 He  lays  down  a lotus-leaf,  rfprebenting  the  sky,  on  a tuft  of  Ku^  grass, 
with  the  text  which  is  repeated  from  XI.  29. 

3 Upon  the  lotus  leaf  he  lays  the  piece  of  gold  hung  round  his  neck  (see 
XII.  1).  with  the  text  from  A V IV.  1.  1.  Brahma:  or  the  Prayer.  P-ayer 
originated  in  the  eastern  heaven  ; when  Vena,  the  Loving  One,  the  early 
Sun,  first  rose  in  his  glory  be  poured  forth  the  type  of  human 
morning  song  of  joy  aud  praise  See  III.  8 

Brahma  here  is  the  Suii.  O'trtpread  the  Bright  Oim:  or,  disclosed  bright 
flashes.  According  to  Mahidhara,  the  Bright  Onti  are  the  worlds.  Aon- 

existent:  but  possessing  the  potentiality  of  future  existence. 

4 On  the  piece  of  gold  he  lays  a golden  figure  of  a man,  on  bvs  bdek,  with 
his  face  eastward,  a symbol  of  Prajapati,  Agni,  and  the  Sacrifioer,  and  re- 
cites the  two  texts  taken  respectively  from  R.  V.  X.  121.  1,  and,  with  van* 
ations,  from  R.  V X.  17.  11.  //{rangagarbha:  ‘the  Gold  Germ, 

of  Golden  Light,'  the  Sun-God  identified  with  Praj.lpati.  Ba : Pra]4pati. 
Or.  What  God  (other  than  Prajapati)  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation? 

See  I.  6,  note.  - , _ 

5 6,  7 The  Di’Op : meaning,  »ay  the  Commentators,  Aditya,  the  oun. 
Oblations  ■ hotrds,  meaning,  it  is  said,  the  regions  of  the  sky.  The  Saertf  cer 
thus  establishes  the  Sun  in  heaven.  See  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  XL  I. 
p 368.  The  Saorifioer  stands  by  the  golden  figure  worshipping  with  the 
tiiieo  following  formulas.  SerpenU:  see  two  hymns  addressed  to  Serpents 
as  powerful  superhuman  beings,  A.  V.  III.  26,  27.  Denotit  durit:  sent  by 
Mkshasas  and  other  evil  beings  to  bite  and  kill  men. 


VERSE  18.] 


WHITE  YAJURYEDA. 


115 


I offer  up,  throughout  the  seven  oblations,  the  Drop  still 
moving  to  the  common  dwelling. 

6 Homage  be  paid  to  Serpents  unto  all  of  them  that  are  on 

earth, 

To  those  that  dwell  in  air,  to  those  that  dwell  in  sky  be 
homage  paid. 

7 To  those  that  are  the  demons'  darts,  to  those  that  live  upon 

the  trees, 

To  all  the  Serpents  that  lie  low  in  holes  be  adoration  paid. 

8 Or  those  that  are  in  heaven’s  bright  sphere,  or  those  that 

dwell  in  the  Sun’s  beams  : 

Serpents,  whose  home  has  been  prepared  in  waters,  homage 
unto  them ! 

9 Put  forth  like  a wide  spreading  net  thy  vigour : go  like  a 

mighty  King  with  his  attendants. 

Thou,  following  thy  swift  net,  shootest  arrows : transfix  the 
fiends  with  darts  that  burn  most  fiercely. 

10  Forth  go  in  rapid  flight  thy  whirling  weapons:  follow  them 

closely  glowing  in  thy  fury. 

Spread  with  thy  tongue  the  wingM  flames,  0 Agni : unfet- 
tered cast  thy  fiiebrands  all  around  thee. 

11  Send  thy  spies  forward,  fleetest  in  thy  motion:  be,  ne’er 

deceived,  the  guardian  of  this  people 
From  him  who,  near  or  far,  is  bent  on  evil,  and  let  uc 
trouble  sent  from  thee  o’ercome  us. 

12  Rise  up,  0 Agni,  spread  thee  out  before  us,  burn  down  our 

foes,  thou  who  hast  sharpened  arrows. 

Him,  blazing  Agni ! who  hath  worked  us  mischief,  consume 
thou  utterly  like  dried-up  stubble. 

13  Rise,  Agni,  drive  off  those  who  fight  against  us:  make 

manifest  thine  own  celestial  vigour. 

Slacken  the  strong  bows  of  the  demon-driven  : destroy  ou» 
foernen  whether  kin  or  stranger. 

I settle  thee  with  Agni’s  fiery  ardour. 


9 He  site  down  and  oSers  an  oblation  on  the  gold  figure  with  butter  tak* 
in  five  ladlefuls,  reciting  five  texts,  demon-slaying  charms,  taken  irofn  K.  v 
IV.  4.  1-5. 


1 1 5pt« ; the  first  flames,  sent  forward  ae  if  to  reconnoitre. 

18  Dmm-drivtn:  those  whom  evil  spiriU  incite  to  attwk  «s.  I uW 
..  with  this  formuU  he  lays  down  on  the  wujh  s^e  a ladle  ^ 

Wood  of  the  mrshmarya  tree  (Onaeliae  Arboree)  filled  wRh  ctenfied  butte* 


TEE  TEXTS  OF  TEE 


[BOOK  xni 


116 

14  Agni  is  head  and  height  of  heaven,  the  Master  of  the  earth 

is  he : 

He  quickeneth  the  waters’  seed. 

I settle  thee  with  the  great  strength  of  Indra. 

15  Thou  art  the  leader  of  the  rite  and  region  to  which  with 
' thine  auspicious  teams  thou  tendest. 

Thy  light-bestowing  head  to  heaven  thou  hftest,  makiDg 
thy  tongue  the  oblation-bearer,  Agni ! 

16  Steady  art  thou,  sustainer,  laid  by  Visvakarman  m thy 

Let 'mi  tlie  ocean  nor  the  bird  harm  thee : unshaking,  steady 
earth.  , • » 

17  Thee  let  Prajapati  settle  on  the  waters’  back,  m Oceans 

Thee^the  capaoiods,  widely  spread.  Thou  art  the  Wide 
One  : spread  thee  wide  ! 

18  Thou  art  the  earth,  the  ground,  thou  art  the  all-sustftmiQg 

Aditi,  she 'Who  supporteth  all  the  world. 

Control  the  earth,  steady  the  earth,  do  thou  the  earth  no 

19  For  all  breath,  out-breath,  through-breath,  upward-breath- 

ing, for  high  position,  for  prescribed  . 

May^Agni  keep  thee  safe  with  great  well-being,  ^ 
securest  shelter.  As  aforetime  With  Angiras,  with  tha 
Deity  lie  steady. 

20  Upspringing  from  thine  every  joint,  npspringing  from  each 

knot  of  thine,  

14  He  lays  down  oo  the  north jide  a 

rata)  wood,  filled  with  inspisea^BOur  mi  J p'y  yrjj  44  je  and 
recites  the  text,  repeated  from  III.  12,  taken  from  R.  V.  Vlll.  10, 
the  additional  formula,  I settle  ther  eto. 

15  He  recites  also  the  test  from  R.  V.  X.  a.  e.  ^orfr^rated  or 

«rL,  wide  ; the  commoa  name  of  the  eerth,  »»d  Earth  pereomSed  eei 

QoddeM.  Sjpreadthee  mU:  praeriM  oUerraKCi 

19  Hioh  vontion : ‘ for  a resting-pwce  l!.ugeijDg.  ^ 

■fi  . moviori'lsce':  Egaeli«g-^ 

gti^h^i  oufidH' Lengthen  out  ouMmrtof  descendants). 


URSB  26.]  WHITE  YAJURVEDA,  117 


Thus  with  a thousand,  Durvi ! with  a hundred  do  thou 
stretch  us  out. 


21  Thou  spreading  with  a hundred,  thou  that  braiichest  with 

a thousand  shoots, — 

Thee,  such,  with  our  oblation  will  we  worship,  0 celestial 
Brick. 

22  Thy  lights,  0 Agni,  in  the  Sun  that  with  their  beams  o’er- 

spreiid  the  sky, — 

Witii  all  of  those  assist  thou  ns  to  day  to  light  and  progeny. 


23  Lights  of  yours  in  the  Sun,  0 Gods,  or  lights  that  are  in 

kine  and  steeds, 

0 Indni-Agni,  with  all  those  vouchsafe  us  light,  Brihaspati ! 

24  The  Far-Refulgent  held  the  light.  The  Self-Refulgent  held 

the  light. 

Thee,  luminous,  may  Prajapati  settle  upon  the  back  of  Earth. 
Give,  to  all  breathing,  all  the  light,  to  out-breath,  to  diflfu- 
sive  breath. 

Thy  Sovran  Lord  is  Agni.  With  that  Deity,  as  with  Angiras, 
lie  firmly  settled  in  thy  place. 

25  Madhu  and  Mildhava,  the  two  Spring  seasons-— thou  art 

the  innermost  cement  of  Agni. 

May  Heaven  and  Earth,  may  Waters,  Plants  and  Agnis 
help,  separate,  accordant,  my  precedence. 

May  all  the  Fires  ’twixt  heaven  and  earth,  one  minded, 
well-fitted,  gather  round  these  two  Spring  seasons. 

As  the  Gods  gathering  encompass  Indra  : firm  with  that 
Deity,  Angiras-like,  be  seated. 

26  Thou  art  Ashadha,  Conquering  One.  Conquer  our  foemcn, 

conquer  thou  the  men  who  fain  would  fight  with  us. 

A thousand  manly  powers  hast  thou  : so  do  thou  aid  an 
quicken  me.  


22  CloM  to  the  porous  brick,  on  ito  eastern  side,  he  lays  * 

80  called  because  it  was  originally  seen  and  used  by  the  two  Gods,  ludr 
and  A«ui,  and  recites  the  two  texts.  ^ 

24  He  leys  down  two  Ketatsich,  or  re^ 

Dviyajua,  eastward,  one  on  each  side  of  the  backbone  ViaWivotis 

cit*;  the  first  line  Jf  the  text.  TAw,  ltt«.iuo»s  ■ he  lays  down  a V..v»jyot>». 
Of  All-light,  brick,  and  recites  the  rest  of  the  text. 

26  H^ays  down  two  RiUvyd,  hoZ. 

light  brick,  one  on  each  eide  of  t**®  honev-like  • Vai- 

a name  of  Chaitra  (Mid-March  to  Mid-Apnl).  2^!  ’ Be 

•»kha(Mi<l.April  to  Mid-May).  TIutu:  t**®  t U ofthl  Fire- 

the slmwnal bricks  are  addressed.  O/iyn,;  thatu.of  thohire 

^ m'  He  Uys  down  the  brick  Ashidbfi,  01  Inyincible,  oa  th«  Itont  of  tho 
4tar,  OQ  its  backbone. 


118 


THE  TEXTS  OP  TBS  [BOOK  XIII 


27  The  winds  waft  sweets,  the  rivers  pour  sweets  for  the  maa 

who  keeps  the  Law  : 

So  may  the  plants  be  sweet  for  us. 

28  Sweet  be  the  night  and  sweet  the  dawns,  sweet  the  terres- 

trial atmosphere : 

Sweet  be  our  Father  Heaven  to  us. 

29  May  the  tall  tree  be  full  of  sweets  for  us  and,  and  full  of 

sweets  the  Sun  : 

May  our  milch-kine  be  sweet  for  us. 

;0  Seat  thyself  in  the  deepness  of  the  waters,  lest  Surya,  leal 
Vaisvanara  Agni  scorch  thee. 

With  wing  unclipped,  survey  created  beings  : may  rair 
that  cometh  down  from  heaven  attend  thee. 
il  He  crept  across  the  three  heaven-reaching  oceans,  the  Bui 
of  Bricks,  the  Master  of  the  Waters. 

Clad  in  the  world  with  his,  the  Well-Made’s,  vesture,  go 
whither  those  before  thee  have  departed. 

32  May  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Mighty  Pair,  besprinkle  this  our 

sacrifice. 

And  feed  us  full  with  nourishments. 

33  Look  ye  on  Vishnu’s  works  whereby  the  Friend  of  Indra, 

close  allied. 

Hath  let  his  holy  ways  be  seen. 


27  He  anointi  a tortoise,  said  to  represent  the  Sun  or  Pr.ijJpati,  wit 
mixed  sour  milk,  honey,  aud  butter,  and  recites  the  tliree  texts  taken  from 
R V.  I 90.  6-8.  ^ ^ , 

30  He  lays  down  the  tortoise  on  a bed  of  Avaka  plants  (B1yxa  Octan|r», 
growino-  in  tuar.hy  places)  on  the  right  side  of  the  brick  Invincible,  looang 
toward!  the  golden  figure.  The  cu4ora  of  building  living  animals  some 
times  human  beings,  into  the  foundations  of  a house  t > secure  its  stab ili  y, 
is  of  very  great  antiquity,  and  was  formerly  very  widely  spread^^  See  S 
Baring-Gould,  Strange  Survivals,  pp  1-35  Tiie  tortoise  may  have  bee 
chosen  here  with  reference  to  the  belief  that  the  woidd  re. ts  upon  a tortoise 
a-,  an  incarnation  of  Vishnu.  See  A.  Weber,  Indische  Streifen,  p. 
Waten : the  heavenly  waters  in  the  orb  of  the  Sun. 

31  He  keeps  his  hand  on  the  tortoise  and  shakes  it  as  he  recites  the  text. 
The  Bull:  the  chief.  The  Wdl-mode:  Agni  whose  ve-^ture  is  said  to  be 
cattle  whose  form  the  tortoise  is  supposed  to  assume.  Time  before  tfiee 
former  tortoises  employed  in  similar  ceremonies. 

32  He  pute  the  tortoise  on  the  altar  site  with  the  text,  repeated  from 
VIZI.  82,  taken  from  E.  V.  I.  22.  13. 

33  On  the  north  aide  of  the  chief  and  mpresenUtive  porous  l»ick  he 
places  a pestle  a^d  morUr  of  Udumbara  wood,  reciting  the  text,  repeatea 
frbtn  VI.  4,  taken  from  R V.  I.  22.  19, 


WHITE  YAJURySHA. 


119 


terse  40.] 


34  Firm  art  thon,  a sustainer.  Hence  engendered,  forth  from 

these  wombs  at  first  came  Jatavedas. 

By  Giiyatri,  by  Trishtup,  by  Auushtnp,  muy  he  who  knows 
bear  to  the  Gods  oblation. 

35  Take  thon  thine  ease  for  food,  for  store  of  riches,  for  might 

in  splendour,  and  for  strength  a»id  offspring. 

Thou  art  all-ruling,  independent  Ruler : both  fountains  of 
Sarasvati  pt’otect  thee ! 

36  0 radiant  Agin,  harness  thou  thy  steeds  wliich  ore  most  ei- 

cellent ! 

They  bear  thee  as  thy  spirit  wills. 

37  Yoke,  Agni,  as  a charioteer,  thy  steeds  who  best  invoke  the 

Gods  : 

As  ancient  llotar  take  thy  seat. 

88  Like  rivers  our  lil)ations  flow  together,  clearsing  themselves 
in  inmost  heart  and  spirit. 

1 look  upon  the  flowing  streams  of  butter : the  golden  reed 
is  in  tlio  midst  of  Agni. 

39  Thee  for  tiie  praise-verse,  thee  for  sheen,  thee  for  bright 

splendour,  thee  for  light  j r 

This  hath  hecome  the  energetic  spirit  of  all  the  world  and  of 
Vaisvanara  Agni. 

40  Agni,  all-luminous  with  light,  splendid  with  splendour,  golden 
Giver  of  thousands  art  thou : for  a thousand  thee. 


34  Having  first  silently  pla^'ed  the  Fire-pan  on  the  mo.har 

prepared  clay  and  throws  iton  the  ground  ^ 'lie  vol  so  16. 

«et  upon  it  with  the  two  following  fiinnulau.  • 

35  Both  foKHtaim:  Mind  and  Speech;  according  tc  Mahidhara,  the 
Rigveda  and  the  SAmaveda. 

' 36  Ha  offara  two  oblations  on  tlm  F.ra  pw  with  two  teits  taken  respea- 
lively  from  R.  V.  VI  16  43  and  VIII.  64  1. 

33  The  heads  of  the  victim.  sla«?hte,ed  for  ‘he  ceremony 

at  an  early  Stage  of  the  proceedings,  ann  he  now  tl.n.a.  * P'" “ Q 
the  symbol  of  pnrity  and  nnmortsl.ty,  into  the  moutb  c»c'‘' 
taken,  with  transposrtion  and  a var.aUon,  from  V,  IV  o8  6 6 

den  reed;  the  golden  figure  of  a man  (see  verse  4).  dyw.  liereme  g 

the  Fire-altar.  „ rr  - 

89  Tkee  for  the  praise-vem:  riche ; ‘for  praise  : right 

splinter  of  gold  into  each  victim’s  left  nostnl  . into  the  loft  eve 

nostril.  Forbr^htspUndour:  inU,  the  right  eye.  ear  ^ 

Tki,  hath  bmZ:  ^th  this,  a splinter  of  g.dd  is  trust  into  the  left  ear 

<0  With  the  first  line  he  thrusts  a splinter  of  gold 
right  ear.  Qioer  ofthoHtands:  he  addresses  the  go  f? 
he  taken  up  and  deposiU,  with  tlws  other  beads,  in  the  Fire-pan. 


120  THE  TEXTS  OP  TEE  [BOOK  Xlll 

41  Balm  thou  with  milk  the  unboni  babe  Aditya,  wearing  all 

forms,  creator  of  a thousand. 

Spare  him  with  heat,  nor  plot  against  him : give  him  a 
hundred  years  of  life  while  thou  art  building. 

42  The  wind’s  impetuous  rush,  Vanina’s  navel ! the  horse  that 

springs  to  life  amid  the  waters ! 

The  rivers’  tawny  child,  based  on  the  mountain,  harm  not, 
0 Agni,  in  the  loftiest  region. 

43  Unwasting  Drop,  red,  eager,  pressing  forward,  Agni  I worsSnp 

with  repeated  homage. 

Forming  thyself  with  joints  in  proper  order,  harm  not  the 
Cow,  Aditi  widely  ruling  I 

44  Her  who  is  TvasMar’s  guardian,  Varuna’s  navel,  the  Ewe 

brought  forth  from  out  the  loftiest  region, 

The  Asura’s  mighty  thousandfold  contrivance,  injure  not  in 
the  highest  sphere,  0 Agni. 

45  The  Agni  who  from  Agni  had  his  being,  from  heat  of  Earth 

or  also  heat  of  Heaven, 

Whereby  the  Omnific  One  engendered  creatures,  him  may 
thy  fierce  displeasure  spare,  0 Agni. 

46  The  brilliant  presence  of  the  Gods  hath  risen,  the  eye  of 

Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Agni. 

The  soul  of  all  that  moveth  not  or  moveth,  the  Sun  hath 
filled  the  air,  and  earth  and  heaven. 

47  Injure  not,  thousand-eyed,  while  thou  art  building  for  sacri- 

fice, this  animal,  the  biped. 

41  With  milk : with  reference  to  the  milk,  repreeenting  wealta  in  cattle, 

put  into  the  Fire-pan  with  the  eaud  mentioned  in  XII.  61,  note.  Aditya: 
the  Sun,  that  is,  Agni  of  the  Fire-altar.  Wearing  all  form : regarded  as 
the  Sun.  Him : the  Sacrificer.  , t * 

42  He  puts  the  horse’s  head  on  the  north-east  side,  and  recites  the  text. 

43  He  puts  the  ox's  head  on  the  south-east  side,  and  recites  the  text. 
The  i>rop  is  Soma  represented  by  the  ox. 

44  The  ram's  head  is  similarly  placed  on  the  north-west  side.  ,Tva8htari 

ouarrfian:  as  providing  warm  clothing  for  human  beings  created 

uisura’s ; the  Divine  Being's.  But  see  S.  B.  E.  XLI.  406.  Thousandfold- 
infinitely  precious,  or  fit  for  a thousand  services.  j • . 

45  On  the  south-western  side  be  puts  the  head  of  the  be-goat.  The  Agni. 
in  the  form  of  the  goftt.  Fr<mAgni:  that  is  PrajApati.  Whereby:  by  the 
goat  (or,  by  the  Birthless)  representing  V4k,  Speech,  the  Woi^.  by  whicu 
the  Omnific  Prajftpati  created  all  things.  See  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  Ia- 
473  aq  , and  Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  V.  391. 

46  He  ofifers  an  oblation  on  the  human  head,  or  head  of  the  figure,  recit- 
ing the  text,  repeated  from  VII.  42,  taken  from  R.  V.  I.  116.  1.  . 

47  After  worshipping  he  rmnoves  the  human  head,  reciting  the  wxt- 
PitA or  marrow,  the  essential  part  of  sacrificial  food.  Man's 

mayu  is  explained  by  kimpurus^  perhaps,  monkey.  Perhaps  the  head  o* 
a puppet  or  doll,  repreeeuting  a mao,  ia  intended.  See  XI.  16,  note. 


VERSE  52.] 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA. 


121 


Accept  as  pith  man’s  counterfeit  the  victim,  Agni:  therewith 
building  thy  forms,  be  settled. 

Let  thy  flame  reach  man’s  counterfeit : let  thy  flame  reach 
the  man  we  hate. 

48  Harm  not  this  animal  whose  hooves  are  solid,  the  courser 

neighing  in  the  midst  of  coursers. 

I dedicate  to  thee  the  forest  Gaiira  : building  thy  bodies  up 
with  him  be  settled. 

Let  thy  flame  reach  the  Gaura,  let  thy  flame  reach  him  whom 
we  detest. 

49  Tliousandfold,  with  a hundred  streams,  this  fountain,  ex- 

panded in  the  middle  of  the  waters, 

Infinite,  yielding  butter  for  the  people,  harm  not,  0 Agni, 
in  tlie  highest  region. 

This  wild  bull  of  the  forest  I assign  thee : building  thy 
bodies  up  therewith  be  settled. 

Let  tliy  flame  reach  the  wild  bull,  etc.  ( as  in  48 ). 

50  This  creature  clothed  in  wool,  Vanina's  navel,  the  skin  of 

animals  quadruped  and  biped, 

The  first  that  was  produced  of  Tvashtai’s  creatures,  0 Agni, 
harm  not  in  the  highest  region. 

The  forest  buftalo  do  I assign  thee : building,  etc.,  as  above 
mutaio  mutando, 

51  From  Agni’s  warmth  the  he-goat  had  his  being  : he  looked 

at  first  upon  his  generator. 

Thereby  the  Gods  at  first  attained  to  Godhead ; those  meet 
for  worship  to  the  height  ascended. 

The  forest  Sarabha  do  1 assign  thee : building,  etc. 

52  Do  thou.  Most  Youthful  God,  protect  the  men  who  offer, 

hear  their  songs. 

Protect  his  offspring  and  himself. 


48  He  removes  the  horse’a  head,  Oaura:  the  Gaur  or  Oour  (Boe  Gauruu), 
a apeeies  of  wild  ox. 

49  He  removes  the  head  of  the  ox  representing  the  coW.  Wild  bull: 
Gavaya  ; the  Gayal  (Bos  Gavaeus). 

50  He  removes  the  head  of  the  ram.  Skin : provider  of  clothmg.  Qua- 
drupedi : horses,  cows,  mules,  etc. 

51  He  removes  the  head  of  the  he-goat.  AgnVt  warmth ; ^ 

japati's.  Tlureby : by  the  goat  (or  the  Birtbless).  See  v. 

a mythical  ei^^legged  animal,  supposed  to  live  on  the  Snowy  Mountain 
and  to  equal  or  surpass  the  lion  in  strength,  like  our  unicorn. 

«2  He  wonhipe  the  half.finiehed  Fire-altw  with  the  text  from  l^V. 
^UI.  73.  8.  rAow#  wA®  cftr;  or,  the  Secrificere  men.  Hu.  The  present 
Sacrihcer’a. 


122 


THE  TEXTS  OP  THE 


BOOK  XIII 


53  I set  thee  in  the  passage  of  the  waters.  I set  thee  in  the 

swelling  of  the  waters.  I set  thee  in  the  ashes  of  tiie 
waters.  I set  thee  in  the  lustre  of  the  waters.  I set 
thee  in  the  way  which  waters  travel.  I set  thee  in  the 
flood,  the  place  to  rest  in.  I set  thee  in  the  sea,  the  place 
to  rest  in.  1 set  thee  in  the  stream,  the  place  to  rest  in. 
I set  thee  in  the  water’s  habitation.  I set  thee  in  the 
resting-place  of  waters.  I set  thee  in  the  station  of  the 
waters.  I set  thee  in  the  meeting-place  of  waters.  I set 
thee  in  the  birthplace  of  the  waters.  I set  thee  in  the 
refuse  of  the  waters  I set  thee  in  the  residence  of  waters. 

I settle  thee  with  the  G4yatri  metre.  I settle  thee  with 
the  Trishtup  metre.  I settle  the?  with  the  Jagati  metre. 

I settle  thee  with  the  Anushtup  metre.  I settle  thee 
with  the  Paiikti  metre. 

54  This,  in  front,  is  Bhuva.  His  offspring,  Breath,  is  Bhauva- 

yana.  Spring  is  Pranayana.  The  Gayatri  is  the  daughter 
of  Spring.  From  the  Gayatri  conies  the  Gayatra  tune 
From  the  G\yatra  the  Upamsii.  From  tlie  Uj  amsu  the 
Trivrit.  From  the  Trivnt  the  Rathantara.  The  Kishi 
Vasishtha.  By  thee,  taken  i)y  Prajajiati,  I take  vital 
breath  for  creatures. 

55  This  on  the  right,  the  Omnific.  His,  the  Omnific’s  offspring, 

Mind,  Summer  sprang  from  Mind.  I’he  Trisbtup  is  the 
daughter  of  Summer.  From  the  Trishtup  came  the  Svara 
song.  From  the  Sv^ra  the  Antaryama.  From  the  An* 
taryama  the  Panchadasa,  From  the  Paftchidasa  the 
Bnhat.  The  Bishi  Bharadvaja.  By  thee,  taken  by  Pra 
japati,  I take  Mind  for  creatures.  

53  He  mounts  on  the  altar  l)ehind  the  porous  brick  and  lays  down  the 
Apasyis,  or  W.itery,  bricks,  five  in  each  quarter,  correspoudiug  with  tlie 
number  of  the  sacrificial  victims,  and  addie-ises  a formula  to  each.  jPassage 
explained  as  the  wind.  Swelling:  the  plants,  ilsAes.- foam,  //iiairc;  lightning. 
Way;  the  eaith.  Flood:  the  breath.  Sea:  the  raind.  Stream:  sjieech.  M- 
iation;  the  eye  Resting  place:  the  ear.  Station:  the  sky.  Meeting-place 
the  air.  Birthplace:  the  sea.  Refuse:  sand.  Residence:  food.  I ?ettle:  he 
then  lays  down  four  Chbandasy&s,  or  Metre,  bricks,  with  a formula  for  eac  . 

54  He  lay^  down  the  Prl  labhritas,  or  Breath- supporting,  bricvs,  two  at 

a time,  with  a formula  for  each  8*et.  Bhuva  : a name  of  Agni ; ‘ the  Exis- 
tent’ ; Egg«ling.  Bkauvdyana:  sprung  from  the  Existent;  or  Mundaiie 
Prdndyaua:  sprung  from  breath,  f/ptfinsw ; see  VI  30  sq.  Triviit  . t e 
nine’-verse  hymn.  Vasishtha:  meaning  the  vital  bre.ith,  the  word  signity- 
I Hg  best,  most  precious.  .•  created,  or  established. 

65  He  lays  down  the  thml  set  (after  the  ten  of  the  following  verse). 
Omnific:  meaning  V4yu  the  Wind-God.  SvAra:  a S&man  that  hw  th 
$oara,  or  first  rising  and  then  falling  pitch  of  the  final  vowel,  for  its  iin<  • 
AntarydnuiL:  aspecial  Soma  cup  and  libation.  See  VII.  4,  note.  <'? 

a hymn  with  fifteen  verses.  Bharadvdja  : another  famous  Vedio  Jyishi,  Here 
meaning  Mind. 


yERSB  W.l 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


12S 


56  This  on  the  western  side,  the  All-Embracer.  His,  the  All 

Embracer’s  oflfspring,  the  Eye.  The  Rains  sprang  from 
the  Eye.  The  Jagati  is  the  daughter  of  the  Rams. 
From  the  Jagati  came  the  Riksama.  From  the  Riksama 
the  Sukra.  From  the  Sukra  the  Saptadasa.  From  the 
Saptadasa  the  Vairupa.  TheRishi  Jao'adagni.  By  thee, 
taken  by  Prajapati,  I take  the  Eye  for  creatures. 

57  This  on  the  north  side,  iieaven.  This,  heaven's  oflfspring, 

the  Ear.  Autumn,  the  daughter  of  the  Ear.  The  Anusli- 
tup  sprang  from  Antumn.  From  the  Amishtiip  ctme  the 
Alda,  From  the  Aida  the  Manthin.  From  the  Mimthiu 
the  Ekavimsa.  From  the  Ekaviinsa  the  Vaitaja.  Tlie 
Rishi  Visvamitra  By  thee,  taken  by  Prajapati,  I take 
the  Ear  for  creatures. 

58  This  above,  Intellect.  Its,  Intellect's  offspring,  Speech. 

Winter  the  offspring  of  Speech.  I'ahkti  sprang  from 
Winter.  From  Pahkti  the  Nidhanavat.  From  the  Ni- 
dhanavat  came  the  Agrayana.  From  the  Agrayana  the 
'J’rinava  and  the  Trayastrimsa.  From  the  Trinava  and 
the  Trayastrimsa  the  Sakvara  and  the  Raivata.  The 
Rishi  Visvakarman.  By  thee,  taken  by  Visvakarman, 
I take  Speech  for  people.  • 

Fill  up  the  room,  etc.  The  dappled  kine,  etc.  All  sacred 
songs,  etc.,  three  texts  repeated  from  XII.  51  — 56. 


56  He  Iriys  down  the  second  set  of  ten.  All-Enibi’acer : the  Sun  Riksama. 
similar  to  a Rich  ; a certain  kind  of  S.tman.  Sukra:  n certain  Soma  cup 
and  hbatiori.  See  VII  12  Suptadam:  a hymn  of  Reventeen  verneH. 
Vairdpa  : an  important  Sftman.  Jamadagni:  a famous  Vedic  Rishi,  here 
representing  the  Eye. 

57  He  Uys  down  the  fourth  set.  Aida  * the  name  of  SAmans  which  have 
the  Word  iriff  (lefreshment ; libation)  for  their  fiiule  or  chorus  Manthin 
» Soma  libation  S-ie  VII  Ifi.  Ekavimm  a hymn  of  twenty-one  vernes 
Yairya:  an  important  S-lniau.  Vi^vdmitra:  the  name  of  a celebiai-ed 
Vedic  Ri^lii,  here  meaning  the  Ear,  because  one  hears  with  it  on  all  (vijri;a) 
sides,  and  because  it  has  a friend  [mitra)  on  all  sides. 

58  He  lays  down  the  fifth  set  Intellect  - meaning  the  Moon.  Nidhana- 

vat ■ a SAman  with  a special  finale  or  chorus.  Agrayana:  a certain  Soma 
cup  and  libation  See  VII.  20.  Trinava:  a hymn  consHtiiig  of  ihiice  nine 
veises.  a hymn  of  thirty  three  verses.  Slkvara.  Ruivata: 

two  important  Prishtha-Sdmans,  Sikvara  meaning  Potent,  and  Kaivata 
Wealthy.  See  Hang,  Aitareya-BrAhmaiaro,  IV.  13.  Viavakartnau  : mean- 
ing, all-effecting  Speech. 


BOOK  THE  FOURTEENTH. 


With  stedfast  site  and  birthplace  thou  art  stedfast : settle 
thou  duly  in  thy  stedfast  birthplace,  rejoicing  m the 
Ukhya’s  first  appearance. 

Here  let  the  Asvins,  the  Adhvaryus,  seat  thee. 

2 Nesting,  intelligent  dripping  with  butter  , in  the  auspicious 

seat  of  earth  be  seated. 

Let  Rudras,  Vasus  welcome  thee  with  praises  : fill  full  these 
prayers  for  our  propitious  fortune. 

Here  let  the  Asvins,  the  Adhvaryus,  seat  thee. 

3 Here,  Guard  of  Strength,  with  thine  own  powers  be  seated 

for  the  Gods’  happiness  and  great  enjoyment. 

Even  as  a father  to  his  son,  be  friendly : with  easy  entrance 
enter  with  thy  body.  Here  let  the  Asvins,  the  Adhvaryus 
seat  thee : 

i Thou  art  the  filling-stuff  of  earth  called  Apsas.  May  all  the 
Gods  celebrate  thee  with  praises 
Enriched  with  songs  of  praise,  Pyishthas  and  butter,  sit  bere 
and  give  us  wealth  with  store  of  children. 

Here  let  the  Asvins,  etc. 

5*  Upon  the  back  of  Aditi  I lay  thee  the  sky’s  supporter,  pillar 

of  the  Quarters,  . i.  *1,^.1 

Queen  over  creutures.  Wave  and  drop  of  waters  art  thou, 

and  Visvakarman  is  thy  Rishi, 

6 Sukm  and  Suchi,  seasons,  both,  of  summer— thou  art  the 

innermost  cement  of  Agni.  j a # Vmln 

May  Heaven  and  Earth,  may  Waters,  Plants  and  Agnis  help, 

separate,  accordant,  my  precedence.  _ 


■ He  «te  the  eecoad  Uyer  ot  brieke,  the"firet  l.yer  representing  this 

‘"rHeUvrdot  the  B«t  briek  oslled  Asvint,  belonging  W the  AeVta, 
becsuso  they  sa  the  divine  Adhvsiyus  laid  down  tor  ^ ‘^'^Ttweei 
layer  of  tbe^ Celestial  Altar  of  the  Universe,  representing  what  w bet 
the  eerth  nnd  the  niiddle..ir"  Ukhyu  s : Agni  e. 

2 K down  the  aeoond  A,«nt  briek.  Earth ; meaning  the  Sret  layer 

4He'i:red:::tofciHh&i’'wek.  FiteytHf.- 
cover’  Eggetr%<«:  ««>'ding  to  Mahtdhma,  the  moietnr.  that . 

^^’sXTr'thrafthj&vin. brick.  Aditi: 

first  layer!  Thov.:  as  constituting  one  season.  FtfecOiarmon . Fraj  p 

"“S  He'uji  down  two  Ritavyi.  or  Soaiimal, 

brick. of  the  firat  layer.  See  IIII. M *" 

Junc-Juljt  The  formuU  IS  almost  idenUcal  with  Alli.  ^9- 


WHITE  YAJVJtVEDA, 


125 


YEESE  9.] 


Let  all  the  Agnis  ’twixt  the  earth  and  heaven  gather  together 
round  these  summer  seasons,  as  the  Gods  gather  in  their 
hosts  round  Indra, 

Firm,  with  that  Deity,  Angiras-like,  be  seated. 

7  Associate  with  the  Seasons,  with  the  Modes  with  the  Gods, 
with  the  health-establishing  Gods— -may  the  Asvins  the 
Adhvaryus  settle  thee  here  for  Agni  Vaisvanara. 


Associate with  the  Vasus,  etc. 

Associate with  the  Rudras,  etc. 

Associate with  the  Adityas,  etc. 

Associate with  the  Visvedevas,  etc. 


8 Guard  thou  my  breath.  Guard  my  out-breathing.  Guard 

my  through-breathing.  Illume  mine  eye  with  far-rcach- 
ing  vision.  Give  power  of  hearing  to  mine  ear.  Pour 
forth  waters.  Quicken  plants.  Protect  bipeds.  Protect 
quadrupeds.  Send  rain  from  heaven. 

9 The  head  is  vital  vigour.  Prajapati  became  the  metre. 

Royalty  is  vital  vigour,  health-giving  metre.  The  Supporter 
is  vital  vigour,  the  Sovran  Lord  the  metre.  Visvakarman 
is  vital  vigour,  Parameshthin  the  metre.  The  he-goat  is 
vital  vigour,  excellent  the  metre.  The  bull  is  vital  vigour, 
extensive  the  metre.  Man  is  vital  vigour,  languid  the 
metre.  The  tiger  is  vital  vigour,  invincible  the  metre.  The 
lion  is  vital  vigour,  covering  the  metre.  The  four  year 
bull  is  vital  vigour,  Brihati  the  metre.  The  ox  is  vital 
vigour,  Kakup  the  metre.  The  steer  is  vital  vigour,  Sato- 
brihati  the  metre. 


7 He  iaya  down  five  Vaiavadevl  bricks,  «o  called  as  beloningto  the  Visve- 
devas or  All-Gods.  Aaaociaie : or,  in  accord ; the  l>rick  is  addressed.  Modes  : 
meaning  the  waters  by  which  everything  was  created  and  .arranged. 
ttiablUhing  Oods:  the  vital  breathings  by  which  life  is  sii limited  The 
four  following  formulas  differ  only  in  substituting  ‘ Vasus,  • Rudras,  etc. 
for  ‘the  Gods.’ 


8 He  lays  down  the  Prftnabhritas  or  Breath-supporting  bricks  (see  XIII. 
54)  with  five  formulas.  Pour  forth  waters : here  he  l.ys  down  the  AiiasyAs 
or  Watery  bricks  (XIII.  53)  with  five  formulas,  one  f<»r  each  brick. 

9 He  lays  down  the  nineteen  VayasyAs  or  Vital-vigour  bricks  called  in 

the  Satapatha-Brdhma^a  Chhanda.sy'is  or  Sacred-metre  bricks,  with  a for^ 
mula  addressed  to  each.  According  to  the  legend  PrajApati  ^ 

performed  the  work  of  creation  became  disjointed,  relaxed,  or  agitated, 
and  the  cattle,  having  assumed  the  forms  of  the  sacred  meties,  went  from 
him.  Then  Prftj-lpati  in  the  form  of  the  G.lyatrl,  which  is  connected  with 
cattle,  and  the.ftther  metres  followed  and  overtook  them  through  the  vital 
powqr  of  the  Gdyatrl.  The  head:  PrajApati. 


126 


THE  TEXTS  OP  THE  [BOOK  XI Y, 

10  The  bullock  is  vital  vigour,  Pankti  the  metre.  The  miloh- 

cow  is  vital  vigour,  Jogati  the  metre.  The  eighteen- 
month  calf  is  vital  vigour,  Trishtup  tl.e  metre.  The  two 
year  old  steer  is  vital  vigour,  Viraj  the  metre.  The  thiity- 
month  old  ewe  is  vital  vigour,  Gkyatri  the  metre.  The 
three  year  old  steer  is  vital  vigour,  Ush^ih  the  metre. 
The  four  year  old  ox  is  vital  vigour,  Anushtup  the  metre. 
Fill  up  the  room,  cte.  The  dappled  kiue,  eto  All  sacrrf 
songs,  etc.  are  three  texts  repeated  fiom  XII.  54— 5b. 
See  also  XIII.  58. 

11  Indra  and  Agni,  in  its  place  securely  set  the  unshaking  brick. 
Thou  with  thy  back  suuderest  heaven  and  the  broad  earth 

and  firmament. 

12  On  the  air’s  back  let  Tisvakarman  set  thee,  thee  the  capa- 

cious, thee  the  far-extended. 

Control  the  air,  fix  firm  the  air,  do  thou  the  air  no  injury. 
For  all  breath,  out-breath,  through-breath,  upward  breath- 
ing, for  high  position,  for  prescribed  observance. 

May  Vliyu  keep  thee  safe  with  great  well-being,  with  ^cur- 
est  shelter.  In  the  manner  of  Angiras,  with  that  Deity 
he  steady. 

13  Queen  art  thou.  Quartet  of  the  East.  Widwuler,  Quarter 

of  the  South.  West  Quarter,  thou  art  Sovran.  Thou 
Autocrat,  Quarter  of  the  North. 

Queen  Paramount  art  thou,  the  Lofty  Point. 

U On  the  air’s  back  may  Visvakarman  set  thee  luminous. 
Control  all  light  for  all  breath,  for  out-breath,  up-breath, 

through-breath.  . i*  c ^ 

Thy  Lord  is  Yayu,  with  that  Deity,  Angiras-like,  lie  firm. 

15  Two  Kaiiiy  Seasons,  Nabhas  and  Nahha^a-thou  art  the 
innermost  cement  of  Agui,  etc.  (as  lu  Xlll.  -5;. 

11  He  now  e.t.  the  third  Uyerof  the  Altir  ludmand  igni:  s.  to  the 
case  of  the  hret  leyer.  ITMing  6rici;  the  central  poreua  brick,  which 
represente  the  layer.  I'Aoa ; the  bnek  i»  addressed. 

12  See  XIII.  18,  W.  a • u..  in. 

13  He  lave  down  Eve  Dieyde  or  Regional  bricks  on  the  spines  above  the 
VaLtvt  brickrot  the  sl^nd  U,er,*with  a formula  addressed  to  each. 
Lofty  Point : the  zenith. 

14  He  lavs  down  a Viavajyotis  or  All-Ught  brick  juat  above  the  Viava^ 

jyott  Air'^back:  the  aeoond  layer  repreaentiog 

mid  air  ae  the  fin*  repreaenta  the  earth.  „ a „ ai  . ya. 

15  He  lays  down  two  Bfitavyi  or  Seasonal  brieke,  called  «»d 

Marea ; Mist  and  MUty  ; Jnly-Au^t.  and  August-8eptemb«t.  The 
at  the  foimuU  ia  repeated  from  XIII.  25, 


terse  22]  WHITE  YAJORVEDA.  127 

16  Isha  and  two  Autumnal  Seasons — thou  art  the  inner- 

most cement  of  Agui,  etc. 

17  Preserve  my  life.  Preserve  my  breath.  Guard  mine  out- 

breath.  Preserve  mine  eyes.  Preserve  mine  ears. 
Strengthen  my  voice.  Quicken  my  mmd.  Preserve  my 
seif.  Vouchsafe  me  light. 

18  metre.  Prama  metre.  Pratimd  metre.  Asrlvayas  metro. 
Pankti  metre.  Uslmih  metre.  Brihati  metre.  Annslitup 
metre.  Viraj  metre.  G^yatrl  metro.  Tiishtup  metre. 
Jagati  metre. 

19  Earth  i^ietre.  Sky  metre.  Heaven  metre.  Years  metre. 

Nakshatras  metro.  Vak  metre.  Mind  metre.  Husbandry 
metre.  Gold  metre.  Cow  metre.  She-gout  metre.  Horse 
metre. 

20  The  Deity  Agni.  The  Deity  ViLta.  The  Deity  Sarva.  The 

Deity  Moon.  The  Deity  Vasus.  The  Deity  Rod  1 as.  The 
Deity  Adityas  'I’he  Deity  Marnts.  The  Deity  Viijvedevas. 
I’he  Deity  Brihaspati.  The  Deity  India.  The  Deity 
Varuna. 

21  Chief  art  thou,  bright,  supporting,  firm,  thou  art  the  great 

sustainer.  Earth. 

Thee  for  life,  thee  for  lustre,  thee  for  tillage,  thee  for  peace 
and  rest. 

22  Controller,  brilliant  art  thou,  managing  controller,  firm  sus- 

tainer. For  strength,  for  energy  thee,  for  riches  thee, 
for  prosperity  thee. 

Fill  up  the  room,  etc.  The  dappled  kiiie,  etc.  All  sacred 
songs,  etc.  (as  in  10). 

16  He  lays  two  more  Seasonal  bnckg  ou  the  tirat  two ; called  Isha  and 
Oija,  Sap  ar.d  Vigour,  Septembei -October  aud  Ootober-November.  Therewt 
01  the  formula  as  in  XIII  25 

17  He  lays  down  the  PrAnabhritas  or  Breath  supporting  bricke,  tenia 
number  with  a formula  for  each, 

18  He  lays  down  the  ChhandasyAs  or  Mctiebricks,  thirty -six  in  number, 
in  sets  of  twelve,  with  a formula  for  each.  Tlie  first  four  names  of  the 
bricks  are  fanciful.  MA : measure;  signifying  the  measured  earth. 
Rf’dtftd . forward  measure;  mid-atr.  Prutini^ : counter-measure;  the 
heavenly  world  copied  in  mid-air,  Atrivayas:  sai:*  to  represent  the  three 
Worlds  of  earth,  air,  aud  heaven.  The  following  eight  are  real  metres  and 
names  of  the  bricks. 

19  The  next  twelve  bricks  are  laid  down  and  ^dressed  as  the  metres  of 
the  deified  objects  enumerated. 

20  The  next  twelve  are  named  after  the  deities  enumerated. 

21  He  lays  down  the  bricks  called  Vdlakhilyis,  representing  the  vital 
breathings,  seven  in  front  and  seven  behind. 

22  Thet:  that  is,  I lay  thee  down.  Fill  tfCe,  etc : these  three  fermuUe 
ere  repeated  from  XII.  54—66. 


J23  tee  texts  op  TEE  [BOOK  XIV. 

23  The  Swift,  the  triple  praise-song.  The  Shining,  the  Paficha- 
dasa  hymn.  Heaven,  the  Saptadasa.  The  Supporter,  the 
Ekavimsa.  Speed,  the  Ash^dasa.  Ardour,  the  Navadasa. 
Triumphant  Onset,  Savimsa,  Vigour,  Dvavirp?a.  Main- 
tenance, Trayovimsa.  Womb,  Chaturvimsa.  Embryos, 
Paachavimsa.  Energy,  the  Trinava.  Intention,  the  Eka- 
trimsa.  The  Basis,  the  Trayastrimfa.  The  Bright  Ones 
Station,  the  Chatustrimsa.  The  Vault  of  Heaven,  the 
Shattrimsa,  Tl»e  Revolving  One,  the  Ashtachatvannisa. 
The  Support,  the  Four-divisioned  praise-song. 


^ Hebeeinat^  fourth  layer,  setting  eighteen  bricks  that  the 

He  o p formula  addressed  to  each,  thou  art 

Stomas  or  hymns  of  prm8e,mt|i  a - . the  Trivrit,  or  nine- 

being  understood  m ^ impatient,  the  Moon  or  the  thunderbolt 

verse  T ^ recitation  sacred  to  In- 

according  to  Mnhldto  _ f referring  to  the  days  of  the  w.axing 

dra  as  wielder  f Yefr,  according  to  Mahidhara  ; 

c Saptadasa  or  Seventeenfohl; 

in  the  aaveiiteenfold  with  twelve  mouths  and  five  seasons, 

the  Year  of  a Stoma  or  praise-soug  in  seventeen  verses. 

Saptadasa  18  also  t ^ gtoma  of  twenty -one  verses;  or  the 

Supporter:  the  , withal 2 months  5 seasons,  3 worlds,  and  himself. 

12  month.  5 sevens. 

Speed,  the  Vurmn' of  1*8  verses  Ardour:  or  Heat , the  Year.  Nuva- 

and  its^f ; or  i2®J,nth8!  fileasons,  and  itself ; or  the  hymn  of 

dasa;  Nineteenfold  Twentyfold,  of  12 

19  verses.  Triumphant  Omet . oo  verses.  Viaour:  the  Year, 

months,  7 seasons,  and  itself ; or  J . . n seasons  day  and  night,  and 

itself  ; A . consisting  of  13  months  (one  intercalary),  7 seasons,  day 

23  verles.  Wo»a : the  Year  Ohatur- 
and  night,  and  itself,  or  tne  y j,  the  hymn  of  24  verses. 

vm,i:  Twentydourfold  of  24  hall  mont  ^ , j half  months 

£™6ryo,:  2rveree-  ZrrT'  the  Yeir.  Trimv. : 

and  itself;  also  ** „ths,  day  and  night,  .md  itself ; meaning 

Thriceminefold,  with  24  talt  /LmJion  ■ the  Year 

jdso  the  hymn  of  ‘^"“^  ths,  5 seasons,  day  and  night  and  itself; 
Ttiirty-onefold,  Of  24  “ r*  . .u.  year.  Trayastrims  i : Thirty- 

als->  the  hymn  of  Z aS  night,  and  itself ; also  the 

threefold,  of  24  A . , ^ StatLu  > the^place  of  the  Sun  ; the 

hymu  of  33  verses,  24  half-months,  7 

Year.  ^s*;  The  Vaan 

Beasops,  » oi  ^-^5^ . Thirty-sixfold,  consisting  of  24  half- 

of  Heaven : the  Year,  Smt^  W - J ^ Revolving  0-ir 

months,  and  12  months ; . porty-eightfold,  consisting  of  26 

the  intercalary  Year,  ^ also  the  hymn  of  48 

half-monjs,  13  Pour-dioUioned : a hymn  mad« 

8«ptada»,and  Ekavi,s.  Thu 

rpia"eeXg  5 eighteen  bricks  with  eighuen  forninlas. 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


129 


7ERSE  23.3 


24  Thou  art  the  portion  of  Agni,  chief  control  of  Consecration. 

The  Priesthood  is  saved ; the  Trivrit  Stoma. 

Thou  art  the  portion  of  Indra,  the  sovran ty  of  Vishnu.  The 
Nobility  is  saved ; the  Pafichadasa  Stoma. 

Thou  art  the  share  of  the  Man-beholders ; the  supremacy  of 
the  Creator;  the  birthplace  is  saved;  the  Saptadaaa Stoma. 
Thou  art  the  share  of  Mitra,  the  sovranty  of  Vanina.  Kain 
of  heaven  and  wind  are  saved ; the  Ekavimsa  Stoma. 

25  Thou  art  the  share  of  the  Vasus,  the  sovranty  of  the  Rudras. 

Quadrupeds  are  saved  ; the  Chaturvini^  Stoma. 

Thou  art  the  sha^e  of  the  Adityas ; the  sovranty  of  the  Ma- 
ruts.  The  Embryos  are  saved ; the  Panchavimto  Stoma. 
Thou  art  the  share  of  Aditi ; the  sovranty  of  Pdshan. 

Strength  is  saved  ; the  Trinava  Stoma. 

Thou  art  the  share  of  God  Savitar;  the  sovranty  of  Bri- 
haspati.  The  universal  Quarters  are  saved ; the  Chatush- 
toma  Stoma. 

26  Thou  art  the  share  of  the  Yavas ; the  sovranty  of  the  Aya- 

vas.  Creatures  are  saved;  the  Chatusehatvanm^  Stoma. 
Thou  art  the  share  of  the  Ribhus ; the  sovranty  of  the  Vis- 
vedevas.  The  Being  is  saved ; the  Trayastnnisa  Storna. 

27  Sahas,  Sahasya,  the  two  Winter  Seasons-thou  art  the  inner- 

most cement  of  Agni,  etc.  (as  in  XUI.  -5). 

28  With  one  they  praised ; creatures  were  produced.  Prajipati 

WiTthreTthey  praised ; the  Priestliood  was  created.  Bri- 
haspati  was  over-lord.  


24  He  lay.  -Ikd  Spnt.-^f  cere« 

Pr^japati's  doliverance,  with  the  htdp  of  God  ’ Ood  and 

and  evil.  Tkou:  the  first  bi  ick.  T e ’ received  by  itgreement  a 

deihed  entity  that  the  work  of  deliveran^  here  meaning  Vak 

portion  and  chief  control  or  sovereignty.  deliverance,’  being  un- 

or  Speech.  TAe  Trivrit  Stoma:  was  the  -rused  ior  the 

derstood.  According  to  Mahldhara  the  n • ^ ,]jan-behoidcr» . the 

-hi  th.  Mo.,„i.waxing; 

A yavas : the  last,  or  dark  halves.  ^ jjj  25).  Sahas 

\7  He  lay.  dow»  two  RitavyS.  or  X’'  road  jauu^iy.  Th. 

oadSatoyi;  Force  and  Forceful; 

rest  of  the  formula  is  repeated  from  Xl  . q g^tions,  symbolical  of 

28  He  lays  down  the  bricks  called 

PrajaiiaU’s  creation  J vital  Airs.  Three:  out-bTeath, 

V.ik,  Speech.  They:  the  deities  of  the  and  mind . Seven. 

upward  breath,  diffusive  breath.  Five  four  vital  breatns  an 

vital  airs  of  the  head;  ears  eyes,  nostrils,  voice. 


130  WBITB  TAJURVBDA.  [BOOK  XI Y, 

With  fivd  they  praised ; beings  were  created.  The  Lord  of 
Beings  was  over-lord. 

With  seven  they  praised ; the  Seven  Rishis  were  created, 
Dhfitar  was  over-lord. 

29  With  nine  they  praised;  the  Fathers  were  created.  Aditi 

was  Sovran  Lady. 

With  eleven  they  praised ; the  Seasons  were  created.  The 
Season- Lords  were  over-lords. 

With  thirteen  they  pmised ; the  Months  were  created.  The 
Year  was  ovei-lord. 

With  fifteen  they  praised ; the  Nobility  was  created.  Iiidra 
was  over-lord. 

With  seventeen  they  praised ; domestic  animals  were  created, 
Bjihaspati  was  over- lord. 

30  With  nineteen  they  praised ; Sfidra  and  Arya  were  created. 

Day  and  Night  were  Sovran  Ladies. 

With  twenty -one  they  praised;  solid-hoofed  animals  were 
created.  Varu^  was  over-lord. 

With  twenty-three  they  praised ; small  animals  were  created. 
Pushan  was  over-lord. 

With  twenty-five  they  praised  ; forest  animals  were  created. 
V&yu  was  over-lord. 

With  twenty-seven  they  praised ; earth  and  heaven  came 
apart.  VasuSi  Rudras,  Adityas  followed  separately,  so 
they  were  over-lords. 

31  With  twenty-nine  they  praised;  Trees  were  created.  Soma 

was  over-lord. 

With  thirty-one  they  praised ; creatures  were  created.  The 
Yavas  and  the  Ayavas  were  over-lords. 

With  thirty-three  they  praised;  living  beings  were  happy. 

Prajiipati,  the  Supreme  in  Place,  was  over-lord. 

Fill  up  the  room,  etc.  The  dappled  kine,  etc.  All  sacred 
songs,  etc.  Repeated  from  XII.  14 — 16. 

29  Nine:  aevea  vital  airs  of  the  head  and  two  below.  Eleven  : ten  vital 
airs  and  the  body.  Seoaon  lards : or  Sections  of  the  year.  Thirieen:  tea 
vital  ail’s,  the  feet,  and  the  body.  Fifteen:  ten  fingers,  the  foro-arni  and 
upper  arms,  and  the  part  above  the  navel.  Softnteen : ten  toes,  the  thighs 
and  kriees  and  the  port  below  the  navel. 

30  Nineteen:  ten  fingers  and  nine  vital  airs.  Twent^one:  20  fingers 

and  toes  and  the  body.  Twenty-three:  the  two  feet  added.  Twenty-jive: 
fiugert,  toes,  hands,  feet,  and  body.  Tweaty-aeven : fingers,  toee,  arms, 
thighs,  feet,  and  body.  . ^ . 

81  Twenty-nine : fingers,  toes,  and  nine  vital  airs.  Thirty-one : fingers, 
toes,  ten  vital  airs,  and  the  body.  Thirty-th¥ee ; fingers,  toes,  ten  organs 
of  perception  and  action,  the  feet,  and  the  body.  Soma:  as  tlve  most  ex- 
celleht  of  plants,  aud  alfFO  as  the  moon  which  is  believed  to  innuence  the 
growth  of  trees. 


BOOK  THE  FIFTEENTH. 


Drive  our  born  enemies  away,  0 Agni ; drive  from  ui  foes 
unborn,  0 J^tavedas. 

Gracioiisly'minded,  free  from  anger,  bless  ua ; may  we  enjoy 
thy  firm  thrice-guarding  shelter. 

2 Drive  off  with  might  our  foemen  born  and  living  i keep  off 

those  yet  unborn,  0 Jutavedtis. 

Benevolent  in  thought  and  spirit  bless  us.  May  wo  remain 
alive  : drive  off  our  foemen, 

3 The  SixteenfoMl  Stoma,  strength  and  wealth.  The  Forty- 

fourth  Stoma,  splendour  and  wealth. 

Apms  art  thou,  the  complement  of  Agni.  As  such  may  all 
the  Gods  greet  thee  with  praises. 

Enriched  with  songs  of  praise,  Prishthas,  and  butter,  ait  here 
and  give  ua  wealth  with  store  of  children. 

4 Course  metre.  Space  metre.  Happy  metre.  Encompass- 

ing metre.  Covering  metre.  Mind  metre.  Expanse 
metre.  Kiver  metre.  Sea  metre.  Water  metre.  Kakup 
metre.  Trikakup  metre.  KAvya  metre.  Ankupa  metre. 
Aksharapaukti  metre.  Padapahkti  metre.  Vish^rapaukti 
metre.  Kshurabhraja  metre. 

6 Covering  metre.  Clothing  metre.  Collecting  metre.  Part- 
ing metre.  Brihat  metre.  Rathantara  metre.  Group 
metre.  Vivadhra  metre.  Sw'allower  metre.  Bright  metre. 
Samstup  metre.  Anushtup  metre.  Course  metre.  Space 
metre.  Vigour  metre.  Vigour-giving  metre.  Emulating 
metre.  Spacious  metre,  Inaccessible  metre.  Slow  metre. 
AukHtika  metre. 


He  begins  the  fifth  layer  with  the  bricks  called  Aeapatni\«,  or  Free  from 
Enemies ; reciting  two  texts  addressed  to  Agni  as  he  sets  one  brick  m front 
lud  one  behind.  , , i « rni 

3 He  lays  a brick  on  the  right,  and  addreraes  it  with  the  formula,  lliou 

fcrt  ’ being  understood.  Then  one  on  the  left  with  Tkt  For  y-fourfo  ^ 
8ioma:  etc.  Then  one  in  the  middle  with  ' Thou  art  the  complement,  etc. 
reflated  with  ‘Agni  ’ inatead  of  ‘ Earth  ’ from  XIV.  4,  * i „ 

4 He  lays  down  the  Virftj  bricks,  which  are  named  after  that  metre,  by 

lets  of  ten,  corresponding  to  the  ten  regions  of  the  sky,  Thou  art  being 
Understood  before  each  formula.  Courte:  in  which  all  living  creatures 
(aove,  that  is,  this  world.  Space : the  middle  air  or  firmament.  Happy  :. 
^hesky.  - tbe  regions.  Covering:  M.  "f”®  ' • 

the  Sun.  River:  the  breath.  5ea.  mmd. 

^akup:  breath.  Trikakup:  upward  breathing.  Kdvya:  the 

inkupa:  water.  Akiharapahkti : the  heavenly  world  Pi^apankU  thm 

"'orld.  VuhtArapahkti:  the  region  or  regions,  hsharabhrdja : Bright 

; the  Sun.  d 

J Ooverittg : Clothing:  (ood.  «ec<mflf  mght.  Parang,  day. 

: yonder  world.  Rathantara  - thin  world.  Group  - the  ^nd 
(Yoke) : the  air.  S^aallowar:  food.  Biiyht  hre.  Samtup  aM 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  XV. 


132 


6 With  the  ray  for  truth  quicken  thou  truth.  With  advance 

by  duty  quicken  duty.  With  following  by  heaven  quicken 
heaven.  With  union  by  middle  air  quicken  middle  air 
^ With  Pratidhi  by  Darth  quicken  Earth.  With  support 
by  rain  quicken  rain.  With  blowing  away  by  day  quicke  r 
day.  With  following  by  night  quicken  night.  With 
clarihed  butter  by  the  Vagus  quicken  the  Vasus.  With 
perception  by  the  Adityas  quicken  the  Adityas, 

7 With  the  thread  by  prosperity  quicken,  prosperity.  ^ With 

the  creeper  by  revelation  quicken  revelation.  With  re- 
freshment by  plants  quicken  plants.  With  the  best  hy 
bodies  quicken  bodies.  With  the  invigorating  by  religious 
study  quicken  religions  study.  With  the  victorious  by 
brilliance  quicken  brilliance. 

8 Thou  art  Pratipad,  for  Pratipad  thee.  Thou  art  Apnpad, 

for  Auupad  thee.  Thou  art  Sampad,  for  Sampad  thee. 
Thou  art  brilliance,  for  brilliance  thee. 

9 Trivnt  (triple)  art  thou,  thee  for  Trivyit.  Pravvit  art  thou, 

thee  for  Pravrit.  Vivfit  art  thou,  thee  for  Vivnt.  Savrit 
art  thou,  thee  for  Savrit.  Thou  art  attack,  thee  for  attack 
Thou  art  concurrence,  thee  for  concurrence.  Thou  au 
ascent,  thee  for  ascent.  Thou  art  upstriding,  thee  ior 
upstriding.  With  Energy  as  over.-lord  quicken  food- 


essence. 

JO  Thou  art  the  Queen,  the  Eastern  region.  The  bright  Vasin 
are  thine  over-lords.  Agni  is  thy  warder-off  of  hostile 
weapons.  May  the  Trivrit  Stoma  assist  thee  on  eaith. 
The  Ajya  Uktha  fix  thee  firmly  against  slipping.  The 
Bathantara  S4mau  establish  thee  iu  the  sky  for  secure 
station.  May  the  first-born  Rishis  extend  thee  among  the 


4nu«A<up;  food.  Coum  . Expanu:  see  verse  4.  Vigour  : food.  Vigour 
omfw’-Agni.  Emulating;  yonder  world.  this  world.  Cotcr 

the  air.  Inaccessible:  the  Sun.  Slow:  the  Pahkti.  it water. 

6 He  lays  down  the  bricks  railed  Stoma-bhagils  haud-bhaners, 

number,  with  a formula  addressed  to  each,  The  ray ; the  Sun,  which  a. 
the  giver  of  light  is  food.  Advance:  meaning  foo<l.  By  rfuiy;  according 
Mahldhara,  in  this  and  the  following  formulas  of  this  verse  the  ipstrumeuta 
care  is  used  for  the  dative  ; for  duty,  etc, 

7 According  to  Mahldhara,  the  creeper:  the  Jesi;  etc.,  meai 

I food,’  and  he  gives  the  same  meaning  to  Pratipad,  Annpad,  etc.,  in 
following  verse.  * j 

9 Trivrit:  triple,  threefold;  food,  says  Mahldhara,  as  produced  fro 

ploughing,  seed,  and  rain.  He  gives  similar  explanations  of  the  other  u 
translatable  words  in  the  verse.  . . 

1 0 He  lays  down  the  Nikasadas  or  Sky-seated  bricks.  Thou : the  bn 
laid  down  In  front.  An/a  Uktha : a litany  to  Agni.  Rishw:  the  Vital  m 


WHITE  \AJURYED1. 


13J 


\ERSE  15-.] 

Gods  by  the  measure  and  amplitude  of  heaven.  May 
thU  Disposer  and  the  Over-Lord  extend  thee.  M ty  all, 
concordant,  settle  thee  on  the  ridge  of  heaven  in  the 
world  of  Svarga. 

11  Thou  art  Far-ruling,  the  Southern  region.  The  bright 

Rudras  are  thine  over-lords,  liidra  is  thy  warder  off  of 
arrows.  May  the  Pafichadasa  Stoma  support  thee  on 
earth.  The  Ffaiiga  Uktha  fix  thee  firmly  against  8lii)ping. 
The  Brihat  Saman  establish  thee  in  the  sky,  etc.  (the  rest 
as  in  10). 

1 2 Thou  art  Universal  Ruler,  the  Western  region.  The  Adityas 

are  thine  over-lords.  Vanina  is  thy  Warder-off  of  mi.ssiles. 
^I^he  Saptadasa  Stoma  support  thee  on  earth.  The  Marut- 
vatiya  Uktha  fix  thee  firmly  against  slipping.  The 
Vairupa  Saman  establish  thee,  etc.  ( as  above ). 

13  Thou  art  Independent  Ruler,  the  Northern  region.  ( The 

I’Gst  is  identical  with  12,  with  the  substitution  of  Marnts 
...Soma....Vim8a  Stoma  ...Niahkevalya  Uktha. ...Vairaja 
Saman  for  the  corresponding  names ). 

U Thou  art  Lady-Paramount,  the  Lofty  region.  ( The  rest  as 
above,  Vi8vedevas..,Briha8pati  ..Trinavaand  1 rnyasti nnsa 
Stomas. ..Vaiavadeva  and  Miruta  Uktha8...Sakvara  and 
Raivata  Siinans  being  substituted  for  the  corresponding 
names. 

Ib  This  one  in  front,  golden-tressed,  with  sunbeams;  the  leader 
of  his  host  and  his  cliiettain  are  Rathagritsa  and  Rathau- 
jas,  and  Punjikasthal^  and  Kratusthala  his  Apsarasos 
Biting  animals  are  his  weapon,  homicide  his  missile  wea- 
pon ;°to  them  be  homage:  may  they  protect  us,  may 
they  have  mercy  upon  us.  In  their  jaws  we  place  the 
man  whom  we  hate  and  who  hates  us. 


11  He  lays  a brick  on  the  right  aide.  Faf -ruling  Viiij.  Pfaug  (fktka 
name  of  a hymn  at  the  loorniug  libation. 

12  He  lays  a brick  behind.  Universal  Ruler  ■ Sainrlj.  Marutvaltya 
Uktha:  a litany  to  Indr.i  Lord  of  the  Maruts. 

n Independent  Ruhr:  Svardj.  NiHhkevahjaUktha  :ah\Any  io^^^ 

delusively,  beginning  with  Abhi  tvA,  3 ira,  noiiuina  (It. 

1 4 Ho  lays  a brick  in  the  middle. 

15  He  leys  tba  Psaelisch  iais  or  Five  erroted  bricks  ?" ’ 

Thu  in  front:  tbo  brick  reproronting  Agni.  Bolh^ntm  md 

Skilled  with  tbo  Car.  and  Migbty  with  tbe  Car  ; meaning  Ibe  ^1 ' « 
mentbs.  Puiljikasthald  and  Kratudhald:  allegorical  names  of  Celestial 
Nymphs  representing  the  region  and  the  aub-regmn- 


[BOOK  XV. 


334  THE  TEXTS  k)F  THE 

16  This  one  on  the  right,  the  Omnific;  the  lender  of  his  bout 

and  his  chieftain  are  Rathasvana  and  Rathechitra,  and 
Menaka  and  Sahajanya  his  Apsarases.  Yatudhanas  are 
his  weapon,  Rakshasas  his  missile  weapon  j to  them  be 
homage,  etc.  (as  in  15). 

17  This  one  behind,  the  All-comprising;  the  leader  of  his 

host  and  his  chieftain  are  Rathaprota  and  Asamaratha, 
and  Praralochanti  and  AnumochlantI  are  his  Apsarases. 
Tigers  are  his  weapon,  Serpents  his  missile  weapon ; to 
them  be  homage,  etc. 

18  This  one  on  the  left,  Lord  of  uninterrupted  riches;  the 

leader  of  his  host  and  his  chieftain  are  Tarkshya  and 
Arish^anemi,  and  VisvSchi  and  Ghntachi  his  Apsarases. 
Water  is  his  weapon,*  wind  his  missile  weapon ; to  them 
be  homage,  etc. 

19  This  one  above,  Wealth-giver;  the  leader  of  his  host  and  his 

chieftain  are  Sena  jit  and  Snshena,  and  Urvasi  and  Purva- 
chitti  his  Apsarases.  Thundering  is  his  weapon  and  light- 
ning his  missile  weapon ; to  them  be  homage,  etc. 

20  Agni  is  head  and  height  of  heaven,  the  Master  of  the  earth 

is  he.  He  quickeneth  the  waters'  seed. 

21  This  Agni  is  the  Master  of  spoil  thousandfold  and  hund- 

redfold, the  sapient  one,  the  head  of  wealth. 

22  Agni,  Atharvan  brought  thee  forth  by  rubbing  from  the 

lotus-leaf,  the  head  of  Visva,  of  the  Priest. 

16  He  lets  a brick  on  the  south  or  right  side.  The  Onnific:  Yisvakar- 
man,  meaning  VAyu,  the  Wind.  Rathasvana  : Car-rattlmg.  mhechitra: 
Glittering  on  his  Car.  These  two  are  the  two  Summer  months.  Menaka 
and  Sahajanyd  • Celestial  Nymphs,  representing  portions  of  the  sky,  or 
heaven  and  earth. 

17  He  sets  a brick  behind.  All  comprising : the  Sun.  Rathaprota: 
Car-seated.  Asamaratha : Pecrlm-uxrred : the  two  Rain  months. 

18  He  sets  a brick  on  the  left  side.  Lord  of  uninterrupted  ric^ : the 
sacrifice.  Tdrkshya  and  Arishtanemi  (whose  fellies  are  uninjured) : both 
originally  personifications  of  the  Sun ; meaning  here  the  two  Autumn 
months.  Viivdcht  and  Qhritdchtz  representing  the  quarter  and  the  mid- 
quarter  of  the  sky. 

19  He  sets  a brick  in  the  middle  above.  Wealth-oferer : Parjaigra,  God 
of  the  Hain-oloud.  Army-eonqiieror : or  Senajit.  Well-armied:  or  Sushena. 
These  are  the  two  Winter  mouths.  Urvasi  and  PUrvachUti : representing  a 
quarter  and  a mid-quarter  of  the  sky.  For  Urvasi  see  R.  V.  X.  95. 

20  He  lays  down  the  ChhandasyAs  or  Metre  bricks,  and  first  three  bricks 
representing  the  GAyatrt  with  foimulas  in  that  metre.  The  first  formula 
repeated  from  III.  12)  is  taken  from  R.  V.  VIII.  44.  16. 

21  The  formula  is  taken  from  R.  V.  VIII.  64,  4. 

22  The  formula  (repeated  from  XI.  32  b.)  is  taken  from  R.  V.  VI.  16. 16. 


WHITE  YAJVRVEBA. 


135 


ySRSE  80.] 


23  Guide  of  the  rite  art  thou  and  of  the  region  to  which  with 

thine  auBpicious  teams  thou  tendest. 

Thy  light-bestowing  head  to  heaven  thou  liftest,  making  thy 
tongue  oblation- bearer,  Agni. 

24  Agni  is  wakened  by  the  people’s  fuel  to  meet  the  Dawn  who 

cometh  like  a milch-cow. 

Like  young  trees  shooting  up  on  high  their  branches  his 
flames  are  rising  to  the  vault  of  heaven. 

25  To  him  adorable,  sage,  strong  and  mighty  we  have  sung 

forth  our  song  of  praise  and  homage. 

' Gavishthira  hath  raised  with  prayer  to  Agni  this  laud  far- 
reaching  as  the  gold  in  heaven. 

26  Here  by  ordainers  was  this  God  appointed  first  Invoker,  best 

at  worship,  to  be  praised  at  rites ; 

Whom  Apnavana  and  the  Bhrigus  caused  to  shine  bright- 
coloured  in  the  wood,  spreading  to  every  houBC. 

27  The  watchful  Guardian  of  the  people  hath  been  bom,  Agni 

the  very  strong,  for  fresh  prosperity. 

With  oil  upon  his  face,  with  high  heaven-touching  flame,  he 
shincth  splendidly,  pure  for  the  Bharatas. 

28  Agni,  Angirases  discovered  thee  what  time  thou  layest  hid- 

den, fleeing  back  from  wood  to  wood. 

Thou  by  attrition  art  produced  as  conquering  might,  and 
men,  0 Anginis,  call  thee  the  Son  of  Strength. 

29  Offer  to  Agni,  0 my  friends,  your  seemly  food,  your  seemly 


To  him  supremest  o’er  the  folk,  the  Son  of  Strength,  the 
Mighty  I^rd. 

30  Thou,  mighty  Agni,  gatherest  up  all  that  is  precious  for  tliy 

Br[ng”ut’  all  treasure  as  thou  art  enkindled  in  libation’s  place. 

23  He  lays  down  the  three  TrShtup  brickii  with  formulas  in  that  ineUe. 
The  first  formula  (repeated  from  XIII.  15)  is  taken  from  It.  V.  X.  8.  6. 

« tZ  llVl-n  the  Seer  of  the  origin.l 

three  "jag*!!  bricke  « 

“2T ‘0  ““ 

T5e“LyrdU^hf«  «up  hrich.  with  formulM  in  thet  metre. 
The  first  formula  is  taken  from  R,  > . V.  7. 1. 

30  The  second  from  R.  V.  X.  191. 1. 


136 


TEXTS  OP  THE  [BOOK  XV. 


31  0 Agui,  loved  of  many,  thou  of  fame  moat  Wotidrousy  in 

their  homes  , , u r 

Men  call  on  thee  whose  hair  is  flame  to  be  the  beater  of 

their  gifts. 

32  With  this  my  reverent  hymn  I call  Agni  for  you,  the  Son 

of  Strength,  . 

Dear,  wisest  envoy,  served  with  noble  sacrtnce,  immottal 
messenger  of  all. 

33  Immoi-tal  messenger  of  all,  immortal  messenger  of  all, 

His  two  red  steeds,  all-cherishing,  he  harnesaeth  i let  him, 

well-worshipped,  urge  them  fast. 

34  Let  him  w'ell-worshipped  Urge  them  fast,  let  him  well-wor 

shipped  urge  them  fast.  , j 

Then  hath  the  sacrifice  good  prayer  and  happy  end,  and 
heavetily  gift  of  wealth  to  men. 

35  0 Agni,  thou  who  art  the  Lord  of  wealth  in  kiue,  the  Son 

of  Strength, 

Vouchsafe  to  us,  0 Jatavedas,  high  renown. 

36  He,  Agui,  kindled,  good  and  wise,  must  be  exalted  in  our 


ouug  . 

Shine,  thou  of  many  forms,  shine  radiantly  on  us. 

37  0 Agni,  shining  of  thyself  by  night  and  when  the  morning 
breaks 

Burn,  thou  whose  teeth  are  sharp,  against  the  Haksbasas. 
3S'  May  Agni,  worshipped,  bring  us  bliss,  may  the  gift,  BlesaM 
One ! and  sacrifice  bring  bliss. 

Yea,  may  our  praises  bring  us  bliss. 

39  Yea,  may  our  praises  bring  ns  bliss.  Show  forth  the  mind 

that  brings  success  m war  with  fiends,  wherewith  thou 

conquerest  in  fights: 

40  Wherewith  thou  conquerest  in  fights.  Bring  down  the  many 

firm  hopes  of  our  enemies,  and  let  us  vanquish  with  thine 
aid.  _ 


31  The  third  from  R.  V.  I.  45.  6. 

32  He  lays  down  three  Brihatt  bricks  with  formulns  in  Brihatl  metie, 
8+8  + 12  + 8 syllables.  The  first  formula  is  taken  from  R.  Y.  Vll.  10.  !■ 

83  The  verses  of  the  original  hymn  (R.  V.  VII.  16)  being  alternate^ 
Brihatt  and  Satobrihatl,  the  second  and  third  verses  of  this  triplet  are  mad 
up  out  of  verse  2 with  the  aid  of  repetitions. 

35  He  lays  down  three  Ushnih  bricks  with  a triplet  in  that  metn 
(8  + 8 + 12  syllables)  from  R.  V.  I.  79.  4—6. 

88  He  lavs  down  the  three  Kakup  bricks  with  a triplet  in  that  metn 
+ 12  + 8),  verse  1 taken  from  R V.  VIII.  19. 19,  verses  2 and  3 pieced 
gether  out  of  the  Satobrihatl  verse  20  of  the  ongmal  hymn,  with  pWa 
repeated  as  in  33  and  34. 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


nnsE  484] 


i3r 


41  t value  Agiii,  tliat  good  Lord,  the  home  to  whicli  tlie  kine 

return ; 

Whom  fleet-foot  coutfsera  seek  as  home,  and  strong  enduring 
steeds  as  home.  Bring  food  to  those  who  suig  thy  pi-aise. 

42  ’Tis  Agui  whom  we  laud  as  good,  to  whom  the  milch-kme 

come  in  herds, 

To  whom  the  coursers  swift  of  foot,  to  whom  our  well-born 
princes  come.  Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thy  praise. 

43  Thou,  brilliant  God,  within  thy  mouth  warmest  both  ladles 

of  the  oil. 

So  fill  us  also  in  our  hymns  abundantly,  0 Lord  of  Strength 
Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thy  praise. 

44  Agni,  with  lauds  this  day  may  we  bring  thee  that  which 

thou  lovest. 

Right  judgiiiout,  like  a horse,  with  our  devotions. 

45  For  thou  hast  ever  been  the  car-driver,  Agni,  of  noble 
Strength,  lofty  sacrifice,  and  rightful  judgment. 

46  Through  these  our  praises  come  thou  to  meet  us,  bright  as 

the  sunlight, 

0 Agiii,  well  disposed,  with  all  thine  aspects. 

47  Agni  I hold  as  Herald,  the  munificent,  the  gracious  Son  of 

^Strength  who  kiiowcth  all  that  live,  as  holy  singer  know 
iiig  all ; , 

Lord  of  fair  rites,  a God  with  form  erected,  turning  to  the 


Gods,  ... 

Ho,  when  tlio  flame  hath  sprung  forth  from  the  sacred  oil, 
the  oftered  fatness,  lougeth  for  it  with  his  glow. 

48  0 Agui,  be  our  nearest  Friend,  be  thou  a kind  deliverer  and 

a gracious  Friend.  , 

Come  as  good  Agui,  come  as  excellent  and  give  us  wealtli 
most  splendidly  renowned. 

To  thee  then,  0 most  bright,  0 radiant  God,  we  come  with 
prayer  for  happiness  tor  our  friends.  

^ 41  He  lays  down  the  three  Pankti  bricks  witli  f.»rmiik.s  in  the  Torres- 
ponding  metre  (8  x 6)  taken  from  R.  V.  V.  6.  1,  2,  9.  , , ■ .u  , 

44  He  lays  down  the  three  Padapahkti  bricks  with 
metre  (5  x 6).  This  ' con.iete  of  t«o  line.,  ‘he  ™br.tcmg  hnm  r 
feet  of  five  eyllablee  each,  having  the  ictua  on  the  firat  end  ‘''"-‘h  -fhah  ea, 

end  resembling  the  last  line  of  a Sepph'c  w se..  >‘n“  « 

ply  e Trishtup’  M Mdller,  S.  B K,  XXXll.  p.  icvnt.  The  triplet  ot 

Wmulas  is  taken  fiom  R.  V.  IV.  10.  1 3.  , i 

47  He  lays  down  an  Atichhandaa  or  Hypermeter  brick  with  a formula 
Uken  from  R.  V.  I.  127.  1. 

48  He  lavs  down  three  DvipadA  bricks  with  a formulary  triplet  from 
U.  V.  Y.  24;  1,  2,  4.  Cf.  111.  25,  20. 


m 


THE  TEXTS  OP  THE  [BOOK  EV. 


49  With  what  devotion,  winning  light,  the  Eishis  came,  kind- 

ling Agni,  to  the  holy  session, 

Even  with  that  in  heaven  I stablish  Agni  whom  men  call 
him  whose  sacred  grass  is  scattered. 

50  Gods,  let  us  follow  him  with  wives  beside  us,  with  sons,  with 

brothers,  with  our  gold  adornments, 

Grasping  the  sky  up  in  the  world  of  virtue,  on  the  third 
height,  the  luminous  realm  of  heaven. 

51  This  Agni  mounted  up  to  Speech’s  Centre,  Lord  of  the 

Brave,  observant,  ever-active. 

Laid  on  the  back  of  Earth,  may  he,  resplendent,  cast  under 
foot  those  who  would  fight  against  us. 

52  May  this  most  manly  Agni,  strength-bestower,  giver  of  thou- 

sands, shine  with  care  that  fails  not. 

Resplendent  in  the  middle  of  the  water,  make  thine  approach 
tx)  the  celestial  mansions. 

53  Make  him  go  forth  from  all  sides;  meet,  approach  y^.  0 

Agni,  make  the  paths  for  Godward  travel. 

Making  the  Parents  young  with  life’s  renewal,  the  out-spun 
thread  in  thee  have  they  extended. 

54  Wake  up,  0 Agni,  thou,  and  keep  him  watchful.  Wish  and 

fruition,  meet,  and  he,  together.  » n j » 

In  this  and  in  the  loftier  habitation  be  seated,  All-Gods . 
and  the  Sacrificer. 

55  Convey  our  sacrifice  to  heaven  that  it  may  reach  the  Gods, 

with  that 


49  He  lays  down  the  Punaschiti  (Piling  up  again),  a second  layer  of  righi 
bricks,  on  the  top  of  the  Gtrhap.itya  or  Householder  s Hearth.  ^ X I 
45  sqq.  The  ceremony  is  performed  with  eight  formulas,  six  m Trish^  i] 
«nd  two  in  Anushtup  metre. 

51  He  lays  down  the  third  brick.  Speech' i Centn:  the  part  of  the  pil. 
in  which  he  is  established.  Em-active : bkuranyu  ; the  world  s supporter 
according  to  Mahidhara. 

52  He  lays  the  fourth  brick.  ' 

53  He  lays  the  Bfth  brick.  Make  him : he  addresses  the  Rishis 

thpatlu:  LordiDg±oM.hMhat»  the  iJural 

end  refer,  to  Agni.  If,  »•  requi^  the  verb  «f«r,  ^ the 

Agnek,  of  Agni,  must  be  read  instead  of  Agne:  Make  ye  Av  ,1^ 

1^  to  the  (Me EggeUog.  parent*;  prtard/meanygVdk  and  Many 
Speech  and  Mind.  0o(.p«  (W:  of  •^8?'’-  .w 

Rnhie  dceorliug.  bo  Ma  itlha^ ; but  the  verb  w m the  singular . in  the 
hath  he  spun  out  this  thread’:  Eg'j;eliBg. 

54  He  lar,  the  eijth  brick.  WM  and  fraUio*;  the  heavenly  reward 

of  pious  actions.  He:  the  Sacrificer.  i v iv  k l' 

65  He  lays  the  seventh  brick.  The  lonnulaistaken  from  A V.lA.  0.  ii 
With  that:  power,  understood. 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


139 


fERSE  66.] 


Whereby  thou,  Agni,  bearest  wealth  in  thousands  and  all 
precious  things. 

56  This  is  thine  ordered  place  of  birth  whence  sprung  to  life 

thou  shonest  forth. 

Knowing  this,  Agni,  rise  thou  up  and  cause  our  riches  to 
increase. 

57  Tapa,  Tapasya,  pair  of  Dewy  Seasons:  thou  art,  etc.  (as 

in  XIII.  25 ). 

58  On  the  sky’s  back  may  Parameshthin  lay  thee,  etc.  ( as  in 

XIV.  14 ). 

Thy  Lord  is  Surya,  etc.  (as  in  XIV.  14 ). 

59  Repeated  from  XII.  54. 

€0  Repeated  from  XII.  55. 

61  Repeated  from  XII.  56. 

€2  Like  a horse  neighing,  eager  for  the  pasture,  when  he  hath 
stepped  forth  from  the  great  enclosure : 

Theu  the  wind  following  blows  upon  his  splendour,  and, 
straight,  the  path  is  black  which  thou  hast  travelled. 

63  In  Ayu’s  seat  I set  thee,  in  the  shadow  of  the  protector  in 

the  heart  of  Ocean, 

Thee  luminous,  bright  with  eyes,  thee  who  illnmost  the  sky, 
the  earth,  and  air’s  broad  realm  between  them. 

64  On  the  sky’s  back  may  Parameshthin  set  thee,  etc.  { as  in 

XI V.  12,  substituting  sky  for  air  and  Surya  for  V^yu ). 

65  Thou  art  the  measure  of  a thousand.  Thou  art  the  repre- 

sentative of  a thousand.  Thou  art  the  equivalent  of  a 
thousand.  Thou  art  worth  a thousand.  Thee  for  a thou- 
sand. 


68  He  lays  the  eighth  brick.  The  formula,  t«ken  from  R.  V.  III.  29.  10, 
lias  occurred  in  III.  14  and  XII.  62.  - 

67  He  lays  two  Ritavyie  or  Seasonal  bricks.  See  XIII.  25.  rapa, 

Tapatya:  January- February,  and  February-March.  Thx>u  art. 

the  formulas  as  in  XIII.  25. 

68  He  lay.  down  a VUraiyoti.  or  All-Iight  brick. 

Sopreme.  The  rert  i.  ae  in  XIV.  U,  with  the  eutwtitution  .fy.' 

59  He  lays  the  LokamprinAs,  Room-filling  or  Complementary  bnoW,  wiwi 
the  three  formulas  employed  in  XII.  64—68.  Vikarn! 

62  He  scatters  loose  soil  over  the  layer  and  sets  t-k®  hnok  , taken 
»nd  the  porous  or  Svayamatrin^  The  Vikar.l  with  the  fo 

from  R.  V.  VII.  8. 2.  ' . ’ , i Vital 

63  The  SvayamAtrinnA  with  the  following  formula.  Ayus.  of  vii 

Power,  or  of  the  Sun.  it  a 

66  He  stands  by  the  Altar  and  consecrates  it  by  , 

‘hou«nd  bit.  ol  gold,  two  hundred  at  the  r^itation  of 
6f«»«rr  o/a  (Ao,-.«nd;  bricU  Thu:  In>ri»Ue.  for  « thmoMi.  for 
attainment  of  countless  benefits. 


BOOK  THE  SIXTEtlNTH. 


Homage  be  paid  unto  thy  wrath,  0 Rudra,  homage  to  tliy 
shaft : to  thy  two  arms  be  homage  paid. 

2 With  that  auspicious  form  of  thine,  mild,  Rudra!  pleasant 
to  behold, 

Even  with  that  most  blessdd  form,  look.  Mountain-haunter ! 


here  on  us. 

3 The  shaft  which,  Mountain -hauntei',  thott  art  holding  m 
thy  hand  to  shoot. 

Make  that  auspicious,  Mountain-Lord  I Injure  ttot  man  nor 


moving  thing. 

4 0 Dweller  on  the  Mountain^  we  salute  thee  with  auspicious 

j . c j 

That  all,  yea,  all  our  people  may  be  healthy  and  well-satisfied 


5 The  Advocate,  the  firat  divine  Physician,  hath  defended  us. 
Crushing  all  serpents,  drive  away  all  YUudhatiis  down  below 

6 That  most  auspicious  One  whose  hue  is  coppery  and  re' 

and  brown,  . • u 

And  those,  the  Rudras  who  maintain  their  station  in  th( 
regions,  who  surround  him  in  a thousand  bauds,  of  thes 
we  deprecate  the  wrath. 

7 May  he  who  glides  away,  whose  neck  is  azure,  and  whos 

hue  is  red, 

He  whom  the  herdsmen,  whom  the  girls  who  carry  wate 
have  beheld,  may  he  when  seen  be  kind  to  ns. 

8 Homage  to  him  the  Azure-necked,  the  thousand-eyed,  th 

bountiful, 

Yea,  and  his  spirit  ministers— to  them  I offer  reverence. 


This  Book  consists  of  the  ^.itarudriya,  a litany,  accompanying  425  o»)l 
tions,  addressed  to  the  hundred  Rudras.  or  the  hundred  forms  and  powers 
Rudra  represCUtidg  life  and  nature  in  their  more  terrible  phases  Agr 
that  is,  the  Fire-altar,  has  on  eompletiou  become  Rudra,  and  this  eereniui 
is  performed  to  avert  Kis  wrath  and  secure  his  favour.  The  laitUrlya  rcce 
sion  of  the  text— which  has  been  regarded  as  a special  Upanisbad,  or  treaii 
on  esoteric  religious  doctrine— has  beeu  translated  and  annotated  by 
A.  Weber,  Indische  Studien,  II.  pp  14  IF.,  and  the  White  Yajurveda  te 
has  been  tiansliterated  and  translated  by  J Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Tex 
IV.  pp.  322—331.  There  is  also  a complete  translation  of  the  formulas 
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  XLIII.  pp.  160—155. 

2 Auspicious  form : the  God  having  two  forms,  one  terrific  and  the  oti 

^/e^JdlTus:  ‘ May  hc  plead  for  us’:  figgeling.  Ydtudhdo 

“rtfS“jiSamy!’'rth9form  of  the  Sua  Whose  mciU  »» 
from  drinking  up  the  world-destroying  poison  produced  at  the  t hut  mug 
the  Ooeafl  by  the  Gods. 


VERSE  17.] 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA. 


141 


9 Loosen  thy  bowstring,  loosen  it  from  thy  bow's  two  extre- 

mities, 

And  cast  away,  0 Lord  Divine,  the  arrows  that  are  in  thy 
hand. 

10  Now  stringless  be  Kapardiu’s  bow,  his  quiver  hold  no  pointed 

shaft. 

The  shafts  he  had  have  perished  and  the  sheath  that  held 
his  sword  is  bare. 

1 1 Thy  weapon,  0 Most  Donntiful,  the  bow  that  resteth  in  thy 

hand, — 

With  that,  deprived  of  power  to  harn),  protect  thou  us  on 
every  side. 

12  So  may  the  arrow  of  thy  bow,  in  all  directions,  pass  us  by, 
And  in  a place  remote  from  us  lay  thou  the  quiver  that  thou 

hast. 

13  Having  unbent  thy  bow  0 thou  hundred-eyed,  hundred- 

quivered  One ! 

And  dulled  thy  pointed  arrows’  heads,  be  kind  and  gracious 
unto  us. 


14  To  thy  fierce  weapon,  now  unstrung>  be  reverent  obeisance 

paid. 

Homsge  be  paid  to  both  thine  arms,  and  to  thy  bow  bo 
reverence ! 

15  Do  thou  no  injury  to  great  or  small  of  us,  harm  not  the 

growing  boy,  harm  not  the  full  grown  man. 

Slay  not  a sire  among  us,  slay  no  mother  here,  and  to  our 
own  dear  bodies,  Kudra  ! do  no  harm. 

IG  Harm  us  not  in  our  seed  or  m our  progeny,  harm  us  not  in 
our  life  or  in  our  cows  or  steeds. 

Slay  not  our  heroes  in  the  fury  of  their  wrath.  e wi  i 
oblations  ever  call  on  only  thee. 

17  Homage  to  the  golden-armed  leader  of  hosts,  lord  of  the 
regions,  to  the  trees  with  their  green  tresses,  to  t e iOM 
of  beasts  be  homage;  homage  to  him  whiise  sheen  is  MKc 
green  grass,  homage  to  the  radiant  Lord  of  pat  s,  omag 
to  the  golden-haired  wearer  of  the  sacrificial  cord,  homage 
to  the  Lord  of  the  well-endowed. 

10  Kapardin:  he  whose  hair  is  coiled  and  braidtd  ; an  epithet  in  the 
Rigveda  of  ffishan  as  well  as  of  Budra. 

15,  1$  are  taken,  with  vaiiations,  from  B.  V.  I.  114.  7,  8. 

17  Lord  of  beasts:  either  originally 

cattlj  which  are  specially  exposed  to  the  fury  of  evnUnAth'ii. 

h'rd  of  sacrificial  victims,  as  Prof.  Weber  thinks  mns  j;„i  > p'lreslinii 
WdU»dou-ed  or,  physically,  ‘ full  fed  ’ (Muir) , btrong-bodicd 


142 


TH£  TEXTS  OP  THE  [BOOH  XVI. 

18  Homage  to  the  brown-hucd  piewer,  to  the  Lord  of  food  be 

homage.  Homage  to  Bhava^s  weapon,  homage  to  the 
Lord  of  moving  things  1 homage  to  Rudra  whose  bow  ig 
bent  to  slay,  to  the  Lord  of  fields  homage,  homage  to  the 
charioteer  who  injures  none,  to  the  Lord  of  forests  be 
homage. 

1 9 Homage  to  the  red  architect,  to  the  Lord  of  trees  homage ! 

Homage  to  him  who  stretched  out  the  earth,  to  him  who 
gives  relief  be  homage.  Homage  to  the  Lord  of  Flanta, 
homage  to  the  prudent  merchant ! Homage  to  the  Lord 
of  bushes,  to  the  shouting  Lord  of  foot-soldiers  who 
makes  foes  weep  be  homage. 

20  Homage  to  the  runner  at  full  stretch,  to  the  Lord  of  min- 

istering spirits,  homage ! Homage  to  the  conquering, 
piercing  Lord  of  assailing  bands,  homage  to  the  towering 
sword-bearer,  to  the  Lord  of  thieves  homage ! Homage  to 
the  gliding  robber,  to  the  roamer,  to  the  Lord  of  forests 
homage  1 

21  Homage  to  the  cheat,  to  the  arch-deceiver,  to  the  Lord  of 

stealers  homage ! Homage  to  the  wearer  of  sword  and 
quiver,  to  the  Lord  of  robbers  homsge ! Homage  to  the 
boltarmed  homicides,  to  the  Lord  of  pilferers  homage! 
Homage  to  the  sword-bearers,  to  those  who  roam  at  night, 
to  the  Lord  of  plunderers  homage ! 

22  To  the  turban-wearing  haunter  of  mountains,  Lord  of 

land-grabbers  homage!  Homage  to  you  who  bear  arrows 
aud  to  you  who  carry  bows.  Homage  to  you  with  bent 
bows,  and  to  you  who  adjust  your  arrows,  to  you  who 
draw  the  bow  and  to  you  who  shoot  be  homage ! 

23  Homage  to  you  who  let  fly  and  to  you  who  pierce,  homage 

to  you  who  sleep  and  to  you  who  wake,  homage  to  yon 
who  lie  and  to  you  who  sit,  homage  to  you  who  stand 
and  to  you  who  run. 

24  Homage  to  assemblies  and  to  you  l^ds  of  i^eniWies,  ho- 

mage toTtoraelTandr  to  you  masteiilirTiorses,  h'otiiage  to 
you  hosts  that  wound  and  pierce,  to  you  destructive 
armies  with  eicellent  bandlB  be  homage. 


18  Bhai>a:  the  Existent,  or  the  Eternal ; here  a name  of  Rudra. 

20  Thieves, ,.roU>o‘:  assuming  their  forms  in  sport,  says  Mahidhara: 

24  Armies:  or,  alternatively,  Qoddessei,  according  to  Mahidhara i tbs 
feminine  participle  standing  without  a noun. 


VERSS 


WHITE  YAJVRYSDA, 


143 


25  Homage  to  the  troops  to  you  lords  of  troops  bo  homage. 
Homage  to  the  companies  and  to  you  lords  of  companies, 
homage. 

Homage  to  sharpers  and  to  you  lords  of  sharpers,  homage. 
Homage  to  you  the  deformed,  and  to  you  who  wear  all  forms, 
bomsge ! 

2G  Homage  to  armies  and  to  you  the  leaders  of  armies,  homage. 
Homage  to  you  car-borue  and  to  you  who  are  earless,  homage. 
Homage  to  the  charioteers  and  to  you  drivers  of  horses, 
homage. 

Homage  to  you  the  great  and  to  you  the  small,  homage. 

27  Homage  to  you  carpenters,  and  to  you  chariot-makers  homoge. 
Homage  to  you  potters  and  to  you  blacksmiths,  homage. 

y Homage  to  you  Niah^as  and  to  you  Pufijish^has,  homage. 
Homage  to  you  dog-leaders,  and  to  you  hunters,  homage. 

28  Homage  to  dogs,  and  to  you  masters  of  dogs,  homage. 
Homage  to  Bhava,  and  to  Rudra  homage,  homage  to  S u va 

and  to  Pasiipati,  and  to  Nilagriva  and  Sitikantha,  homage. 

29  Homage  to  him  with  braided  hair  and  to  him  with  shaven 

hair,  homage ! homage  to  the  thousand-eyed  and  to  him 
with  a hundred  bows,  homage  ! 

To  the  mountain-haunter  and  to  Sipivishto,  homage ! 

To  the  most  bountiful,  armed  with  arrows,  homage ! 

JO  Homage  to  the  short,  and  to  the  dwarf,  homage,  homage  to 
the  great  and  to  the  adult,  homage ! Homage  to  the  full- 
grown  and  to  the  growing,  to  the  foremost  and  to  the  first 
he  homage. 

51  Homage  to  the  swift,  and  to  the  active  be  homage,  and  to 
the  hasty  and  to  the  rapid  mover  be  homage!  Homage  to 
him  who  dwells  in  waves,  and  in  still  waters,  to  him  who 
dwells  in  rivers  and  on  islands. 


J2  Homage  to  the  eldest  and  to  the  youngest,  to  the  first-born 
and  to  the  last-born,  homage ! Homage  to  the  middle- 
: moat  and  to  the  immature,  to  the  lowest  and  to  him  who 
is  in  the  depth,  be  homage ! 

men  of  cei-tain  wild  aboriginal  tribes.  PuHjiahlhoi : fiiher- 


PQ,  or  fowleis,  • a 

28  ^rva:  a name  or  form  of  Rudra,  of  frequent  occurren^  in  the  A V. 
ofwpttit;  Lord  of  Beasts.  Ndagtiva:  Blue*neck.  See  verse  7.  Sdikanil^^: 
^bite-throated. 

Sipiviikia : in  the  R.  V.  a name  of  Yishru.  See  YHl. 


[BOOK  xn 


144  THE  TEXTS  OP  THE 

33  Homage  to  Sobhya  and  to  the  dweller  in  the  magic  amulet, 
homage!  Horn, age  to  him  who  is  allied  to  Yaraa,  to  him 
who  prosper  be  homage!  Homage  to  the  famoea  end  to 
the  endmost,  to  him  of  the  aown  corn-laud  and  to  him  d 
the  threshing-floor  be  homage. 

31  Homage  to  him  in  woods  and  to  him  in  bushes,  homage! 
Homage  to  him  as  sound  and  to  him  as  echo,  how^^^g®  • 
Homage  to  him  with  swift  armies  and  to  him  with  swut 
chariots,  homage ! Homage  to  the  hero,  and  to  mm  who 
rends  asunder  be  homage. 

35  Homage  to  him  who  wears  a helmet,  and  to  him  who  weais 

a cuirass,  homage ! To  liim  who  wears  mail  and  defensive 
armour,  homage  ! To  the  renowned  one  and  to  him  whoso 
army  is  renowned  be  homage,  to  him  who  is  in  drums  and 
to  him  who  makes  himself  known  by  beating  them. 

36  Homage  to  tlie  bold  one  and  to  the  prudent,  homage  to  him 

who  carries  sword  and  quiver,  homage  to  him  who  hath 
keen  arrows  and  is  armed  with  weapons,  homage  to  him 
who  hath  good  weapons  and  a good  bow. 

37  Homage  to  him  who  dwells  on  paths  and  reads,  honiage 

Wm  who  dwells  in  rugged  spots  and  on  the  skirts  of  mo«,v 
Ulus,  homage  to  him  who  dwells  in  water  eourses  and 
lakes,  homage  to  him  who  dwells  m rivers  and  meies. 

33  Homage  to  him  who  dwells  in  wells  and  pits,  homage  to  him 
who^dwells  in  bright  sky  and  sunlight.  Homage  to  1 
who  dwells  in  cloud  and  lightning,  homage  to  him  win 
dwells  in  rain  and  to  him  who  dwells  in  fair  weather. 

39  Homage  to  him  who  dwells  in  wind  and  to  him  who  dwtl  i 

in  teniuest,  homage  to  the  dweller  m houses  and  to  tla 
house-protector.  Homage  to  Soma  and  to  Rudra,  homagi 
to  the  copper-coloured  aud  to  the  ruddy  One. 

40  Homage  to  the  giver  of  weal,  and  to  Pasupati,  homage  « 

the  fierce  and  to  the  terrific.  Homage  to  him.  who  s y 
in  front  apd  to  him  who  slays  at  a ^'stance,  homage 
the  slayer  and  to  the  frequent  slayer,  homage  to  the  green 
tressed  trees,  homage  to  the  deliverer. 

*1  Homage  to  the  source  of  happiness  and  to  Ae  source  of 
light,  homage  to  the  causer  of  happiness  and  to  the  can 
of  delight,  homage  to  the  auspicious,  homage  to  the  m 

auspicious.  - 

Sobha  the  City  of  the  |i^dh^ 
MZic  aSet:  a string  bound  round  the  neck  or  arm  with  lUcaoUtio 
mtdto  Yana,  in  Yama’s  (death’s)  power  : hggeUng. 


VERSB  i9.] 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA, 


145 


42  Homage  to  him  who  is  beyond  and  to  him  who  is  on  this 

side,  homage  to  him  who  crosses  over  and  to  Inm  who 
crosses  back.  Homage  to  him  who  is  in  fords  and  on 
river  banks,  homage  to  him  who  is  in  tender  glass  and  iu 
foam. 

43  Homage  to  him  who  is  in  sand  and  to  him  who  is  in  running 

water,  homage  to  him  who  is  on  pebhly  ground  and  to 
him  who  is  where  still  water  stands.  Homage  to  him 
who  wears  braided  hair  and  to  him  whose  hair  is  suuMith. 
Homage  to  him  who  is  iu  deserts  and  to  him  who  is  on 
broad  roads. 

44  Homage  to  him  who  is  in  herds  of  cattle  and  to  1dm  wlio 

is  in  cow-pens,  homage  to  him  who  is  on  bods  and  to 
him  who  is  in  houses.  Homage  to  him  who  is  in  hearts, 
and  to  him  who  is  in  whirlpools,  homage  to  him  who  is  in 
wells  and  to  him  who  is  in  abysses. 

45  Homage  to  him  wlio  is  in  dry  things  and  to  him  who  is  In 

green  things.  Homage  to  him  who  is  in  dust  and  to  him 
who  is  ill  vapour.  Homage  to  him  who  is  in  inaccessiblu 
places,  homage  to  him  who  is  in  creeping  plants,  hornugm 
to  him  who  is  in  the  earth  and  to  him  who  is  in  g(>od  soil. 

46  Homage  to  him  who  is  in  leaves  and  to  him  who  is  in  the 

fallnig  of  leaves.  Homage  to  him  with  the  tlireatcning 
voice  and  to  him  who  slays,  homage  to  him  wlio  troubles 
and  to  him  who  afflicts.  Homage  to  you  arrow-makers 
and  to  you  bow-makeis,  homage  to  you  sprinklers,  to  the 
hearts  of  the  Cods.  Homage  to  the  disccrners,  homago 
to  the  destroyers;  homage  to  the  indestructible. 

47  Pursuer,  Lord  of  Soma  juice,  thou  cleaver,  coloured  blue 

and  red,  - 

Cleave  not,  destroy  not  one  of  these  our  children,  nor  ot 
these  our  beasts,  let  nothing  that  is  ours  be  sick. 

48  To  the  strong  lludra  bring  we  these  our  songs  of  praise,  to 

him  the  Lord  of  Heroes,  with  the  braided  hair, 

That  it  be  well  with  all  our  cattle  and  our  men,  that  m this 
village  all  be  healthy  and  well-fed. 

;49  Rudra,  with  that  auspicious  form  of  thine  which  healeth 


AuTpTcIousJhealerof  disease,  be  kind  tons  that  »e  may  live. 

46  Sprinkler):  sender,  of  rain.  The  heart,  of  Ihe  Oode: 
agtokwdhara,  Agni,  Vdj  u,  aod  Sdrya ; ‘ the  Sl.»rkhng  hea.t.  of  the 


^8  ’ t Eg^eluig. 

48  Taken  ftum  R.  V.  I.  lib  1. 


10 


[BOOK  XYl, 


345  THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 

50  May  RudiVs  missile  turn  asiHe  and  spare  iis,  the  great 
wrath  of  the  impetuous  One  avoid  us. 

Turn,  Bounteous  God,  thy  strong  how  from  our  princes,  and 
be  thou  gracious  to  our  seed  and  offspring. 

61  Most  bounteous,  most  auspicious,  be  auspicious,  well  inclined 

to  us.  1 1 J ■ 

On  some  remotest  tree  lay  down  thy  weapon,  and  clad  in 
robe  of  skin  approach,  bearing  thy  bow  come  hitherward. 

52  0 Wound  averter,  pnrple-hued,  to  thee  be  homage,  holy  Lord! 
May  all  those  thousand  darts  of  thme  strike  dead  another 

one  than  us. 

53  Thousands  of  thoimuds  are  tlie  shafts,  the  missiles  ready 

in  thy  hands : » i • 

Thou  holy  Lord,  who  hast  the  power,  turn  thou  their 

points  away  from  us. 

54  Innumerable  thousands  are  the  Rudrns  on  the  face  of  earth: 
Of  all  these  Rudras  we  unbend  the  bows  a thousand  leagues 

away. 

55  Bhavas  there  are  above  ns  in  this  mighty  billowy  sea  of  air, 
Of  all  of  these  do  we  unbend,  etc. 

5G  Rudras  are  dwelUng  in  the  sky,  whose  necks  are  blue,  whose 
throats  are  white  : 

Of  these  do  we  unbend  the  bows  a thousand  leagues  away 
from  us. 

.57  Sarvns  haunt  realms  beneath  the  earth — their  necks  are  blue, 
their  throats  aie  white  : 

Of  these,  etc. 

53  Tlmsc,  green  like  young  grass,  in  the  trees,  with  azure  necks 
and  purple  hue, 

Of  tho.se,  etc. 

59  Those,  ministering  spirits’  lords,  with  no  hair-tufts,  witl 
braided  locks, 

Of  these,  etc. 

GO  Those,  the  protectors  of  the  paths,  bringers  of  food,  wh. 
tight  for  life,  Of  these,  etc. 

61  Those  who  with  arrows  in  their  hand,  and  armed  witl 

swords,  frequent  the  fords,  Of  these,  etc. 

62  Those  who,  inhabiting  the  food,  vei  men  whde  drinking  frot 

their  cups,  etc. 


60  Taken  fiom  R.  V.  II.  33.  14, 


VERSE  66.] 


WffITE  YAJURVLDA. 


117 


C3  Rudras  so  many  and  still  more,  lodged  in  the  quarters  of 
the  sky,  etc. 

6i  Homage  to  Rudras,  those  wliose  home  is  sky,  whose  arrows 
floods  of  rain. 

To  them  ten  eastward,  southward  ten,  ten  to  tlie  south,  ten 
to  the  north,  ten  to  the  region  uppermost ! 

To  them  be  homage  ! May  they  spare  and  guard  us.  Within 
their  jaws  we  lay  the  man  who  hates  us  and  whom  we 
abhor, 

65  Homage  to  Rudras,  those  whose  home  is  air,  whose  arrows 

is  the  rain.  To  them,  etc. 

66  Homage  to  Rudras,  those  whose  home  is  earth,  whose  ar- 

rows is  men’s  food. 

To  them  be  homage,  etc. 


€4  To  them:  ' I stietxjh  out’  uadi'rstood.  Ten:  ‘fingers’  un(U!i8t<ind, 
That  is,  he  extends  both  liaiids,  witli  tins  linger  tips  j»la(,e<i  togothiT  in  sign 
of  adoration  to  the  omnipresent  Uudras,  towards  the  four  ejuat  tors  of  tlio  sky 
Dr.  Muir  observes;  ‘ Many  of  the  epithets  in  this  Hit.arudriya  are  not 
found  in  other  books  ; and  it  is  ddfieult,  and  perliaps  of  lit, tie  inifxjriaiiee 
to  discover  their  leal  sense.  Others,  as  tlic  reader  will  have  observed,  aie 
of  the  moat  fantastic  character.’ 


BOOK  THE  SEVENTEENTH. 


The  food  and  strength  contained  in  stone  and  mountain, 
drink  gdhered  from  the  plants  and  trees  and  waters, 

That  food  and  strength,  Maruts  ! free-givers,  giant  us. 

Ill  the  stone  is  thy  hunger.  In  me  is  thy  food.  Let  thy 
pain  reach  the  m m we  liate 

2 0 Agni,  may  these  bricks  be  mine  own  milch  kine  : one,  and 

ten,  and  ten  tens,  a hundred,  and  ten  hundreds,  a thou- 
sand, and  ten  thousand  a myriad,  and  a hundred  thousand, 
and  a million,  and  a hundred  millions,  and  an  ocean  mid- 
dle and  end,  and  a hundred  thousand  millions,  and  a bil- 

May  these  bricks  be  mine  own  milch-kine  in  yonder  world 
and  in  this  world. 

3 Ye  are  the  Seasons,  strengthening  Law,  fixed  in  due  season, 

strengthening  Law, 

Called  Splendid,  dropping  butter  down  and  honey,  yielders 
of  every  wish,  imperishable. 

4 With  the  lake’s  mantling  need  we  robe  tbeo,  Agni : to  us 

be  purifying  and  auspicious. 

5 With  cold’s  investing  garb  we  gird  thee,  Agni : to  us  be  puri- 

fying and  auspicious. 


^After  the  performance  of  the  Satarud.iya  Oblatiom  propitiatory  and  pre^ 
p.rato.7  rloDie,  in  connerion  with  Agni  and  the  F.re-alt».'  are  o«nt.nn»d 
in  this  Book.  , . • t ^ ^ 

First  he  sprinkles  the  altar  with  water  from  a pitcher.  ^ 

Bione  which  he  has  placed  at  the  junction  of  the  right  wing  of  the  altar  with 

^li6  body*  • 

1 In  the  stone:  he  puts  the  pitcher  on  the  stone  which  represents  Agm 
According  to  Mahidhara,  atman  (rock,  stone)  here  means  ‘eater,  tbe  devonnn? 
Fire  he  takes  up  the  pitcher.  Thy  pain : the  fiery  heat  and  at 

Ldant  suflfering.  Here,  having  put  the  stone  in  the  pitcher,  he  throws 
southward.  , . ; 

1!  Hetakrepoareasionof  the  bricka  of  the  altar  atretchmg  over  it  aw 
touehing  aa  much  of  it  as  he  can.  An  o<xan:  a fantastic  name  fur  a thus 
sand  million. 

3 Ye : the  bricks.  , 

4 He  draws  a frog,  an  AvakA  (Blyja  Octandra,  a water-weed ),  and 
shout  of  bamboo,  allLblems  of  coolness,  eastward  along  the  right  part 
the  body  of  the  altar.  See  R.  V.  X.  16.  14. 

6 He  draws  them  along  from  the  south  to  the  north  hip  of  the  altar. 


terse  12.]  WHITE  YAJURVEDA.  149 


6 Descend  upon  the  earth,  the  reed,  the  livers  : thou  art  the 

gull,  0 Agni,  of  tli0  waters. 

Witli  them  come  hither,  female  Frog,  and  render  this  sacri- 
fice of  ours  bright-hued,  successful. 

7 This  is  the  place  where  waters  meet ; here  is  the  gathering 

of  the  flood. 

Let  thy  shaft  burn  others  than  us : be  thou  cleanser,  pro- 
pitious unto  us. 

8 0 Agni,  purifier,  God,  with  splendour  and  thy  pleasant 


tongue 

Bring  hither,  and  adore,  the  Gods. 

9  So,  Agni,  purifying,  bright,  bring  hither  to  our  sacrifice. 

To  our  oblation  bring  the  Gods. 

10  He  who  with  purifying,  eye  attracting  form  hath  shone  up- 

on the  earth  as  with  the  light  of  Dawn  ; 

Who  speeding  on,  as  in  the  fleet  steed’s  race,  in  fight,  cometh 
untouched  by  age,  as  one  athirst  in  hcut. 

11  Obeisance  to  thy  wrath  and  glow ! Obeisance  to  thy  fiery 

flame ! 

Let  thy  shot  missiles  burn  others  than  us ; be  thou  cleanser, 

propitious  unto  us.  . , i n • 

11  To  him  who  dwells  in  man,  Hail ! To  him  who  dwells  m 

waters.  Hail ! , . . i i i ii,. 

To  liim  who  dwells  in  sacred  grass,  Kail ! To  him  who  dwells 
in  the  wood,  Hail  1 To  liim  who  linds  the  li^ht,  Hull ! 

6 HedrTwsthemalwiT^ ^rom  the  noith  l.i|.  to  the  south  *1!''"''*''; 
altar.  Gall:  meaurag  heat,  which  U rc^ardeil  ae  characteristic  of  the  b.ll- 
ouB  humour. 

7 He  drtws  then  along  from -the  north  to  the  south  shoulder. 

8 He  draws  then,  over  the  right  wing  of  the  aitar.  The  formuia  is  Uk.u 

*Th1  IZ,  then,  over  the  taii  of  the  bird  ehaped  altar,  with  the  formula 
from  K V.  VI.  16.  5. 

10  Fleet  tteed't:  or  Etasa’s,  one  of  the  horBes  of  the  bun. 

"a  moZt:x':iurmaiug"t.:: 

formula  addressed  to  Agni.  , . . « „ 

12  Mounted  on  the  altar  he  offers  an  oblation,  on 
of  clarified  butter  taken  in  five  Iwilefula,  ^ / ..  v(t, 

dmllt  in  man : Agni.  seated  as  vital  breath  in  to  voehul 

a sacrificial  exclamation  of  “or,Ung  to  Mahidhara.  In 

Jnu,ater,:  in  the  shape  of  submarine  fire,  « woS  • in  the  trees 

saered  grots:  in  the  shape  of  in  the  form  of 

which  he  penetrates  and  consumes.  The  light . « 
the  Sun, 


160  THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  XVIt, 

13  Worshipful  Gods  of  Gods  who  merit  worship,  those  who  sit 

down  beside  their  yearly  portion, 

Let  them  who  eat  not  sacrificial  presents  drink  in  this  rite 
of  honey  and  of  butter. 

14  Those  Gods  who  have  attained  to  Godhead  over  Gods,  they 

who  Imve  led  the  way  in  this  our  holy  work. 

Without  whose  aid  no  body  whatsoever  moves,  not  on  heaven’s 
heights  are  they,  nor  on  the  face  of  earth. 

15  Giver  of  breath,  of  out-breath,  breath  diffusive,  giver  of 

lustre,  giving  room  and  freedom. 

Lot  thy  shot  missiles  burn  others  than  us  : be  thou  cleanser, 
propitious  unto  us. 

16  May  Agni  with  his  sharpened  blaze  cast  down  each  fierce 

devouring  fiend. 

May  Agm  win  us  wealth  by  war. 

17  He  who  sate  down  as  Hotar  priest,  the  lyishi,  our  Father 

offering  up  all  things  existent — 

He,  seeking  with  his  wish  a great  possession,  came  among 
men  on  earth  as  archetypal. 

18  What  was  the  place  whereon  he  took  his  station  1 What  was 

it  that  upheld  him  1 What  the  manner, 

Whence  Visvakarman,  seeing  all,  producing  the  earth,  with 
mighty  power  disclosed  the  heavens'! 


13  He  sprinkles  the  altar,  the  enclosing  stones,  and  outside  them,  with 
sour  curds,  honey,  cUritied  bulter,  ami  Kusa  grass,  lecitiug  two  foimulas. 
Worshipful  Gods:  in  the  shape  of  the  Vital  Airs,  who  are  not  eaters  of 
oblations. 

14  Holy  work  - brahman,  according  to  Mabidhara,  Agni  is  intended. 
No  body... mores:  ‘ no  dwelling-place  becoinetii  pure’:  Eggeling.  Not  on 
heaven's  height,  etc.:  that  is,  the  Vital  Airs,  although  deities,  exist  m 
living  creatures  only. 

15  Ho  descends  fiom  the  altar,  and  recites  the  formula  addressed  to 
Agni. 

16  He  goes  to  the  saciificial  hall  and  offers  clarified  butter  taken  in  fire 
ladlefuls  in  the  Hall- Door  Fire,  with  the  formula  taken  from  R.  V.  VI.  16.  28; 

17  He  offers  claiified  butter  in  a ladle  filled  with  sixteen  spoonfuls,  in  two 
oblations,  with  eight  formulis  for  each,  and  the  formula  of  verse  16.  The 
verses  17-23  are  taken  from  R.  V.  X 81  He  who  sate  down  : Visvakarman, 
the  Omnifio,  the  universal  Father  and  Gener.itoi,  the  Architect  of  the  worlds 
and  Cretor  of  all  thing.s  heie  identiBed  with  Prajripati,  Agni  the  Fire-altar. 
All  things  existent  ■ regarded  as  contained  in  the  offerings  presented  by 
Visvakarman.  His  wish:  hisdc^iie  to  create.  Archetypal:  the  meaning 
of  ‘prathamachhcul  is  uncertain  ; ‘ fiist  investing  ( Agni  with  the  worlds  ), 
accoidingto  Siy ana’s  explanation;  ‘first  appealing’  : Ludwig;  ‘ first  wor* 
shipper  ’ : Wallis. 


WHITE  YkJURVEDA. 


VERSE  26,] 


151 


19  He  who  hath  eyes  on  all  sides  round  about  liim,  a mouth  ou 

all  sides,  arms  and  feet  on  all  sides, 

He  the  sole  God,  producing;  earth  and  lieaveu,  weldeth  them 
with  bis  anus  as  wiui^s  tojjjetber. 

20  What  was  the  tree,  wh.it  wood  in  sootli  produced  it,  from 

which  they  fashioned  out  the  earth  and  iieaveul 
Ye  thongiitful  men,  inquire  within  your  s}MnL  whereon  lie 
stood  when  he  establishiMl  all  tiinius. 

21  Thine  higliest,  lowest  saerilici:d  natures,  and  these  thy 

midmost  here,  0 Visvakarman, 

Teach  thou  thy  friends  at  s.icnfice,  0 Ulessed,  and  come  thy- 
self, exalted,  to  our  worship. 

22  Bring  those,  thyself  exalted  with  obl.ition,  0 Visvakaiman, 

Earth  and  Heaven  to  woi'slnp. 

Let  enemies  around  us  live  in  folly:  here  let  us  have  a liih 
and  liberal  patron. 

23,  24 -VIII.  45,  46. 

25  The  Father  of  the  eye,  the  Wise  in  spiiit.  create<l  both  tliesc 

worlds  submerged  in  fatness. 

Then  when  the  e.isteni  ends  were  firmly  fastened,  the  heavens 
and  the  earth  weie  fur  extended. 

26  Mighty  in  mind  and  power  i.^  Visvakarman,  Maker,  Disposer, 

and  most  lofty  I’i'esence, 


if  H'eWrfA  <*««.■  Cl  U V IV  2 17;  X 72  2.  , 

fanmii^  the  flame  in  wliich  tlie  m.iterial  w amelfed 
thaf.  whirlwinds,  produced  by  the  action  of  liamirt,  feet,  aiii 

'"itrty;  the  maker,  of  the  «erl.l,  .l..ectea  hy  l>aran.«va,a  ll-c  Su,.- 

^*’21' Ihyte//:  ‘ealiil.ir..te,l,  tl.y.eW  ..ffw  uj.  'v  j*'".'' 

thou  sacrifice  to  thyself  dehghmiK  lhy^elf  : Wallis  •' Jj 
dhara,  the  meaning  is  that  nun  is  inc.mi,.et.nt  m w..rdo,,  ^ 
is,  in  his  forms,  and  that  the  worship  .nu>t  he  peifurmed  hy  the  ticator 

22*^Bring Eartk  and  Heaven  to  wonkip:  or,  saciifice  to  them. 

2:^,  24  = V[II.  4.'),  46.  , , » v X 81  The 

25  This  and  the  following  six  verses  aie  ^ 

father  of  the  eye : Vi-vakai  man,  who  mad*- the  h;/ i _ i i.v  • w.itcr 
to  see.  Suhrfieryed  U futnets  Saya  a explainy/t."  t»i  ‘ . ji^,^ting 

^ eugendere.l  the  water,  ( and  then  ) these  two  ( lu-avcu  ouU  ) U 

f on  the  waters  — Wilson.  . il,« 

_ 26  Most  lojty  hterally,  the  highc^^  ofleiings, 

image  or  oliject  of  spiritual  contemplation,  ihu  P 'ru  vnt  Ihtluti ' 

or  perhaps  the  wishes,  of  the  Fatliers,  semi-peisoiu  ic<  _ Kratii  and 

the  great  Rislns  M.oichi,  Atri,  Angiras,  1 ula-.'>a,  fullilineiiL 

V-isUhtha.  The  meaning  is  that  the  spnits  ot  the 

tvf  alUheir  desires  l.eyoad  the  stairy  heavcn»  wheie  Uie  i>uug, 
gieat  Cieatur,  dw-ellu. 


152 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  XV  11 


Their  oflferings  joy  in  rich  juice  where  they  value  One,  only 
One  beyond  the  Seven  Eishis. 

27  Father  who  made  ns,  he  wiio,  as  Disposer,  knoweth  all  races 

and  all  things  existing, 

Even  he  alone,  the  Deities'  name-giver,— him  other  being* 
seek  for  information. 

28  To  him  in  sacrifice  they  offered  treasures,— Kishis  of  old,  in 

numerous  troops,  as  singers. 

Who,  in  the  distant,  near,  and  lower  region,  made  ready  all 
these  things  that  have  existence. 

29  That  which  is  earlier  than  this  earth  and  heaven,  before  the 

Asuras  and  Oods  had  being, 

Wlmt  was  the  germ  primeval  which  the  waters  received  where 

the  first  Gods  beheld  each  other  1 

30  The  waters,  they  received  that  germ  primeval  wherein  the 

Gods  were  gathered  all  together. 

It  rested  set  upon  the  Unborn’s  navel,  that  One  wherein  abide 
all  things  existing. 

31  Ye  will  not  find  him  who  produced  these  creatures : another 

Ibiiig  hath  risen  up  among  you 
E.iwrapt  in  misty  cloud,  with  lips  that  stammer,  hymn- 
chanters  wander  and  are  discontented. 

32  First  wns  the  Go<i  engendered,  Visvakarman  : then  the 

Gandh.irva  sprang  to  life  as  second.  , a 

Third  in  succession  was  the  plants’  begetter : he  laid  the 

waters’  germ  in  many  places. 

33  Swift,  rapidly  srrikiiig,  like  a bull  who  sharpens  his  horns, 

terrific,  stirring  up  the  people, 

With  eyes  that  close  not,  bellowing,  Sole  Hero,  Indrasulidncd 

at  once  a hundred  armies.  

27  Fm-mffmitwn:  to  is  the  Supreme  Q.hJ  ; or  whet  ti.rn 

Visrsha;n..n.  S. 

mLn,,  according  tar  the  Commentator  ■ Vi^rahar 
man  is  a different  Itity  fiem  y-u  who  tmnsi . 

vidnal  con.sciou3ues9,  and  80  foi  tlj  — bee  edit >r  s note  n f v • rli 

tion  i-nm-npt.  etc. ; You  who  are  engaged  in  the  enjoyment,  "f 
or  the  next  teinc  subject  to  false  knowle<lge  or  ignorance,  nave  no  k 
X^eX  the  ^h  sie  The  Hymns  of  the  R V.  and  the  authont^s  refer 

red  to  in  the  note  on  the  i-assage,  * • mi.  Pai 

32  TkeOandhaiTa-  the  Sun,  that  is,  Agm.  The  plants  begetter. 

ianva.  the  God  of  the  Rain-cloud.  "d  v Y lfl‘ 

^ SS  This  verse  and  the  eleven  that  follow  are  taken  from  * • • 

which  is  a prayer  to  ludra  for  aid  and  victory  m battle. 


VERSE  iB.] 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


15S 


34  VV'th  liim  loud-roaring,  ever  watchful,  Victor,  Iwld,  hard  to 

overthrow,  Rouser  of  l)attle, 

Jndra  the  Strong,  whose  hand  bears  arrows,  conquer,  ye 
warriors,  now,  now  vanquish  m the  combat. 

35  He  rules  with  those  who  cany  shafts  and  quivers,  liidra  who 

with  his  band  brings  hosts  together, 

Foe-conquering,  strong  of  arm,  the  Soina-drinker,  with  mighty 
bow,  shooting  with  well-laid  arrtnvs. 

36  Brihaspati,  fly  with  thy  chariot  hither,  slayer  of  demons, 

driving  off  our  foemen. 

Be  thou  protector  of  our  cars,  destroyer,  victor  iu  battle, 
breaker-up  of  armies. 

37  Conspicuous  by  thy  strength,  firm,  foremost  fighter,  mighty 

and  fierce,  victorious,  all-subduing, 

The  Son  of  Conquest,  passing  men  and  heroes,  kiue-winner, 
mount  thy  conquering  car,  0 Indra. 

38  Cleaver  of  stalls,  kine-wiuner,  armed  with  thunder,  who  qncdls 

an  army  and  with  might  destroys  it, — 

Follow  liim,  brothers!  quit  yourselves  like  heroes,  and  like 
this  Indra  show  your  zeal  and  courage. 

39  Piercing  the  cow-stalls  with  surpassing  vigour,  Indra,  the 

pitiless  Hero,  wild  with  anger, 

Victor  ill  fight,  unslialtcii  and  resistless, — may  ho  protect  our 
armies  lu  our  battles. 

40  Indra  guide  these : Brihaspati  precede  them,  the  guerdon, 

and  the  sacrifice,  and  Soma  ; 

And  let  the  banded  Marnts  march  in  forefront  of  heavenly 
hosts  that  conquer  and  demolish. 

41  Ours  be  the  potent  host  of  miglity  Indra,  King  Varuna,  and 

Maruts,  and  Adityas.  • j i 1 

Uplifted  is  the  shout  of  Gods  who  conquer,  high-mindei  o » 
who  cause  the  worlds  to  tiemble. 

42  Bristle  thou  up,  0 Bounteous  Lord,  our  weapons : excite  the 

spirits  of  my  warring  heroes.  i w 

Urge  on  the  strong  steeds’  might,  0 Vntra-slayer,  and  e »e 
din  of  conquering  cars  go  upward. 

43  May  Indra  aid  us  wheu  our  flags  are  gathered  ; victorious 

the  arrows  of  our  array.  i ^ 

May  our  brave  men  of  war  prevail  in  battle.  Ye  Gods  protect 

U8  in  the  shout  of  onset.  


40  Guide  these : be  the  leader  of  our  troops.  The  don . the  reward  o 
the  priests  who  peiform  tlie  sacrifice  offereil  before  battle. 

43  When  our  jlags  are  gathered : ‘ apparently  comparable  with  the  sign 
collatis  of  the  Romans  ’ : Ludwig. 


154 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOdK  XVll 


44  Bewildering  the  senses  of  our  foemen,  seize  thou  then  bodies 

and  depart,  0 Apva.  xu  . w 

Attack  them,  set  their  hearts  on  fire  and  burn  them  ; so  let 
our  foes  abide  in  utter  darkness. 

45  Loosed  from  the  bowstring  fly  awiy,  0 Arrow,  sharpened  by 

our  prayer.  , x x c 

Go  to  the  foemen,  strike  them  home,  and  let  not  one  of 

them  escape. 

46  Advance,  0 heroes,  win  the  day.  May  Indra  be  your  sure 

defence.  , , 

Exceeding  mighty  be  your  arms,  that  none  may  wound  or 

injure  you. 

47  That  army  of  our  enemies,  0 Maruts,  that  comes  against 

us  with  its  might,  ceutending,  x x 

Meet  ye  and  wrap  it  in  unwelcome  darkness  so  that  not  one 
of  them  may  know  another. 

48  There  where  the  flights  of  arrows  fall  like  boys  whose  lock) 

are  yet  unshorn,  „ 

May  India,  mxay  Brihaspati,  may  Aditi  protect  us  well,  pro 

tect  us  well  through  all  our  days. 

49  Thy  vital  parts  I cover  with  thine  armour : with  immor 

tality  King  Soma  clothe  thee.  , j tl,, 

Varuna  give  thee  what  is  more  than  ample,  and  in  tl  ^ 

triumph  may  the  Gods  be  joyful.  , u-  i rrx 

50  Worshipped  with  butter,  Agiii,  lead  this  man  to  high  p 

eminence.  , , . , , .i 

Vouchsafe  him  growth  of  riches  and  multiply  him 

progeuny.  - 

44  Apvd:  according  to  Sityana,  a female  deity  piesides  overjir 

according  to  Mahtdhara,  sickness  or  fear 

colic,  or  dysentery,  likely  to  attack  soldiers  in  the  field  of  battle. 
part : or,  pass  us  by  ; do  not  attack  us. 

46  Taken  from  R.  V.  VI.  75.  16.  , 

46  Taken  from  R.  V.  X.  103.  13, 

47  Taken  from  A V.  III.  2 6.  < T?  V VI  75  17.  ^ 

48  This  and  the  following  verse  are  taken  ^ 

Tikebovs  etc  : ‘ the  point  of  the  comparison  is  not  very  obvious,  nu 
ty  San  thai  the  ar'rows  fall  where  they  list,  as  boys  ^-f-e  he,- 
with  the  lock  of  hair,  before  the  religions  f ^ a 

they  like  ’ ; Wilson.  Prof,  von  Roth  separates  vtaikkd  from  > 

Sate.  : ‘ where  the  arrow,  fly.  young  and  old  : that feathered  a 

the  or  ooat  of  mail,  P-f  “if ! 

back,  cheat,  and  lower  part,  of  the  body.  If  not  nude  o , 

strengthened  with  metal  of  some  kind.  formula 

50  He  puts  three  logs  of  Udumbara  wood  on  the  fire, 

each. 


VBRSE  58.]  WHITE  YAJURVEDA.  155 

)1  Indra,  lead  him  to  eminence  : controller  of  hia  foes  bo  he. 

Vouchsafe  him  lustre  : let  him  give  their  sacred  portions  to 
the  Gods. 

)3  The  man  within  whose  house  we  pay  oblation,  Indra,  prosper 
him. 

May  the  Gods  bless  and  comfort  him,  they  and  this  Brah- 
manaspati. 

)3  May  the  All-Gods,  0 Agni,  bear  and  lift  thee  upwanl  with 
their  thoughts. 

Fair  to  bo  looked  on,  rich  in  light,  be  thou  propitious  unto 
us. 

)4  May  the  Five  Regions  guard,  divine,  our  worship,  Goddesses 
chasing  lack  of  thought  and  hatred. 

Giving  the  Sacrificer  growth  of  riches.  Let  sacrifice  be  based 
on  growth  of  riches. 

')5  Inspirited  above  enkindled  Agni,  adorable,  winged  with 
hymns,  was  it  accepted. 

When  the  Gods  offered  sacrifice  with  viands,  circling  the 
heated  caldron,  paying  worship. 

)6  Lord  of  a hundred  draughts,  benign.  God-serving— to  him 
divine,  establishcr,  protector, 

The  Gods  approached  the  sacrifice,  encircling.  Gods  for  the 
Gods  stood  fain  for  sacred  service. 

57  When  the  fourth  sacrifice  reaches  the  oblation,  accepted  offer- 
ing which  hath  been  made  leady,  fit  for  the  Imnulator’s 
sacrificing, 

; Thence  bless  us  prayers  and  holy  recitations  ! 

Savitar,  goldeii-hued,  hath  lifted  eastward,  bright  with  the 
sunbeams,  his  eternal  lustre, 

He  at  whose  furtherance  wise  Rushan  marches  surveying  all 
existence  like  a herdsman. 

52  This  Brahmunaspati:  or  Brihaspati,  Lord  of  Prayer,  who  ia  »i»ei:ially 
resent. 

53  The  PratiprasthiUar  lifts  up  a kindled  log  of  fuel  representing  Agni. 
he  text  h.as  oeeurred  in  XI I 31. 

54  He  goes  forward  to  the  altar, 

55  Inspirited : ‘ glorifying’  ; Kggeling.  The  meaning  of  the  verse  is 
t)«cure. 

j 5fi  Lord  of  a hundred  draughts  • Agni,  worshipped  with  countless  libations. 
157  Fourth  sacrifice : corning  after  the  muttering  of  foinmlah,  the  reel ta- 

of  sacred  pi aise- verses,  aud  the  Apratiiatha  or  liie.'iistible  hymn  (ver- 
'33- -44.  Prof.  Eggeliug  remurks  with  reason  that  ‘these  verses  are 
-her  enigmatical.’ 

58  Taken  from  K.  Y.  X.  139.  1.  Savitar,  the  Impeller,  the  bun  as  a 
ria  of  Agui. 


156 


the  texts  of  the 


[BOOK  XV It] 


59  He  Bite,  the  measurer,  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  filling  the  t», 

wol  Id-halves  and  air’s  mid-region. 

He  looks  upon  the  rich  far-spreading  pastures  between  the 
ea^tel•u  and  the  western  limit. 

60  Steer,  Sea,  Red  Bird  with  strong  winus,  he  hath  entered  the 

dwelling-place  of  the  Primeval  Father.  » t .v, 

A gly  hued'^Stone  set  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  he  fcath  gone 
forth  and  guards  the  air’s  two  limits. 

61  All  sacred  songs  have  glorified  I«<l'VT"f?V,rvlrrLo;d 
The  best  of  warriors  borne  on  cars,  the  Loid,  the  V y 

of  strength. 

62  May  God-invoking  sacrifice  bring  the  Gods  hitberward  to  U8. 

Ebless-invokmlsacrificebringtheClodshitherW^^^^^^^^^^^ 

May  Agni,  God,  make  offering  and  hither  bring  the  Gods  to 

US. 

63  May  the  abundant  growth  of  wealth  with  elevation  lift  me 

AinUMth  his  subjugating  power  may  Indra  keep  my  foenicr 
down. 

64  Unraisine  and  depression  and  devotion  may  the  Gods  increase 
Marii'dra,  too,  and  Agni  drive  my  foes  away  to  every  s.d 

65  Go  ve  bv  Agni  to  the  sky  bearing  the  Ukhya  in  your  ham  ^ 
Keaching  the  heights  of  sky  and  heaven  stay  interminglci 

with  the  Gods. 

66  Agni,  go  forward  to  the  eastern  region,  well-skilled,  holier 

the  fire  in  front  of  Agni.  . 

Illuming  all  the  quarters,  shine  with  splendour  : supp  y 
food  our  quadrupeds  and  bipeds. 

" 69  bright  "‘.^Sibhig  b“ 

5nd  lecites  tlie  text  from  H V.  X.  1 • . ‘man-viewing.’  Fattuu 

and  the  oftering-grouuds  : Eggehug.  » 

60  Taken  from  R.  V.  V.  47.  3.  Steer:  mighty.  Sea:  as  the  attracter 

receptacle  of  watera.  Primrof  i*'atAer ; Dyaus  or  Heave  . 

61  They  all  go  to  the  altar,  with  the  text  (repeated  from  XII.  66) 

from  R.  V.  1.  11-  1*  , -n  r 

(13  May.  . . lift ; «o  M.hldh.ra.  ‘ Hath  upheaved  : Eggalmg. 

64  VpraUing:  of  us.  Dq^wion:  of  our  foes.  Jkvctioa:  eapre«ed 

sacrifice.  j • 1.1. 

ti  They  mount  the  altar.  TOya.-  the  fire  conUined  m the  pan. 


WUITE  YAJURYEDA. 


167 


IERSE  74.] 

)7  From  earth  to  air’s  mid-region  have  I mounted,  and  from 
mid  air  ascended  up  to  heaven. 

From  the  high  pitch  of  heaven’s  cope  I came  into  the  world 
of  light. 

68  Mounting  the  sky  they  look  not  round : they  rise  to  heaven 
through  both  the  worlds-- 

Sages  who  span  the  sacrifice  that  pours  its  stream  on  every  side. 
jD  Foremost  of  those  who  seek  the  Gods  come  forward,  thou 
who  art  eye  of  Gods  and  men,  0 Agui. 

Accordant  with  the  Hhrigus,  fain  to  worship,  to  heaven  in 
safety  go  the  Sacrificers. 

70  Night  and  Dawn,  different  in  hue,  accordant,  etc.,  as  in  Xll.  2. 
710  Agui,  thousand  eyed  and  hundied-hoaded,  thy  breaths  arc 
hundred,  thy  through-breaths  a thon^and. 

Thou  art  the  Lord  of  thousandfold  possessions,  'fo  thee, 
for  strength,  may  we  present  ublatmn. 

72  Thou  art  the  Bird  ot  goodly  wing  : be  seated  on  tlie  ridge 

of  earth.  . . . . 

Fill  air’s  mid-region  with  thy  glow,  supportmur  with  thy 
light  tlie  sky,  confirm  the  quarters  with  thy  sheen. 

73  Receiving  offerings,  fair  of  aspect,  eastward  be  duly  seated 

in  thv  place,  0 Agni.  , . i i 

In  thisGie  more  exalted  habitation  be  seated  All  (tods  and 

the  Sacrificer.  ^ , 

74  That  wondrous  all-mankiud-embracing  favour  of  Savitar, 

choice-worthy,  I solicit, 

Even  his  which  Kanva  wont  to  milk,  the  mighty,  the  teeming 
Cow  who  yields  a tliousand  milk-streams. 

67  Th«  S-cdEcer  .peaku,  rec.ting  three  verse,  from  A-J.  I < 3 -5; 
Air',  mid-regiver  : the  firmament.  Hmven  : above  the  .ky^  " 

A still  higher  region.  World  oflvjht:  the  abode  of  ’ Altind^iBcbca 

See  M.  MUller,  Vedio  Hymna,  Part  I.  p.  9 ; and  dimmer,  AUmdiacht. 

Iheben,  p 368.  , . . 

68  Loolc  not  round : do  not  regard  their  eons,  cattle,  etc. 

69  Bhrigus:  seel.  18;  III,  15.  ...  white 

70  He  Xra  an  oblation  of  milk  drawn  from  » with  Tariations 

calf  (representing  Night  and  the  Sun),  with  the  text  taken,  with  variat  , 

from  R,  V.  I.  98.  6.  ..  , ,,  ^ yvtt  n Ilundrtd- 

71  Tliousand-eytd : his  eyes  are  the  chips  of  go  ' , sc  shauatba-liiAh- 

Aeurfed  identified  with  the  hundred-headed  Kudra.  b 1 

"'‘a^Hfia),  down  the  fire  and  recites  two 

73  Thg place:  the  fire-altar.  Him  exM  / , 

74  He  puts  on  the  fire  three  pieces  ot 
FdiiinVwira  wood  respectively,  with  a formula  for  cue 
Tedic  Riehi. 


158 


THE  TEXTS  OP  THE 


[BOOK  XVII 


75  May  we  adore  thee  in  thy  loftiest  birth  place,  Agni ! witli 

praise-songs  in  thy  lower  station. 

The  place  whence  those  hast  issued  forth  I worship.  In  thee, 
well  kindled,  have  they  paid  oblations 

76  Shine  thou  before  us,  Agni,  well  enkindled,  with  flame,  most 

youthful  God,  that  never  fadeth. 

Unceasing  unto  thee  come  sacred  viands. 

77  Agni,  this  day  with  lauds,  etc.,  as  in  XV.  44. 

78  I dedicate  the  thought  with  mind  and  butter  so  that  the 

Gods  may  come  who  love  oblation,  strengthing  Law, 

To  Visvakarman,  Lord  of  all  the  earth,  I offer  up  day  after 
day  the  inviolable  sacrifice. 

79  Seven  fuel  logs  hast  thou,  seven  tongues,  0 Agni,  seven  Rishis 

hast  thou,  seven  belovM  mansions. 

Seven-priests  in  sevenfold  manner  pay  thee  worship.  Fill 
full — All-hail  to  thee  ! — seven  wombs  with  butter. 

80  Purely-Bright,  Wonderfully-Bright,  Really-Bright,  All-Lu- 

minous, 

Bright,  Law’s-Protector,  Safe-from-Ill ; 

81  Such,  Other-Looking,  Equal,  Similar,  Measured,  Commen- 

surate, Jointly-Bearing-np. 

82  Right,  ileal,  Firm,  Strong-to-Support,  Bearer,  Disposer, 

Manager. 

83  Winner-of-Right,  Winner-of-Truth,  Host-Conquering,  Lord- 

of-Goodly-Host, 

Whose-Friends-are-Near-at-Hand,  Whose-Banded-Enemies 
are  Far-Away : ^ 

^ The  formula  18  taken  from  K.  V.  II  9.  3.  Loftiest  birthplace:  heaven 
the  birthplace  of  Agni  as  the  Sun.  Lower  station:  the  firmament,  when 
he  is  produced  as  lightning.  The  place  whence  thou  hast  issued  : the  fiie 
altar. 

76  Taken  from  R.  V.  VII.  13.  . , / 

77  He  offois  with  the  sruva  or  dipping  spoon.  The  formula  is  taken  froii 

R,  V.  IV.  10  1.  . , 

78  He  offers  again  to  Visvakarman,  the  Ommfic  Agm.  I dedicate : '<i 
offer  up.  The  thoiKjlit:  of  the  priests  and  the  sacnficer.  The  metre  i 
Atijagatl,  four  divisions  of  thirteen  syllables  each. 

79  He  offers  a full  oblation  with  the  srak  or  offering-spoon.  Pud  logi 

said  to  be  the  vital  breathings.  Seven  tongues : called  Kali  Kar4lt,  etc  Risks 
Marichi  and  the  re-j;t.  See  XVII.  26  Mansions  . Gilyatri  and  other  sac 
red  metres,  or  the  Ahavanlya,  Gdrhapatya  and  other  fire-hearths.  Seve^ 
fold  fashion:  with  the  Agnishtoma  (Piaise  of  Agni)  and  other  service 
Wombs : layers  of  tlie  altar.  ^ r * n m , 

80  After  offering  the  VaifvAnara  rice-cake  to  Agni  the  God  of  All  Me' 
he  offers  seven  rice  cakes  to  the  Maruts  (consisting  of  three  or  nine  troo] 
of  seven  each  ) with  a formula  at  each  offering  containing  names  or  titles  > 
these  deities. 


VERSE  90.] 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


159 


54  To  day  in  this  onr  sacrifice  be  present,  Such,  Looking-Thus, 

Same,  S i m i lar- 1 n - A ppearan  ce, 

Measured,  Commensurate,  Joint-Rearers,  Maruts  * 

55  Self-Powerful,  Voracious-Onc,  Kin-to-the-Sun,  The  House 

holder, 

Play-Lover,  Mighty,  Conqueror. 

Fierce,  lerrible,  The  Resonant,  The  Roaring,  Victorious, 
Assailant,  and  Dispeller,  All-Hail! 

86  The  Maruts,  clans  divine,  became  the  followers  of  Indm  ; as 
The  Maruts,  clans  divine,  became  the  followers  of  Indra,  so 
May  clans  divine  and  human  be  the  Sacrificcr  s followei-s. 

87  Drink  in  the  middle  of  the  flood,  0 Agni,  this  breast  stored 

full  of  sap,  teeming  witli  water. 

Welcome  this  fountain  redolent  of  sweetness.  0 Courser, 
enter  those  thy  watery  dwelling. 

88  Oil  hath  been  mixed  : oil  is  his  habitation.  In  oil  he  rests  ; 

oil  is  his  proper  province. 

Come  as  thy  wont  is.  0 thou  Steer,  rejoice  thee.  Boar  o(F 
the  oblation  duly  consecrated. 

89  Forth  from  the  ocean  sprang  the  wave  of  sweetness : together 

with  the  stalk  it  turned  to  Amrit, 

That  which  is  holy  oil’s  mysterious  title : but  the  Gods' 
tongue  is  truly  Amrit’s  centre. 

90  Let  us  Declare  aloud  the  name  of  Ghnta,  and  at  this  sacrifice 

held  it  up  with  homage. 

So  let  the  Brahman  hear  the  prixiac  we  utter.  This  hath  the 
four-horned  Bufl'alo  emitted. 


Tliis  is  muttered  by  the  Adhvaryu  at  the  en<l  of  the  offerings  to  the 
'lamts.  , 

87  Verses  87  — 99  in  praisp  of  Agni  are  muttered  f>y  the  S.ienueer  at  le 
lictation  of  the  Adhvaiyu,  or  bv  the  Adhvaryu  himself  /< W . said  to 
(lean  the  world  Breast  tlic  ladle  Water  flowing  butter. 

8S  Taken  fioin  R.  V 11,  3 11  m t i 

89-99  Taken  from  R V.  IV.  58.  a hymn  in  pr.UHe  of  Clhntaor  Clarified 
lutter.  It  would  be  fruitless,  as  Prof.  Lu<lwig  remarks,  to  repeat  all  the 
'arious  explanations  which  Sdyana  gives  of  the  first  line  of  this  staii/.a  : they 
itily  show  the  utter  uiieert  unty  of  ti.adition  m reforeiiee  to  the  passagt. 
"or  instance  samudra,  ocean,  is  said  to  mean  saciifieirtl  fiie;  or  leestia 
ire  ; or  the  firmament  or  the  udder  of  the  Cow  ; ami  Urmi,  wave,  may 
iccordiugly  mean  reward  ; or  ram  j or  butter.  Prof.  I.udwig  Ibmks  ha  , 
■he  sense  of  the  stmza  may  be  • the  life  giving  essence  which  develops  itselt 
)Ut  of  the  woi  Id-ocean  turns  into  Soma  in  tin*  Moon  ; but  it  is  tiei  ler  o 
■hese  two  but  the  tongue  of  the  Gods  ( Agni  ^ ) from  which  mn  pro 
=eed8  and  to  which  it  returns.  But  see  A.  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologic, 


^ 321,322  ..  . , T,  u n., 

90  The  Brahman:  according  to  M.ihldhar.i,  the  rdt-y  or  pi  ie4  Irobably 

^gai  is  meant.  The  last  half-line  of  the  stanza  is  tiauslated,  after  Slyana, 


1^0  the  texts  of  the  [BOOK  XVII 

91  Four  are  hi8  horns,  three  are  the  feet  that  bear  him  : hia 
heads  are  two,  his  hands  are  seven  in  number. 

Bound  with  a triple  bond  the  Bull  roars  loudly . t e mij^  i y 
God  hath  entered  into  mortals. 

02  That  oil  in  tri|ile  shape  the  Gods  discovered  laid  down  with- 
in  the  Cow,  concealed  by  Panis.  , .i  ^ 

Indra  produced  one  shape,  Sdrya  another  : by  th«r  own 
power  they  formed  the  third  from  Vena. 

93  From  inmost  reservoir  in  countless  channels  flow  down  these 

rivers  which  the  foe  beholds  not.  j i u 

I look  upon  the  streams  of  oil  descending,  and  lo . the 
Golden  Heed  is  there  among  them. 

94  Like  rivers  our  libations  flow  together,  cleansing  themselves 

in  inmost  heart  and  spirit. 

The  streams  of  lioly  oil  pour  swiftly  downward  like  the  wild 
beasts  that  fly  before  the  bowman. 

95  As  rushing  down  the  rapids  of  a river,  flow  swifter  than  the 

wind  the  vigorous  currents,  . a ^ 

The  streams  of  oil  in  swelling  fluctuation  like  a red  course 
bursting  through  the  fences.  

by  ProtesMr  Wilwn : ‘ the  fair-eompleiioned  deity  V 'f' 

euithet  ‘four-horned’  being  traiiaferred  to  Braliman.  Ihe  Gcd  may 
called  ibtifalo  (gaum)  Boa  Oaurue,  aa  a type  of  *''“''*'"*71, ‘t  •"'t  t 
MaUdUara  eaplaina  gJra  by  yajiU.,  saei  ifice,  having  four  hoina,  that  la.  four 

officiating  priesUs. 

91  Four  are  hi$  horns:  the  four  horns  of  Agni  bs  identified  with  sacn.ice 
nre  Lw  by  Sayana  to  be  the  four  Vetlas,  and,  if  identified  with  ^ditya  t he 
cLldiL  plinta.  The  firee  /«<  are,  in  the 
eacrificea.  iu  the  latter,  morning,  noon,  and  evening.  1 he  two  he“db  me 
the  former  caee,  the  Bmkmmdana  and  the  Pmmrgya  ceremouiea,  in 
Utter  day  and  night  Similarly,  the  aewii  hawk  are  explained,  alternatively, 

aa  the  n See  of  the  VedaCr  the  aeven  raya  of  the  Sun  1 

bond  aa  the  Manlm,  Kalpa,  and  Bi  dAnmnu,  prayer,  ceremonial,  and  r^ior . 1^ 
the  Veda  or  the  three  regions,  heaven,  firmament,  and  earth.  The 
t.  Xr  aa'Irm;  or  Adit^a,  the  poorer  down  of  «ward^  end  th«  ou 
roaring  is  the  sound  of  the  repetition  of  the  texts  of 

explanation  difters  from  that  of  Sayana.  ’ oi 

I nouns,  verbs,  prepositions,  and  particles ; the  three  feet  are  ; 

the  first,  second,  and  third  persons,  or  the  past, 

fclie  two  heads  are  two  sacrifices,  or  the  f xi-re* 

are  the  metres  or  the  cases  of  the  noun  ; and  the  three  bonds  are  the  thref 
daily  sacrifices,  or  the  singular,  dual,  and  plural  numbers. 

92  In  trivU  shape:  as  milk,  curds,  and  butter,  according  to  S^yana.^1^^ 

meaning  seems  to  be  that  Indra  Siirya.  and  Vena  (who  is  prob^ly  AgaO 
restored  the  power  of  the  elements  of  sacrifice  » _ 
firmament,  and  the  earth,  after  they  had  been  rendered  ineffectual  for 
time  by  tlie  malignant  Panis 

93  The  Golden  Iked : Celestial  Agni. 


WHITE  YAJURVEM. 


161 


VERSE  99.] 


9G  Like  women  at  a gathering  fair  to  look  on  and  gently  smiling, 
they  incline  to  Agni. 

The  streams  of  holy  oil  attain  the  fuel,  and  Jatavedas  joyfully 
receives  them. 

97  As  maidens  deck  themselves  with  gay  adornment  to  join  the 

bridal  feast,  I now  behold  them. 

WS(pre  Soma  flows  and  sacrifice  is  ready,  thither  the  streams 
of  holy  oil  are  running. 

98  Send  to  our  eulogy  a herd  of  cattle:  bestow  upon  us  excellent 


possessions.  p -i  n 

Bear  to  the  Gods  the  sacrifice  we  offer:  the  streams  of  oil  flow 

pure  and  full  of  sweetness. 

99  The  universe  depends  upon  thy  power  and  might  within  tho 
sea,  within  the  heart,  within  all  life. 

May  we  attain  that  sweetly-flavoured  wave  of  thine,  hronglit, 
at  this  gathering,  o’er  the  surface  of  the  floods. 


98  Send  to  our  eulogy  a herd  of  caUk  ■ thi»  i»  Siyana's  cii^lauiitiou.  Tho 
G(d3  ;ire  addreswed  and  prayed  to  reward  the  singi-rs. 

09  Thu  power:  Agoi’s.  Within  the  sea:  in  tlu;  aerial  oce.m.  the  firnia- 
ment  in' which  AgnUs  present  as  lightning.  Within  the  heart  , as  \ .a. 
IthelonghiB  oL  imin  all  Hf,  tho  v.U.I  l>rn.c,i.le,  ..  he.t. 
The  wan  is  the  ficwing  butter  ot  tho  oblation. 


BOOK  THE  EIGHTEENTH. 


May  my  strength  and  my  gain,  and  my  inclination  and  my 
influence,  and  my  thought  and  my  mental  power,  and 
my  praise  and  my  fame,  and  my  renown  and  m^  light, 
and  my  heaven  prosper  by  sacrifice. 

2 May  my  breathing  and  my  out -breathing,  and  my  through- 

breathing  and  my  vital  spirit,  and  my  thought  and  my 
reflection,  and  my  voice  and  my  mind,  and  my  eye  and 
my  ear,  and  my  ability  and  my  strength  prosper  by 
saciifice. 

3 Mav  my  energy  and  my  force,  and  ray  self  and  my  My, 

and  my  shelter  and  my  shield,  and  my  limbs  and  my 
bones,  and  my  joints  and  my  members,  and  iny  hie  an 
my  old  age  prosper  by  sacrifice. 

4 May  my  preeminence  and  my  overlordship,  and  my  wrat  i 

and  my  angry  passion,  and  ray  violence  and  my  impetu- 
osity, and  my  victorious  power  and  my  greatness,  and  my 
breadth  and  my  width,  and  my  height  and  my  length, 
and  my  increase  and  my  improvement  prosper  by  sacnhce. 

5 May  my  truth  and  my  faith,  and  my  cattle  and  my  wealth 

and  my  goods  and  my  pleasure,  and  my  play  and  my 
enjoyiuLt,  and  my  children  and  my  future  children,  aiiJ 
my  hymn  and  my  pious  act  prosper  l>y  sacnhce. 

G Mav  my  religious  rite  and  my  immortality,  mid  ray  frcedoii 
® -'‘  fCconsuraptiou  and  my  freedom  from  dmease,  a,^  ii^^ 
life  and  my  longevity,  and  my  freedom  ^ ’ 

and  my  freedom  from  danger,  and  my  happiness  and  my 
lying  down,  and  my  fair  dawn  and  my  fair  day  prosper 
by  sacrifice.  , 

7 May  my  controller  and  my  supporter,  and  my  secunty  an 
4"s.and  my  goods  and  “J, 

knowledge  and  my  understanding,  and 
my  propagation,  aud  ray  plough  and  my  harrow  prosper 

bv  sacrifice.  

tihed  with  Ihi  The  Sacrificer  offers  an  uninterrupted  , 

eated. 


VERSE  16.] 


WRITE  YAJURVEDA. 


165 


8 May  my  welfare  and  my  comfort,  and  what  I hold  dear  and 

what  I desire,  and  niy  love  and  my  gratification,  and  niy 
enjoyment  and  my  substance,  and  my  happiness  and  my 
felicity,  and  my  higher  bliss  and  my  fame  prosper  by 
sacrifice. 

9 May  my  vigour  and  my  pleasantness,  and  my  milk  and  my 

sap,  and  my  butter  and  my  honey,  and  my  meal  in  com- 
pany and  my  drinking  in  company,  ami  my  ploughing 
and  my  husbandry,  and  my  superiority  and  my  preemi- 
nence prosper  by  sacrifice. 

10  May  my  weiilth  and  my  property,  and  my  prosperity  and 

my  growth,  and  my  pervading  power  and  my  lordship, 
and  my  abundance  and  my  greater  abundance,  and  my 
bad  harvest  and  my  unwasted  crop,  and  my  food  and 
my  satiety  prosper  by  sacrifice. 

11  May  my  gain  and  my  future  gain,  and  what  T have  and 

what  I shall  have,  and  my  good  road  and  my  good  patli, 
and  my  success  and  my  succeeding,  and  my  acliieveinenr 
and  my  contrivance,  and  my  thought  and  my  good  counsel 
prosper  by  sacrifice. 

12  May  my  rice-plants  and  my  barley,  and  my  beans  and  rny 

sesamura,  and  ray  kidney-beans  and  my  vetches,  and  my 
millet  and  my  Panicura  Milliaceum,  and  my  Panicum 
Frumentaceum  and  my  wild  rice,  and  my  wheat  and  my 
lentils  prosper  by  sacrifice. 

13  May  my  stone  and  my  clay,  and  my  hills  and  my  mountains, 

and  my  pebbles  and  my  trees,  and  my  gold  and  my  b.oiize, 
and  my  copper  and  my  iron,  and  my  lead  and  my  tin 
prosper  by  sacrifice. 

U May  my  Are  and  my  water,  and  my  creepers  and  my  plants, 
and  my  plants  with  culture-ripened  fruit  and  my  plants 
with  fruit  ripened  without  culture,  and  rny  do.,|est.c 
animals  and  my  wild  animals,  and  my  substance  and  my 
future  substance,  and  my  belongmgs  and  my  power  be 

and  my  ability  to  perform  it,  and  my  object  and  n y 
course,  and  my  way  and  my  going 
16  Mav  mv  Aeni  and  my  ludra,  and  my  Soma  and  my  Inrtra, 
aL  my  lalitor  and  my  Indra,  aiid  my  Sarasiniti  and  my 
Indr^^and  my  Pfishan  and  my  Indra  prosper  b^acr^ 
"T27«ic;'»ri^;^noEngIUhname,fo7tl.^  thus  de- 

signatsd  Rosbnrgh  ‘he  Ardhemlra  or 

-h  ot^hum  . ooupl=d  with  ludra. 


[BOOK  XVlll 


J64  TUB  TEXTS  OP  THE 

17  May  my  Mitra  and  my  Indra,  and  my  Varuna  and  my  Indra, 

and  my  Dhatar  and  my  India,  and  my  Maruts  and  rny 
Indra,  and  my  AH-Oods  and  my  Indra  prosper  by  saorifice. 

18  May  my  earth  and  my  Indra,  and  my  Air  and  my  Indra, 

and  my  Sky  and  my  Indra,  and  my  Half-months  and  my 
Indra,  and  my  Lunar  Mansions  and  my  Indra,  and  my 
Sky-regions  and  my  Indra  prosper  by  sacrifice. 

19  May  my  Amsu  and  my  Rafmi,  and  my  Adhjpati  and  my 

Up&rpsu/and  myAntary&ma  and  my  Aindra- Vayava,  and 
my  Maitra-Varuna,  and  my  Apvina  and  my  Pratiprastbaiia, 
and  my  Snkra  and  my  Manthin  proper  by  sacrifice. 

20  May  my  Agraynna  and  my  Vaisvadeya,  and  my  Dhrnva  and 

my  Vai§v4nara,and  my  Aindmgna  and  my  Mahavaisvadeva, 
and  my  Marutvatiya  and  my  Nishkevalya,  and  my  Savitra 
and  my  Skasvata,  and  my  P^tpiyala  and  my  Hariyojana 
prosper  by  sacrifice. 

21  May  my  ladles  and  my  cups,  and  my  Yiyw  vessels  and  my 

Soma  reservoirs,  and  my  pressing-stones  and  my  two  press- 
boards,  and  my  Putabhrit  and  my  Adhavaniya,  and  my 
altar  and  altar-grass,  and  my  Avabhritha  and  my  cries  of 
Good-speed  prosper  by  sacrifice. 

22  May  my  Agni  and  my  Gharma,  and  my  Arka  and  my  Surya, 

and  my  Prana  and  my  Asvamedha,  and  rny  Pntfiivi  and 
my  Aditi,  and  my  I>iti  and  my  Sky,  and  ipy  fingers,  powers, 
and  sky-regions  prosper  by  sacrifice. 

19  Three  sets  of  oblations  called  Qrahas  follow  with  their  respective 
formulas  enumerating  pairs  of  Soma  cui>9  and  sets  of  sacrificidl  implements 
Most  of  the  Soma  cups  or  libations  haye  been  mentioned  in  Vll.  1—39 
notes.  The  names  of  the  sacrificial  implements  also  have  occurred  in  pie 
ceediiig  Books. 

21  Cries  of  Oood-speed:  exclamations  of  Svijigd,  a benedictory  sacrificia 
formula. 

22  He  offers  two  sets  of  oblations  called  Yaj^iakrntus  or  Sacri^cial  Ritei 
with  formulas  enumerating  objects  connected  with  certain  special  ceremo 
nies.  Agni:  the  Agniehayana  or  construction  of  the  Fire-altar,  or  tin 
Agnishtoma  (Praise  of  Agni.  See  VI.  29,  note).  Gharma  : the  Caldron,  re- 
presenting the  Pravargya  ceremony.  See  I.  22.  Arka : the  offering  of  a 
cake  to  Indra  with  Arka  tb"  Sun.  S&rya:  an  oblation  t<>  ]thafc  God.  Prdm 
the  Qavlmayana  or  Procession  of  the  Cows  (see  VIII.  41),  a solemn  sacnticiil 
session  usually  of  twelve  months’ duration.  Asvamedha:  the  Horse-Sacti- 
fice.  See  XXII— ^XV.  Prithivl,  4dUi,  Dili,  Sky:  offerings  to  these  deities, 
J)iti  being  a mere  abstraction,  the  antithesis  to  Aditi,  representing  limitation 
as  Aditi  represents  infinity  See  X.  16,  note.  Fingers:  explained  by  Main- 
dhara  as  vird/purwrAdrayawfA,  members  of  Purusha,  Embodied  Spiiit,  or 
(IJoamic  Man.*  See  R.  V.  90.  Powers:  sakvariyuh-^aktayah,  accoidiug 
jto  Mabidhara. 


Wnin  fAjvnnDA. 


165 


VERSk  20.] 


23  May  my  vow  and  my  seasons,  and  my  austere  devotion,  and 
my  day  and  night,  thighs  and  knees,  and  two  Great 
Rathantaras  prosper  by  sacrifice. 

21  May  my  One  and  my  Ibiyee,  and  rhy  Three  and  my  Five, 
and  my  Five  and  my  SeVen  (and  similarly  up  to  thirty- 
three)  prosper*  by  sacr*ifioo. 


25  May  my  Four  and  my  Eight  and  my  Twelve  (and  similarly 
lip  to  forty-eight)  prosper  by  sacrifice 
2d  May  my  eighteen-months  steer  and  my  eighteen-months 
heiferj  and  my  two-year  bull  and  Cow  (and  similarly  up 
to  four-year)  prosper  by  sacrifice. 

27  M.iy  my  six-year  bull  and  my  six-year  cow,  and  my  hull  and 

my  barren  cow,  and  my  yOung  bull  and  mv  calf-slipping 
cowj  and  my  ox  and  my  milch-cow  prosper  by  sacrifice. 

28  To  strength.  Hail ! To  Gain,  Hail ! To  After-born,  Hail  ! To 

Rower,  Hail  1 'fo  Vasa,  Hail ! To  the  Lord  of  Hays,  Hail ! 
To  the  Failing  Day,  Hail ! To  the  Failing  Sprung  from 
the  Transitory,  Hail ! 'I’o  the  Transitory  sprung  I’lom  tlio 
Final,  Hail!  To  the  Final  Mundane,  Hail!  To  the  land 
of  tlie  World,  Hail  1 To  the  Sovran  Lord,  Hail  I To  Fraja- 
pati,  Hail ! This  is  thy  kingdom.  Thou  art  a guiding 
controller  for  the  friend.  I’hee  for  vigour,  thee  for  ram, 
thee  for  the  sovran  lordship  of  creatures. 


39  May  life  succeed  through  sacrifice.  May  life-breath  thrive 
bv  sacrifice.  May  the  eye  thrive  by  sacrifice.  May  the 
ear  thrive  by  sacrifice.  May  the  voice  thrive  by  sacrifice. 
Mav  the  mind  thrive  by  sacrifice.  May  the  self  thnve  by 
sacrifice.  May  Brahma  thrive  by  sacrifice.  May  light 
succeed  by  sacrifice.  May  heaven  succeed  by  saenheo. 
May  the  hymn  thrive  by  sacrifice.  May  sacrifice  thrive 
by  sacrifice  ; And  laud  and  sacrificial  text,  and  verse  of 
praise  and  S4ma  chant.  The  Brihat  and  Rithantara. 


24  Thia  formula  enUmeratea  the  Stomaa,  or  Hymns  of  Praise  con-iiatiiig  of 

iuneveii  numbers  of  veraea.  c 

25  Enumerates  the  even-versed  Stomas,  each  number  after  the  first  increas- 

26%7^'Formulas  for  two  sets  of  Age  Libations,  enumerating  cattle  in 
i<ivaucing  stages  of  their  lives.  fVia 

28  Formul^  for  the  Name  Libation  ceremofty,  fanciful  ^ 

^nonths,  etc.  being  applied  to  Agui  of  whom  the  : 

Of.  rX  20.  meaning  March-Apnl.  (/am;  April-May 

^t^y-June,  and  so  on.  Cp.  IX.  20.  Prajdpati:  as  Geniua  of  the  Year.  The 
fnend'  the  Sscrificer.  Thee:  I besprinale  and  consecrate. 

29  He  offers  the  Kalpa  or  Success  Libation  with  fonnnlas,  containing 
verb  klrip,  to  succeed,  prosper,  thrive,  repeated  from  iA.  -6A. 


m 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  XVIli, 


Gods,  we  have  gone  to  light.  We  have  become  the  children 
of  Prajapati.  We  have  become  immortal. 

30  In  gain  of  wealth  we  celebrate,  etc.  = IX.  5. 

31  'this  day  come  all  the  Maruts,  all  to  aid  us  ! Let  all  the  fires 

be  thoroughly  enkindled. 

May  the  All-Gods  come  hither  with  protection.  May 
possess  all  property  and  riches. 

32  May  our  strength  fill  the  regions  seven,  fill  the  four  distant 

places  full. 

Here  may  our  riches  guard  us  with  the  All-Gods  in  the  gam 
of  wealth. 

33  May  strength  to-day  procure  for  us  donation:  strengtli 

range  the  Gods  together  with  the  Seasons. 

Yea,  strength  hath  made  me  rich  in  store  of  heroes.  As 
lord  of  strength  may  I gain  all  the  regions. 

34  Strength  be  before  us,  in  the  midst  among  us.  May  strength 

exalt  the  Gods  with  our  oblation. 

Yea,  strength  hath  made  me  rich  in  store  of  heroes.  As 
lord  of  strength  may  I gain  all  the  regions. 

35  With  milk  of  Prithivi  do  I unite  me,  unite  myself  with 

waters  and  with  plants. 

As  such  may  I gain  strength,  0 Agni. 

36  Store  milk  in  earth  and  milk  in  plants,  milk  in  the  sky  and 

milk  in  air. 

Teeming  with  milk  for  me  be  all  the  regions. 

37  Thee  by  the  radiant  Savitar’s  impulsion,  with  arms  of  Asvins, 

with  the  hands  of  Pushan,  ^ 

Controlled  by  Yak  Sarasvati’s  Controller,  with  Agni  s sole 
dominion  I besprinkle. 

38  Maintainer  of  Law,  true  by  nature,  Agni  is  the  Gandharva, 

The  plants  are  his  Apsarases,  namely  Delights,  /^^^y  he 
protect  this  our  Priesthood  and  Nobility.  To  .him  All- 
hail  ! Ave  ! To  those  All-hail  I 


30  He  offers  the  fourteen  V4japrasaviya  or  Strength -quickening  Libations 
the  lirst  seven  of  the  formulas  being  repeated  from  IX.  23-29.  Ut 
second  set  of  seven,  one  is  repeated  from  IX.  5. 

35  Milk  of  PrUhivl : waters  and  plants  used  in  sacrifice. 

37  He  anoints  the  Sacrificer  with  the  remains  of  the  f crifiml  maW^ 

Vdk  SarasvatU  Controller:  meaning  PrajApati,  according  to  Mahidhai* 

‘ by  the  support  of  Sarasvati  the  Supporter  ; Egge  mg. 

38  He  offers  the  twelve  Rtahtrabhritoe  or  Kiegdom-supportiDg  Ubatio® 
with  sacrificial  butter  taken  in  twelve  ladlmp.  The  offerings  are  made 
pairs,  first  to  a male  deity  and  then  to  females. 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA, 


167 


VERSE  47.1 


39  The  Conjoined,  Visvas,inian,  Shrya  is  the  Gnnclhnrva.  II is 

motes  are  Ins  Apsarases,  Swift-moving.  May  he  [>rotect, 
etc.,  as  in  38. 

40  The  Highh -Blessed,  the  Moon  whose  rays  are  like  the  Sun’s, 

is  tlie  Gandharva.  The  Asterisiiis  are  his  Apsaiases,  Liuii- 
inous.  May  he  protect,  etc. 

41  The  Quick,  All -reaching,  Wind  is  the  Gandharva.  The 

Waters  are  his  Apsarases,  named  Energies  May  he  pro- 
tect, etc. 

42  The  Protecting,  Strong-winged,  Sacrifice  is  tlio  Gaiidhurva. 

Guerdons  are  his  Apsarasea,  called  Praisers.  May  he  j)ro- 


tect,  etc. 

43  The  Lord  of  Creatures,  Omnific,  Mind  is  the  Gandharva. 

Kichas  and  Samans  are  his  Apsarases,  called  Wishings. 
May  he  protect,  etc. 

44  Lord  of  the  World,  Prajapati,  whose  are  the  homes  above 

and  here,  i xt  i r. 

Give  great  protection  unto  these,  the  Priesthood  and  Nobility. 

45  Thou  art  the  vapoury  sea  that  giveth  moisturo.  Blow  on 

me,  thou,  healthful  and  blessingdaden. 

Thou  art  the  Maruts’  own,  the  band  of  Maruts.  Blow  on 

me,  etc.  , . * . 

Seeker  of  aid  art  thou,  receiving  worship.  Blow  on  me,  etc. 

46  Thy  lights,  0 Agni,  in  the  Sun,  etc.,  as  in  XIII.  22. 

47  Lights  of  yours  in  the  Sun,  0 Gods,  etc.,  as  in  Xllt.  23. 


39  Conjoined:  Mah;  ..  joiner  of  night  and  day.  wear- 

ing  the  form  of  all  SAinans.  . r .i  . 

40  or  Light-givera  ; tUU  « Mal,l,ll>ara’a  n ^ 

doubtful  wgrd  bkekurij/ah ; Min.  hi  mkihatrdai  kurmnu , for  tbc 
latioiis  make  light. 

41  Energies  ■ or,  Viands  ; Eggeling. 

42  Strong-winged:  as  soaring  to  heaven.  Guerdons ‘ sacrificial  fees , pricH  y 

honoraria.  , , 

43  Mind : Prajapati  is  so  called  as  Lord  of  Speech  and  T loug  i . 

44  He  offers  oblation  with  butter  taken  in  five  ladlings  f ^ 
f»re  gf  the  War-charigt  aa  it  ia  held  over  the  Ahavauiya  hru.  f wy! 

pati : identified  with  Agni.  . , • i.iu  i,  u 

45  He  offers  three  Wind  Libations,  having  cah^^  the  w,nd 

lowed  hands  from  onteide  the  altar.  Sea  protection’ : 

exon : the  stormy  region  of  mid-air.  Seeker  of  aid . 6 

Eggeling  : this  terrestrial  world.  _ 

46  He  offers  nine  Lustrous  oblations  with  22  23. 

signifying  Ught  or  lustre.  Verses  46,  47  are  ref-eated  from  Alll.  44, 


168 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  XVIIl, 

48  Give  lustre  to  our  holy  priests,  set  Instre  in  our  ruling  chiefs : 
Lust.e  to  Vaisyas,  SMras  : give,  tlirough  lustre;  lustre  unto 

49  I ask  this  of  thee  wilh  my  prayer,  adoring  : thy  Worshipper 

asks  this  with  his  oblations. 

Vanina,  stay  thou  hero  and  be  not  angry  : steal  not  our  life 
from  ns,  0 thou  Wide-Ruler. 

60  Heaven-like  is  Warmth,  Hail  I Heaven-like  is  Arlta,  Hail ! 
Heavfen-like  is  the  Bright  One,  Hail ! Heaven-like  is  Light, 
Hail ! Heaven-like  is  Snrya,  Hail ! 

51  I yoke  with  power  and  flowing  butter  Agni,  divine,  strong- 

pinioned,  great  with  vital  vigoui.  . , 

Through  him  miy  we  approach  the  Bright  Ones  station, 
ascending  to  the  loftiest  sky,  to  heaven. 

52  Witli  these  thy  two  ne’er  wasting  feathered  pinions  where- 

with thon  drivest  fiends  away,  0 Agni, 

Let  us  fly  to  the  regions  of  the  pious  whither  have  gone  the 
first-born  ancient  Rishis. 

63  The  Drop,  the  powerful,  the  falcon,  righteous,  impetuous 
bird  borne  on  his  golden  pinions, 

Great,  stedfast,  settled  in  the  habitation  to  thee  be  rever- 
ence I Forbear  to  barm  me  ! 

54  Centre  of  earth,  heaven’s  head  art  thou,  essence  of  waters 

and  of  plants,  , n i i 

Eternal,  far  spread  refuge.  Homage  to  the  Path  ! 

55  Attached  thou  standest  at  the  head  of  all  the  world.  Ihy 

heart  is  in  the  sea,  thy  life  is  in  the  floods.  Give  water : 
cleave  the  reservoir.  

48  Through  lustre : of  thine  own.  . . 

49  He  ofFe.8  again  with  a formula  addressed  to  Vanina,  with  whom  Agn 
is  now  identified,  taken  from  R V.  I.  24,  11, 

60  He  offeis  the  five  Arkaavamedha-santati  oblations,  combining  the 
ship  of  Arlva  (Agni)  and  the  San  the  deity  of  the  Horse  ^vcntice, 

51  Tne  three  following  formulas  are  f«*r  the  Aguiyojana  wromony, 

Yoking  or  Equipraeiit  of  Agni,  causing  the  sacnfioial  fire  to  blaze  up  Be- 
fore the  recitation  of  the  Pi&taranuvftka  or  Morning  f . 

XXVI.  F-  229)  he  begins  the  ceremony  by  th®  of  t 

three  enclosing-sticks  and  reciting  the  first  formula.  Enyht  One  » . bradh 
nasya ; the  Sun’s  • ‘ the  region  of  the  bay’  : Eggeling. 

52  He  touches  the  right-hand  stick.  t j 

63  He  touches  the  left-hand  stick.  TU  Drop:  or  Indu,  here  meaning 

m'’  He  now  unyokes  or  frees  the  altar  at  the  points  where  the  sides  of 
the  triangle  of  enclosing-sticks  touch  the  Use,  and  recites  two  formulas. 
The  Path : the  Way  that  leads  to  heaven,  that  is,  Agni. 

55  The  reservoir  : the  receptacle  of  the  waters  of  heaven.  Farjmya . thfi 
God  of  the  Rain-cloud ; here  the  water-laden  cloud. 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDi. 


169 


VEREE  64.] 


Help  us  with  rain  sent  from  the  sky,  Purjanya,  firmament, 
or  ejirth. 

5G  Py  Bhrigns  and  by  Vasus  hath  prayer-granting  sacrifice 
been  paid. 

Come,  Wealth,  into  the  bouse  of  him  our  dear,  onr  well- 
belovM  one. 


57  May  Agni,  served  with  sacrifice  and  gifts,  protect  our  oflfered 

food  : 

This  homage  be  Good -speed  to  Gods  1 

58  That  which  hath  flowed  from  purpijse  or  from  judgment,  or 

gathered  from  the  wind  or  from  the  vision. 

Follow  ye  to  the  region  (»f  the  pious  whither  have  gone  the 
first-born  ancient  Rishis. 

59  To  thee  I trust  this  man,  Celestial  Dwelling ! treasure  which 

Jatavedas  shall  bring  hither. 

After  you  vtill  the  Sacrificor  follow.  Here  recognize  him  in 
the  highest  heaven. 

60  Acknowledge  him,  ye  Gods,  in  Id^^hcst  heaven.  Ye  who  arc 

present,  know  the  shape  he  weareth. 

When  he  approachetli  by  the  God-ward  pith  ways,  reveal  to 
him  the  meed  of  pious  actions. 

61  Wake  up,  0 Agui,  etc,  as  in  XY.  54. 

62  Convey  our  sacrifice  to  heaven,  etc.,  as  in  XV.  55. 

63  With  Darhha-bunch,  with  fcncing-wood,  with  spoon,  with 

altar,  holy  grass, 

With  Lind,  lead  this  our  sacrifice  to  go  to  heaven  among 
the  (Jods. 

64  Our  gifts,  our  charitable  grants,  our  pious  Works,  our  fees  to 

priests,  ^ • 1 

May  the  Omnific’s  Agni  set  all  this  among  the  Gods  m heaven. 


56  He  makes  two  offerings  called  Sainiahtayajuses  or  Final  Sacrifioial 
Ablations  and  fnrmnlas.  See  VIII.  15,  note. 

57  Good-speed  ■ ; «ee  note  on  terse  21  . , * i 

68  He  offers  eitrht  oblations  with  the  dipt.iih?  spoort,  With  a formula  it 
»ch.  Ancient  RIAis:  identified  with  the  Vical  Airs.  The  priests  are  ad- 
Iresaed  and  told  to  follow  sacrifice,  from  whatever  source  it  inav  lave 
it'Hl  to  the  heaven,  where  the  first-born  feishis,  the  earliest  exi.stoiices, 
dwelling, 

69,  60  Taken  with  variations  form  A.  V.  VI  123.  1,  2 
60  Meed  of  pious  actions : or  full  fruition  of  his  wishes  ; P 

)f  saciifices  and  good  works  on  earth, 
fil,  62  Repeated  from  XV^.  54,  66  , . i riarhhA 

63  Darhhlhnnch : the  Prastara  (see  II.  2)  which  is  placed  on  the  Darbha 

pass  coveiiiig  the  High  Altar.  , , , i + via** 

^ 64  The  Omnijic's : that  is  Agni,  or  the  Fire-altar,  that  belongs  u 
^man  or  PrigApati. 


[BOOKXrili 


170  THE  TEXTS  OP  THE 

65  There  where  all  never-failing  streams  of  honey  and  of  butter 

flow 

May  Agni,  Visvakarman’s  own,  place  us  in  heaven  among 
the  Gods. 

66  Agni  am  I who  know  by  birth  all  creatures.  Mine  eye  i, 

butter,  in  my  mouth  is  nectar.  , , , 

I am  the  triple  light,  the  region's  meter:  eshaustless  heat 
am  I,  named  burnt  oblation. 

67  Praise-verses,  *mri6cial  texts, and  chanted  hymns  ami  inn,ame. 
Thou  art  the  best  of  all  the  Fires  amoug  tlie  hvefold  race 

That  burn  upon  this  earth  cf  ours.  Speed  thou  us  on  to 
lengthened  life. 

68  0 ludra,  for  the  strength  that  slays  Vritra  aud  conquers  in 


the  fight 

We  turn  thee  hitherward  to  ns. 

69  Thou,  India,  much-invoked,  didst  crush  to  pieces,  Kuiuru, 

haudless  fiend  who  dwelt  with  Daims. 

Thou  with  might,  ludra,  smotest  dead  the  scorner,  the  loot 
less  Vritra  as  he  waxed  in  vigour. 

70  0 Indra,  beat  our  foes  away,  etc  , as  in  VIII.  44. 

71  Like  some  dread  wild  beast  roaming  on  the  mountain  thou 

hast  approached  us  from  tlie  farthest  distance. 

Whetting  thy  bolt  and  thy  sharp  blade,  0 Indra,  crush  t 
the  foes  aud  scatter  those  who  hate  us. 

72  To  aid  us  let  Vaisvanara  come  from  the  distance  far  away  ■ 
Come  Agni,  to  our  eulogies  ! 

73  Sought  in  the  sky,  sought  on  the  earth,  sought  after,  a 

pkiits  that  grow  on  ground  hath  Agni 
May  Agni,  may  Vaisvanara  witli  vigour,  sought  lor,  by  u., 
aud  mght  from  harm  preserve  ns^ 

ITThe  Sacrifiver,  identifjiuTlhui^ 
from  R.  V.  III.  26.  7.  „ . 

67  He  regards  hiiiiKlf  as  an  incarnation  of 

69  Takenf,omR.V.II  30  6.  DM 

Kandru:  the  uaine  cf  a demon  of  drought.  Ednus . a class 
Scorner : of  the  Gods,  Vntra  ^ .cr  v a 

70  Repeated  from  VIII  44,  taken  from  R.  V.  X.  15^4. 

71  Taken  from  R.  V.  X.  180.  2. 


VEm^E  77.] 


'^HITE  YAJVRVEDA. 


171 


7-1-  Help  ns  th  it  we  nuy  irmn  this  wish,  0 *Agni,  gain  riches, 
Wealthy  One!  with  store  of  heroes. 

Desiring  strength  from  thee  may  we  be  strengthened,  and 
win,  Eternal  1 thine  eternal  glory. 

75  Approaching  with  raised  hands  and  adoration,  we  have  this 

day  fulfilled  for  thee  thy  longing. 

Worship  the  Oods  with  most  devoted  spirit  as  Priest  with 
no  unfriendly  thought,  0 Agni. 

76  Home-hider  Agni,  ludra,  and  Brahma,  and  bright  Brihas- 

pati — 

May  the  All- Gods,  one-minded,  guard  our  sacrifice  in  happy 
place. 

77  Guard  tlioii  the  Sacrifice-’s  men,  0 Youthfullest,  etc.,  as  in 

XIIL  52. 


74  Taken  from  R.  V VI.  5.  7.  Iklp  u$:  literally,  With  thy  help  may 
we  train,  etc. 

75  Taken  from  R.  V.  Ill  14.  6. 

7^)  Home-hider  • tliat  is,  who  frec^uenily  chanj^es  his  dwelUng  idace. 

For  the  flymbolical  meaning  of  the  A^ichayana  or  Comtruction  of  tlie 
Fire-Altar  representing  the  ie.storatU(n  ol  the (UKineiohere<l  Agm-l’raj  tpati 
(wlio  takes  the  place  of  Purusha,  the  Connie  M.in,  R-  V.  X OO),  the 
author,  by  his  great  self- Sac ntice.  of  all  creation,  so  as  to  enable  him  to 
rt-pe^it  cnntinn,dly  the  MHciifioe  of  himself  and  thus  m.iintain  or  re-cieate 

the  universe,  see  Eggelmg,  S L).  E.  XLllI.  pp  xiii.— xx. 


BOOK  THE  NINETEENTH. 


Sweet  with  the  sweet,  I sprinkle’ the’P  with  Soma,  strong 
with’  the  strong-,  the  nectar  with  the  nectar, 

The  honey-sweet  with  what  i>?  sweet  lis  honey. 

Sama  art  thnn.  Get  dressed  for  thu  Asviiis.  Get  dressci 
far  SarasVati.  Get  dressed  for  Indrrf  the  Good  Di^liverer. 

2 Hence  pour  ye  forth  the  flowing  jiHce,  Soma,  best  Sac’rifioi.il 

food.  , , . , 

He  who,  man's  f -iendf,  hath  run  vithin  the  waters  hath  with 

the  prcssing-st jnes  poured  out  tiie  Soma. 

3 Burifled  by  ’^ayu’s  strainer,  S*ma  that  has  passed  away  for- 

ward is  Indra’s  proper  friend. 

Purified  by  VayiTs  strainer,  Soma  that  Ims  passed  away 
backward  is  Indra's  proper  friend. 

4 By  means  of  (his  eternal  ahve  may  Sntya’s  Daughter  piirifj 
The  Soma  that  flows  furtV  from  thee. 

b Soma  With  pressed,  filtered  for  the  ban(|uet,  cleaiyses 

priest,  noble,  brilliancy  and  vigour.  . r j ai 

Ood,  with  the’  Bright  give  Deities  enjoymeirt : give  food  witi: 
flavour  to  the  ^crificev. 


Bo'>k8  xrx— XXI  Gontun  the  forrrtiilas  of  the  Sautriratmi,  a sacrific 
originally  lutjtituted  tooxpute  and  counteract  the  evil  effects  of 
iadulgence  m Sotna-dri.rkiug.  See  X 31.  The  ceremony  ^ 

a means  of  obtaining  general  eminence;-  for  a dethroned  ki  t(  p 
Wa  restoration,  for  a Kahatriya  to  assure  Vic^ry.  tor  a Vai?ya  to  acq 
cattle  and  wealth.  U Conafota  mainly  irf  the  c^ering,  to  the  Asvms  Sara 
vati  and  Indra,  of  SurA  a spirituoua  liquor  concocted  of  f 
rice  or  young  grass),  tokman  (green  barley),  Ai^  ldja  (parched  ^ 

up  with  some  roots  to  serve  as  yeaat,  and  the  liquor  of  tw.)  0 
taesses  of  rice,  and  Syimlka  or  millet  boiled  in  water,  tl*e 
called  Mftsara.  The  prototype  of  the  sacrifice  is  the  . 

Sarasvatl  and  the  AsVins,  when  he  was  suffering  from 
his  favourite  beverage.  The  name  is  derived  from  SutrAman,  the  Go 
Polivefer  or  Piotec^,  Indra.  See  HiUebi'audt,  Ritua.-Littevatui,  pi 
'iM 1^1 

1 fhee-  0 Surl.  Soviaart  ihoH:  he  aldre^aei  the  S ir4  which  by  cor 

mixture  and  tranaubsfautUtion  has  B-'Crificidly  become  Son^. 

2 He-  Soma  Waters:  with  which  the  stalks  are  w'ashed  and  toad 
imell  MAldhara  anppl.ea  mikaarsi^h  (the  AJb».ryii)  a»  the  underetc 

or  cle«einy  F^rer.  Ar^onf.- 
through  the  mouth  from  the  over-loaded  stomach. 

4 Taken  from  R.  V.  IX.  Sdrya's  Daughter:  Sraddhft  or 

5 S>ir4.  f he  Bright : yvGQ  i pure  vigoui  , according 

Mauidliara.  Flavour:  clarified  butter,  etc. 


^ERSE  11.] 


white  Y 4 jury  ED  a. 


178 


G What  tJien  ? As  men  who^e  fields  are  full  ,of  barley,  etc., 
in  X.  32. 

Takeu  vpon  abase  art  th^u.  I take  Jthee  for  the  Asvin  Pair. 

Thee  for  Saras val^  Thee  for  Indra  the  Good  Deliverer. 
This  is  thy  hoiae.  ^’or  splendour  tfiee.  Th,e,e  fur  man’s 
vigour.  Thie  for  stieugth. 

7 For  each  of  you  is  made  a God-appointed  place : so  grant  to 

me  a porticu  in  the  highest  spheie. 

Suia  the  strong  art  thou.  This  b''*'e  is  Soma.  JEntering 
thine  owr  jplace  do  me  no  piisehief. 

8 Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  Splendour  of  Asvins,  Saras- 

vati’s  .nHuly  vigour,  .might  of  Indra. 

This  fs  .tlif  home.  1 take  tlieo  for  enjoye^ent.  I take  thee 
for  deljgiitj  take  thee  for  greatness. 

9 Thou  art  Instore : give  me  l.ustre.  Thou  art  manly  vigour  : 

give  me  manly  vigour. 

Thou  art  strength:  give  me  strength.  Thou  art  ci)0igy: 
give  me  energy. 

Thou  art  passion  : Giye  pie  passion.  Thou  art  conquering 
might : give  me  conquering  might. 

10  she,  Yishueliiha,  who  guards  these  two,  the  tiger  and 
tjie  wolf, 

The  lion  and  the  winged  hawk,  may  she  guard  this  man 
from  distress. 

I When,  a delighted  boy,  I bruised  my  mother  as  I sucked 

her  breast, 

6 Me  takes  three  cups  oi  milk  for  the  Aevins,  Sarasy.Ui,  and  Indra.  Tlie 
''*t  fgrmtilfi  is  taken  from  It.  V.  X.  131.  2,  and  repfuted  fiom  X.  32  (h  this 
(ida  Fo)‘ ipuudour  th^ie : the  Asvins’  cup,  ‘I  take’  being  under«tood. 
hte  foy  vian  t viyour : Sar.iHvatl’s  cup.  Thee  for  itrenyth : Indra’s  cup. 

7 For  each  of  you:  Sguia  aud  Suri.  Ood  appointed  place,  an  altar 
hare  the  libations  are  prepared,  approved  by  the  Deities  to  whoui  the 
l«iingH  are  made 

8 He  deposits  the  cups,  one  by  one,  with  a formula  for  each. 

9 After  the  libation  to  the  Asvijis  he  thiow.n  wheat  and  pounded  fruit 
f the  Jjujube  tree  (Ziziphus  Jujuba)  into  the  milk  and  lays  two  biwles  of 
irhlia  grais  on  the  vessel  that  coi)tain.t  it.  Thou:  the  milk  libation. 
’''eoyth  . . energy  . . paasion:  repiescuted  respectively  by  wolfs,  tigers, 
id  liou'jp  hair  mixed  with  the  SurA 

10  He  purities  the  S.icriflqer  by  stroking  hiip  with  the  tail-feathers  of  an 
f'dtt  or  hawK;  once  ab»'ve  aud  ouce  below  the  waist  VinhiJchikd . the 
'ity  of  chojlera  or  diarrhoea.  Guards:  that  is,  does  not  attack.  This 

‘ the  Sacrifioer.  , • j 

II  He  rnake.s  the  S'lcrificer  look  at  the  fire  and  recite  the  text.  Bruited' 
'tk  my  feet.  Thereby:  by  looking  at  the  fire  wlncli  re[>iesents  Agni. 
^dted-  this  part  of  the  formula  is  repeated  fioui  IX  4,  the  plural  being 
Mituted  for  the  dual  as  three  cups  instead  of  two  are  uddiessed. 


174 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOR  XIX 


Kree  from  my  debt,  0 Agni,  I become  thereby.  My  parents 
are  by  me  unharmed. 

United  are  ye  all ; with  bliss  unite  me.  Parted  are  ye,  keep 

me  apart  from  evil.  ^ u v 

12  The  Asvins,  the  Physicians,  Gods,  stretched  out  the  healing 

sacrifice,  . i 

Sarasvati  with  speech  was  a Physician,  all  nth  heroic  powers 

investing  India.  , „ * • i.  t 

13  Symbols  of  Dlksha  are  grass  buds,  of  Praymiya  sprouts  of 

Of^Soma-purohasing  fried  grains  are  symbols,  Soma-shoots 

and  meath.  , , , 

14  itithya-s  sign  is  Misara,  the  Gharmas  symbo  Nagnahu 
Three  nights  with  Sura  poured,  this  is  the  sjmbol  of  the 

15  EmHem  of  purehased  Soma  isParisrut,  foaming  drink  effnseil. 
Indra’s  balm  milked  for  Indra  by  the  Asvms  and  Sarasvi.ti, 

16  The  Sacrificer’s  seat  is  the  throne’s  symbol,  the  jar  contain- 

The  mhl-spafe  th^'northern  Altar’s  symbol : the  cloth  for 

17  AltM  by  Altars  p'rXetd,  power,  holy  grass  by  holy  giass 
^ The  stake  is  by  tL  stake  obtained,  by  Agni  Agni  earned 

18  The  A^ins  are  the  Soma  store,  Sarasvati  the  sacred  heaA 
For  Indra  formed  is  India’s  seat,  the  Matrons  Hall,  tl 

house-lord’s  tire.  

12  See  X^  33,^4^  XIXJr3t  no^^^^  of  the  Sriutrl 

close  interconnexion  of  the  that  are  used  in  the  foi 

elements,  vessels,  implements,  lauds  > reproductions  of  tlio' 

,n.r  Wng.regsrded  - W y,„„ 

Z^t.'“nWuctory  nor*  the  name  of  an  introducto. 

/r  is- 

fermented  oitars  one  for  Soma  and  one  i 

16  The  mid-space  : between  the  al  to cuie  Iivl 

®“l1’  W the  ^ 

row'  BM : see  IV.  34.  Boute-lord  afire  ■■  the  Gi.Uapatya. 


WHITE  Y A JURY  ED  A. 


175 


UKSE  25.] 


19  Orders  he  gains  by  orders,  by  Apris  Apris  of  sacrifice,^ 
Post-offerings  by  fore- offerings,  and  by  calls  of  Vasliat  Abntis. 

20  By  ■victims  he  gains  victims,  by  ground  rice-cakes  sacrifi- 

cial food, 

By  metres  kindling-verses,  and  Vashat-calls  by  Inviting- 
prayers. 

21  Grain  roasted,  gruel,  barley-meal,  grains  of  rice  roastoil,  milk 

and  curd 

Arc  types  of  Soma : mingled  milk,  sweet  whey,  of  sacrificial 
food. 

22  Type  of  parched  corn  is  jujnbe-fruit  ; wheat  of  the  roastoil 

grains  of  lice  ; Jujube  the  type  of  bailey-mcDl,  and  Indni- 
grains  of  gruel-groats. 

23  Symbol  of  milk  are  barley-grains,  symbol  of  curd  arc  jujube- 

fruits. 

Whey  is  the  type  of  Soma,  and  milk-mixture  typo  ot 
Soma’s  pap. 

21  The  Strophe  is  the  cry,  Bid  hear ! the  answer  is  the  antis- 

Saeiifice  ! is  the  Dhayyas  form,  Pragathas’  the  Yajamelias. 
25  By  verse-halves  comes  the  Ukthas’  type,  Nivids  by  bad.is  he 
obtains. 

The  type  of  Sastras  is  obtained  by  Pranavas,  Soma  by  milk^ 


19  Onkra:  praiskai ; liturgical  directions  given  by  a .snjjerior  pnost  to 

hisamstmt  IpA^:  a dasa  of  propit.ato.y  hy.anx  addres.e^^ 

under  various  forms  and  titles.  See  Higved.i,  Index.  ok  off(  ij  . 

obUtions  ..f  c-Uiitie.1  b.itter  .,fleio,l  t..  1 cbiW  , o. 

F^iic-offcnn'jf  prundjaa;  similar  offerings  pieteiliug  the  riiist  sau.bto. 

Aliutin  oblations  with  fire.  f,. 

20  Kmdliw;-versts : samidhenU ; recited  on  lighting,  or  adding  fuel  to 

tile  saciificiril  fire.  InvUiwj-pruiiers : ydjyds ; pnmonuced  by  tlie  lloUr 
whoa  oblations  are  poured  into  tlie  fire.  , . i -n 

21  Mingled  milk:  a mixture  of  b.»iled  and  coagulated  milk  ^ 

22  Indm-graim:  upavdhxs,  or  Indra  yavas,  seeds  of  the  Wngbtia 

^ ; an  oblation  of  rice,  barley,  and  pulse  boiled  with  butter 

"21  >totri!)d;  a yarse  of  eighty  .ylUl.ley.i^a  nt 

nioiiies.  Bid  hear:  the  Adhvaiyu s c.dl  Asr.lvaui  o - 1.0  him 

Kire-kiudler  Tkt  answer : of  the  Agnidhia  j,,  Almu 

hear.  Saa-ifica'  Vm.  the  ire,,erative  of  the  verb, 

UMiiy/l : the  name  of  an  additional  verao  in.aerted  in  a liUnv  / / 

cei  tain  combiii.itions  of  two  yereea  in  different  me.tiea.  ay  » j 

ttione  of  R.  V.  X.  23.  1,  beginning  with  Yajiiiialia  milrain,  We  womhip 

"'riMoa;  recitationa ; aonga  of  praiae.  iV.ri.fo- 
^uliis  of  invocation.  Padas : verse  divisions  ; ‘ ^ 

|ha»  • recitations  ; kynms  of  praise.  I ranaian  : excU 
iiiystic  syllable  om. 


1^6 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  XIX. 


26  Gained  by  the  Asvius  is  tlie  mom’s  libalioii,  Indra’s  liba-  | 

tion  ol  mid-day  by  ludra.  - , 

Surasvati  obtama  tl),e  third  outpouring,  the  offering  sacied  ^ 
tu  tlie  Visve  Devas.  jt  i.u 

27  By  V&yu  cn'ps  »>«  gM»8  ““P®  ^ ^ ^ 

ffnina  the  vat  for  Soma.  j u ai 

By  thetwojar«iiegftiu8  .two  cleausing-vessels,  and  by  the 

cooking-pot  the  pot  for  cooking. 

28  By  sacnfioij  tmrta  are  gained  t)ie  Grahas,  and  by  the  Gra- 

has  l..uda  and  laud  arraiiKenienis. 

By  metres  are  obtained  Ukihas  and  praise-songs,  and  by  tlie 

By'itu'tSi.:!' B^r^myajas.  and  Consummation  by 

30  He^gmiisbyrnw  of  fasting  Consecration,  by  Consecration 

31  So'fmihe  t*yi’ie*^of?acria<ie  was  formed  by  Brahmk  and  tlie 

AlUits  be  gains,  when  juice  is  shed,  in  the  6antia»am 

33  'J'httbe  wBh  sacred  grass,  wine,  store  of  heroes,  the  mightj 
ones  bpeed  oii  witU  adorations.  n,wi«  ir 

May  WC  swoet-sioging  sacnftcers.  setting  Soma  i.nd  Gods 

lieaveiJ,  giv,e  joy  to  lijdia.  ^ 

a »ao.iHcial  vessel  made  of 

«^ior;  bath  of  p,.rifieatiou  after  -aoria«,,  to  ate,. 

for  any  defeats  in  its  k»„;„ , an  oblation  so  called 

meaninK  Fortutjftte.  P r sa  to  Sf»i»a,  Tva8hVir..ujdAgii>' 

to  tbtJ  Frttntg  (Consorte  of  t ^ sacrifice, 

frrSvi  p'tst  note 

L^tpinie  £.-nd  line  «> 

«ai«s  he  obta.,- 

SHtni^htayajus. 

30  Vow  of  fasting:  see  l {>.  ^ the  Sacrificer. 

31  Brahind : or  P«a]*  P*  » . SautrAiuan!  becoinea  a Soma-saci  iti  ' 

®'’^rHrrA&r«S.rt^aUbat^^^  pne.» 


yERSE  38.] 


WhlTt  1AJUJH£UA. 


33  All  essence  of  thine  own  in  plants  collected,  all  strength  of 

Soma  when  pouied  out  with  Smi— 

Therewith  impel  with  joy  the  sacrifice,  Sarasvati,  the  Asvms, 
Indra,  Agni. 

34  That  which  Sarasvati  poured  out  for  ludra,  by  Asvins 

brought  from  Namuchi  the  demon, 

This  flowing  drop,  brilliant  and  full  of  sweetness,  I drink 
and  feed  on  here,  the  King,  the  Soma. 

!35  Whatever  portion  of  the  savoury  fluid  is  clinging  here, 
what  India  drank  with  powers, 

That  drop  thereof  with  pure  and  holy  spirit  I drink  and 
feed  upon,  the  King,  the  Soma. 

}6  To  Fathers  who  claim  Svadha  be  Svadha  and  liornage  ! 

To  Grandfathers  wlio  claim  Svadha  be  Svadha  and  liomage  ! 
To  Great-grandfathers  who  claim  Svadhil  be  Svadha  and 

homage ! „ , , . • , m 

The  Fathers  have  eaten.  The  Fathers  have  rejoiced.  1 ho 
Fathers  have  been  satisfied.  Fathers,  be  ye  imrificd. 

J7  Cleanse  mo  the  Fathers  who  enjoy  Soma!  Uramifalhers 

make  me  clean  ! . , • n * t • 

May  Great-grandfathers  cleanse  me  with  a sieve  that  bungs 

a century.  , 

May  my  Grandfathers  cleanse  me,  may  my  Great-graml- 

fathers  make  me  clean.  r n 

With  sieve  that  brings  a century  may  I obtain  full  linj.  li 

of  life. 

3S  Agni,  titoi.  poorest  life  : send  down  upon  us  food  and  vigor- 
ous  strength. 

Drive  thou  misfortune  far  away, 

33  With  wo,,l  the 

34  iVuTOMc/a.- who  had  stulemt  hum  India,  bee  X.  t,an  . 

Texts,  V.  p,  94,  note.  , , t i 

35  Here  • in  the  cup  whose  contents  have  been  offered  Indra. 

36  Here  f.dlow  fonnubs  for  oblation  and  prayer  to  the  bith.-r^  or  A aims 

37  A lar  of  ouia  piercea  K .jr  hmse  cow,  I'oat,  and 

Sacnficer  recites  texts  for  his  purification. 

38  Taken  from  U.  V.  IX.  66.  19. 

12 


THE  TEXTS  OF  TITE 


178 


[BOOK  XIX 


39  Cleanse  mo  the  companies  of  Gods ! May  thoughts  with 

spirit  make  me  clean. 

Cleanse  me  all  things  that  be  ! Do  thou,  0 Jatavedas,  make 
me  clean. 

40  Purify  me,  0 Agni,  God,  refulgent  with  thy  pure  bright 

sieve, 

With  powers  according  to  thine  own. 

41  0 Agni,  may  the  cleansing  sieve,  diffused  through  all  thy 

fiery  glow, 

Holy  devotion,  maho  me  clean. 

42  May  Pavamana  with  his  sieve,  Guest  of  all  tribes,  cleanse 

ns  to-day. 

He  who  is  Cleanser  make  us  clean. 

43  Savitar,  God,  by  both  of  these,  libation,  purifying  power, 
Purify  me  on  every  side. 

44  Dear  to  all  Gods  hath  come  the  cleansing  Goddess,  she  who 

contains  these  many  smooth-backed  figures. 

Through  her  may  we  in  sacrificial  banquets  taking  our  pica- 
sure  be  the  lords  of  riches. 

45  The  Fathers  who  in  Yamas  realm  are  equal  and  unanini- 

Th^ek  world  is  Svadha,  roveronco.  To  Gods  let  sacrifice  bo 
paid. 

46  Equals,  unanimous,  my  folk  yet  living  among  those  who 

On  roe  be  set  their  glory  through  a hundred  years  in  this 
our  world, 


89  Cf.  R.  V,  IX.  67.  27. 

40  Sieve : the  purifying  power  of  fire. 

41  T.ikeu,  with  the  e.'tceptioii  of  the  la^t  PAda,  from  Tl.  V.  IX.  67.  23. 

42  Taken  from  R V.  TX.  67.  22  Pavamdiia:  Soma  undergoing  purifi- 
cation. Cleanser:  PoUr,  Cleaning-Piiest. 

43  Taken  from  R.  V.  IX.  67.  25. 

44  A PravahlikA  or  Enigmatical  Verse.  Cleansing  Goddess  - what  Ood- 

j is  uncertain.  Malndhara  sugesta  the  Surd-Jat,  or  the 

s'a^ZTot  or  m-,  Speech,  or  the  Ukht  (XI.  1C).  If  the  Sun-Jer  i.  ..,- 
traded “lie  /yarn.,  or  bodies  m„y  be  the  drops  winch  t.il 

S ite  hundred  hole,.  Cl.  A.  V.  VI.  62.  2,  from  which,  with  a va,  lutiou, 
the  Moond  half  of  the  verM  l,  taken. 

45  He  offers  oblation.  Thdv  world : meaning,  accordmg  to  Mahldhara, 
in  their  world. 

46  He  offers  an  oblation  of  clarified  butter. 


ERSE  53  ] 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA. 


179 


7 I have  heard  mention  of  two  several  patliways,  way  of  the 

Fathers,  way  of  Gods  and  mortals. 

On  these  two  roads  each  moving  creature  travels,  each 
thing  between  the  Father  and  the  Mother. 

8 May  this  my  sacrifice  bring  store  of  children,  with  ten 

brave  sons,  full-companied,  for  welfare — 

Life-winning,  winning  offspring,  winning  cattle,  winning  this 
world  of  ours  and  peace  and  safety. 

May  Agni  make  my  progeny  abundant.  Do  ye  confer  food, 
milk,  and  manly  vigour. 


9 May  they  ascend,  the  lowest,  highest,  midmost,  the  Fathers 
who  deserve  a share  of  Soma. 

May  Fathers  who  have  gained  the  world  of  spirits,  gentle 
and  righteous,  aid  us  when  we  call  them. 

0 Our  Fathers  are  Angirases,  Navagvas,  Atharvaus,  Bhi-igus, 

who  deserve  tlie  Soma. 

May  these  the  holy  look  on  us  with  favour : may  we  enjoy 
their  gracious  loving  kindness. 

1 Oiir  ancient  Fathers  who  deserve  the  Soma,  who  came,  most 

mible,  to  our  Soma  banquet — 

With  these  let  Yama,  yearning  with  the  yearning,  rejoicing 
eat  our  offerings  at  liis  pleasure. 

2 Thou,  Soma,  art  preeminent  for  wisdom:  along  the  straiglit- 

est  path  thou  art  our  leader. 

Our  prudent  Fathers  by  thy  wisdom,  Soma,  dealt  on 
among  the  Gods  their  share  of  treasure, 
p For  our  sago  Fathers,  Soiua  Pavamana,  of  old  iicrfornied  hy 
thee  their  sacred  duties. 

Fighting  imvanqnishcd,  open  the  enclosures:  enrich  us 
with  large  gifts  of  steeds  and  heroes. 


47  IJe  offers  an  oblation  of  milk.  The  formula  U taken  horn  U.  V.  X. 
15  Two  several  pathways  ■ the  way  to  tlie  other  wm hi  an.l  t he  vsay 
regarded  as  distinct.  'The  Father  and  the  Mather,  le.aven  am  ‘■ 
4S  The  sacrificer  drinks  the  remains  of  tlie  milk  oblation.  Sacnjiu. 

■idlci.il  food.  Xto  ye  • he  ad.lres,se.s  the  ofliciating  pnestH  _ , 

49  Tlie  formula  is  taken  from  U V X.  la.  .Ueend  ■ to  hijlmr 
Ilk  and  obtain  the  be.st  oblation,  ;iccorditig  to  biyan.i  ’ 

'hnost-  dwellers  on  p.arth,  in  heaven,  in  sty;  I>athis  ia<  s,  .on.  . 
C'hhvlttas.  Verses  49-5  t .ue  .iddressed  to  Urn  highest  clis- 

Anyirases,  etc  semi  divine  members  of  h ilf-mythioa  pries  y . 

the  rnotit  ancient  times.  The  formula  i.s  taken  from  , - 

t>l  Taken  from  R V X.  15  8 , , n i • ..ar-nriflm/ ’ • 

-’■>2  Taken  from  R.  V.  I.  91.  1.  Prudent:  .skilled  in  sacniicmg  . 

54  Taken  from  R.  V.  IX.  96  1 1.  The  enclosures : the  obati  actions  whic 
k‘l>  tlie  seasonable  rain  from  falling. 


130  THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  Xll 

54  Associate  with  the  Fathers  thou,  0 Soma,  hast  spread  thy 
self  abroad  through  earth  and  heaven. 

So  with  oblation  let  us  serve  thee,  Indu,  and  so  let  us  be 
come  the  lords  of  riches. 

65  Fathers  who  sit  on  sacred  grass,  come  help  us  : those  offer] 
ings  we  have  made  for  you  ; accept  them. 

So  come  to  us  with  most  auspicious  favour,  and  give  us 
health  and  strength  without  a trouble. 

56  I have  attained  the  gracious-minded  Fathers,  have  gamed 

a son  and  progeny  from  Vishnu. 

They  who  enjoy  pressed  juices  with  oblation,  seated  oi 
sacred  grass,  come  oftenest  hither. 

57  May  they,  the  Fathers,  worthy  of  the  Soma,  invited  to  tbei 

favourite  oblations 

Laid  on  the  sacred  grass,  come  nigh  and  listen  ; may  the; 
be  gracious  unto  us  and  bless  us. 

58  May  tiiey  our  Fathers  whom  the  flames  have  tasted,  wortli 

of  Soma,  come  on  (Jod-ward  pathways. 

Enjoying  at  this  sacrifice  their  portion,  may  they  be  gracioi 
unto  us  and  bless  us. 

59  Fathers  whom  Agni’s  flames  have  tasted,  come  ye  nigli 

ye  kindly  leaders,  take  ye  each  your  proper  place. 

Eat  sacrificial  food  presented  on  the  grass  : grant  nchi 
with  a multitude  of  hero  sons. 


54  Taken  from  h.  V.  VIII.  48.  13,  Indu:  Soma. 

55  Three  formulas  are  now  addressed  to  the  Barhishada,  the  Manes  w 
Bit  on  the  sacred  grass  that  covers  the  altar  and  the  floor  of  the  saoiiti. 
hall.  The  fii-bt  formula  is  taken  from  R.  V.  X.  15  4. 

56  Taken  from  R.  V.  X.  15.  3,  Attained:  won  the  presence  of-  « 

progeny:  the  meaning  appears  to  be,  as  suggested  by  Prof.  ^ 

coinm/utary  on  the  original  hymn,  that 

obligatiou  to  the  Fathers  by  begetting  a son  through  . 

(R.  V.  X.  184.  11).  Still  vihramanam:  is  an  uniiitelligiblt 
this  connexion.  Another  explanation,^  forth  1 

napAtavi:  as  fire,  and  vikramamm  : [Vishnu  s studing  fort 

the  sun.  Prof.  Grassmann  translates:  ‘ die  Kinder  nnd  den  ho  ha 
Sehritt  des  Vischnu’;the  children  and  the  stride  of  V 

Mahidhara  takes  vishnoh  to  mean  ‘of  the  sacrifice  and  ‘ 

vikramanam  as  the  two  paths  leading  to  the  Gods  and  to  the  Fathers. 

57  Taken  from  R.  V.  X.  15.  11. 

63  Four  formula,  follow  addressed  to  ♦'’«  j'| 

b.>dies  have  beeu  tasted  or  consumed  by  Agm  or  the  fire  of  the  tun 
jjile. 

69  Taken  from  R.  V,  X.  15. 11. 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


181 


mSE  66.1 


;0  For  those  who,  burnt  with  fire  or  not  cremated,  joy  in  thoir 
portion  in  the  midst  of  heaven, 

May  tlie  Self-Ruler  form  the  world  of  spirits  and  this  their 
body  as  his  pleasure  wills  it 

II  We  call  the  Agnishvattas,  true  to  seasons,  those  who  drank 
Soma  in  the  Naias.irjisa. 

Prompt  to  give  ear  to  us  be  they,  the  sages,  and  then  let 
us  be  lords  of  wealth  and  treasure. 

52  Bowing  the  bended  knee  and  seated  southward,  accept  ye, 
all,  this  saciificc  with  f.tvour. 

lujure  us  not  for  any  sin,  0 Fathers,  which  wc  through 
human  frailty  have  committed. 

)3  Lapped  in  the  bosom  of  the  purple  Mornings  give  riches 
to  the  man  wlio  biings  oblation. 

' Grant  to  his  sons  a poitiou  of  your  treasure,  and,  present, 
give  us  energy,  ye  Fathers. 

54  0 Agni  Kavyavahana,  cau^^c  us  to  praise  before  Hio  Gods, 

As  our  associate  meet  for  lauds,  wealth  which  ecu  thou  re- 
putest  wealth. 

35  May  Agiii,  Kavya-bcarer,  who  halh  worshiiipcil  Fathers 

true  to  Law,  , . 

Announce  to  Gods  and  Fathers  these  our  saerd.cial  ollenngs. 

[56  Thou,  Agni  Kavya-bcarer,  when  entreated,  didst  bear  tho 

I offerings  which  thou  madcst  fr.^grant,  ^ ^ 

' And  gavest  to  the  Fathers  who  did  eat  tliom  with  Svadha. 
Eat,  thou  God,  the  gifts  we  bring  thee. 


60  Taken,  with  variations,  from  U V.  X,  15.  14. 

,he  Departed  ; Yaraa  World  of  spirits:  asanUun  : a .lifheu  t won  L 
Mraewhat  uncertain  meaning  Silyana  ^ 

|he  two  words  by  ‘ the  bo  ly  that  leads  to  life  , d.at  y • 

^.thbreati.’:  Wilson.  ‘Grant  thon,  OKing,  that  then  I'-*/ 
hat  life  which  they  wish  for’,  is  Pmf  Mav  MuHe'' •'  ’ i 

orresponding  portion  of  the  original  verse  m which  iaiaa  is  ' 
lee  India,  What  can  it  Teach  us  ? p.  227. 

I 61  True  to  seasons:  corning  at  the  appointed 

^dvd^rmsa:  a cup  containing  Soma  juice  dedicated  o ^ -j  ■ '» 

ihe  Praise  of  Men,  or  Soma,  or,  as  here,  the  1?  athera 

62  Me.,  from  R.  V,  X.  15.  6.  This  an.l  the  h.llowing  formula  from 
k.  V.  X.  15.  7 are  addressed  to  all  three  clasaes  of  .Manes. 

64  Men.  with  a varialioo.  from  R V.  V 20. 1. 

oblationa  called  Kavya  to  a class  of  Manes  known  also  by  that  title. 

65  T.iken,  with  variations,  from  R.  V.  X.  16.  iL 

1 66  Taken  from  R.  V.  X.  15.  12.  Svadhd:  the  sacrificial  exclamation, 
w,  their  own  allotted  portion. 


182  THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  XI. 

67  Thou,  Jatavedas,  knowest  well  the  number  of  Fathers  win 

aie  here  and  who  are  absent, 

Of  Fathers  wliom  we  know  and  whom  we  know  not.  Accept 
the  sacrifice  arranged  with  portions.  , 

68  Now  let  us  pay  this  homage  to  the  Fathers,  to  those  who 

passed  of  old  and  those  who  followed, 

Those  who  have  rested  in  the  earthly  region  and  those  who 
dwell  among  the  Mighty  Races. 

69  As  in  the  days  of  old  our  ancient  Fathers  speeding  the  work 

of  holy  worship,  Agni  ! 

Sought  pure  light  and  devotion,  singing  praises,  they  cleft 
the  ground  and  made  red  Dawns  apparent. 

70  Right  gladly  do  we  set  thee  down,  right  gladly  make  tlier, 

burn  and  glow. 

Gladly  bring  yearning  Fathers  nigh  to  eat  the  food  oi 
sacrifice. 

71  Indra,  with  waters’  foam  didst  thou  wrench  off  the  head  uf 

Namuchi, 

Subduing  all  contending  hosts. 

72  King  Soma,  pressed,  the  Drink  of  Life,  left  Death  behind 

with  Soma-dregs. 

By  Law  came  truth  and  Iiidra-powcr,  the  pure  bright  drink- 
ing-uff  of  juice.  The  power  of  Indra  was  this  sweet  im- 
mortal milk. 

73  The  Snipe  of  Angiras  by  thought  from  out  the  waters 

drauk  up  milk. 

By  Law  came  truth,  etc.,  as  in  72.  

67  Taken  from  R.  V X.  15.  13.  _ ^ ^ 

68  Taken  from  K.  V.  X.  15.  2.  Earthly  region:  the  part  of  the  finiia 

meat  nearest  to  the  earth.  Mighty  Races : of  the  Gods. 

69  Taken  from  R.  V.  IV.  2 16.  Cleft  the  ground:  in  constructing  ^ 

altar,  digging  a pit,  planting  a sacrificial  stake,  and  other  preparation^^  fo 
Bacrifiee  M(tde  i'ed  Dawns  apparent:  the  return  of  the  light  of  day  beiu 
regarded  as  the  leward  of  sacrifice  and  piayer.  > 

70  Addressed  to  Agni  and  taken  from  R.  V.  X.  16.  12. 

71  Taken  from  R V,  VIII.  14.  13.  With  waters'  foam:  with  a thunde 

bolt  in  the  shape  of  foam,  according  to  a later  legend.  Prof.  Lanma 

(Sanskrit  Reader,  p.  375)  takes  Namuchi  to  be  a waterspout  m a lake,  aui 
‘ with  foam  ’ to  mean  ‘ together  with  its  foam  ’.  The  traditional  expuna 
tion  of  the  name  Namuchi,  derived  from  na  and  muck,  ‘ not  loosiug 
‘ Holdfjwt  makes  him  a demon  who  withholds  the  seasonable  rain. 

72  The  Adhvaryu  reverently  approaches  the  libation -<;up8  of  milk  « 
Surft,  and  recites  eight  verses  illustrative  of  separation,  selection  and  reje( 
tion  with  special  reference  to  the  Soma  diunk  by  Namuchi  ( says  the  Cou 
meu’tator which  though  it  had  mixed  with  his  blood  was  recovered  lu 

^'73^  ^Tf^Snipe:  this  bird,  as  well  as  the  swan  or  flamingo  is  credited  wit 
the  power  of  separating  milk  from  the  water  with  which  it  has  been 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


483 


verse  82.] 


•yi  The  Hamsa  throned  in  light  drank  up  by  metre  Soma  from 
the  floods. 

By  Law,  etc. 

75  Prajapati  by  Brahma  drank  the  essence  from  the  fonming 

food,  the  princely  power,  milk,  Soma  juice.  By  Law,  etc. 

76  The  generative  ]>art  enters  the  yoni : it  leaves  aside  the 

retas  and  the  mutra. 

The  caul-invested  embryo  leaves  by  its  biith  the  covering 
folds.  By  Law,  etc. 

77  Viewing  both  forms  Prajapati  gave  truth  and  falsehood 

different  shapes. 

Prajapati  assigned  the  lack  of  faith  to  falsehood,  faith  to 
truth.  By  Law,  etc. 

78  By  holy  lore  Prajapati  drank  up  both  forms,  pressed  and  un- 

pressed. 

By  Law,  etc. 

79  Seeing  the  foaming  liquor’s  sap,  Prajapati  with  the  bright 

drank  out  the  bright,  the  milk,  the  Soma  juice.  By  Low, 

80  wfse,  with  mind,  lead,  and  thread  of  wool  the  sages  twine 

an  amulet.  . , 

Sarasvat!,  Savitar,  Vanina,  the  Aavins  span  sacrilice  and 

healed  his  form  for  Indra. 

81  This  his  immortal  shape  with  mighty  powers  three  Deities 

bestowing  gifts  compounded. 

His  hair  they  made  with  sprouts  of  grass  and  barley,  and 
roasted  grain  with  skin  and  flesh  supplied  him. 

82  His  inner  shape  Sar.isvati  arranges  and,  borne  on  bright 

paths,  the  Physician  Asviiis ; 

With  Masaras  and  sieve  his  bone  and  marrow,  as  on  the 
Oxen’s  hide  they  lay  the  liquor. 


74  The  Hamm  ■ the  Swan,  the  Sun  who  floatr.  through  thp  sky.  Cf.  K. 
V.  IV.  40.  1. ' By  metre:  with  his  rays  m the  8hai>c  of  the  metres  of  the 

Ve<la.  1 DA  * » 

75  Erahna : sacred  lore  in  the  shape  of  the  , 

78  Pressed  and  unpressed:  According  to  Mahidlura,  Soma  and  milk 

foaming  liquor  parisrut. 

80  With  bulla’  hoofs-  or  Tcssals  in  their  8h.ii«-hc  offers 

lions  of  fat  or  marrow.  The  sayes:  as  ssilful  men  ms  ® ‘ . , remedial 

proleetive  power,  so  the  Deities  uientioned  span  or  “1'”“’ 

teiifiee  to  eiire  indra  of  hi.  .iekness  (see 

ed  his  body  as  described  in  the  ver-ses  that  bdjow.  • I 

charm  against  demons  and  sorcery.  See  A V I 16.  2;  XII.  2. 1. 19,  5^. 

81  nm  the  Aavins  and  SatasvaU. 

82  Mdsaras : see  introductory  note.  Liquor : burfl. 


184  Tirs  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  XIX. 

83  By  thought  Sarasvati  with  both  Nasatyas  forms  lovely  trea- 

sure  au(i  a l)e  lutoous  body. 

Like  shuttle  through  the  loom  the  steady  ferment  mixes 
the  red  juice  with  the  foimiug  spirit. 

84  By  milk  they  generated  bright  immortal,  productive  seed, 

by  Surd  seed  fiom  urine, 

Chasing  afar  folly  and  ill  intention,  crude  food  and  wind 
and  meat  that  loads  the  stomach. 

85  Heart  with  his  heart  Indra  Good  Guardian  gendered  : with 

rioe'Cakc  Savitar  gave  truth  its  being. 

Varuni,  doctoring  the  lungs  and  liver,  forms,  as  with  Vayu 
cups,  the  gall  and  kidneys. 

86  Cooking-pots  pouring  honey  were  the  entrails  : like  a well- 

milking  cow  the  pins  were  bowels. 

A hawk’s  wing  was  the  spleen : through  mighty  powers  the 
stool  as  mother  was  navel  and  belly. 

87  The  pitcher  was  the  father  of  the  rectum  by  powers,  the 

w^omb  which  first  contained  the  infant. 

Plain  was  the  hundred-streaming  fount  as  penis : the  jar 
poured  forth  libations  to  the  Father. 

8^  II is  face  the  basket,  thence  his  head ; the  strainer  his 
tongue,  his  mouth  Sarasvati  and  Asvins. 

The  Clnpya  was  his  rump,  his  leech  the  filter,  the  bladder 
was  his  penis  keen  with  ardour. 

8D  Asvins  with  both  cups  made  his  eye  immortal,  the  goat  and 
cooked  oblation  gave  it  keenness. 

With  wheat  eyela-'lie^.  and  with  jujube  eyebrows  they  clothe 
as  'twere  a black  and  biilhant  figure. 

90  The  sheep,  the  ram  to  give  his  nostril  vigour,  the  immortal 
path  of  breath  by  both  libations. 

By  Indra-grains  and  sacrificial  jujubes  Sarasvati  prodacce 
through-breath  and  nose  hairs. 

83  XU'iti/as : a title  of  the  Asvins,  expliined  by  Indian  Commentator 
as  ‘not  untrue’,  na-asutifd.  See  Micdouell,  Vedio  Mythology,  p.  49.  Fci 
ment ; NAgnahu,  the  root  used  as  ye.ist.  See  verse  14. 

8.')  Truth  ■ lodri’s  quality  of  truthfulness.  enpt : See  verse  27 

87  The  pitcher:  or  jar,  for  holding  Suri.  The  infant  - in  the  shape  r 
the  Surd  contained  in  it.  Fount:  the  pitcher.  See  verse  37. 

8S  7'he  basket : see  verse  27.  Ohapya : a kiud  of  sacrificial  vessel,  tn 
use  of  which  is  not  explained. 

89  Both  cups:  libations  olfered  to  the  Pair.  The  goat:  offered  in  sacr 
fice  T/icy;  Uie  Asvins.  Black  and  brilliant  figure:  the  eye  ot  IndrA. 

90  The  ram  : sacred  to  Sarasvatt  now  offered  in  sacrifice.  By  both  Uv. 
tions : ‘ was  made ' underatood.  Cf.  XXL  49. 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


185 


VERSE  95.] 

91  The  bull  for  strength  made  Indra’s  form  ; the  immortal 

hearing  for  both  his  ears  by  two  libations. 

Barley  and  sacred  grass  composed  his  eyebrows : from  his 
mouth  came  the  jujube  and  sweet  honey. 

92  Hair  of  the  wolf  was  on  his  waist  and  body  ; the  beard  upon 

his  face  was  hair  of  tigers. 

Lion’s  hair  were  his  locks,  for  f.mic  and  beauty,  worn  on 
his  head,  his  crest  and  sheen  and  vigour. 

93  The  Afivins,  Locches,  joined  his  limbs  and  body,  Sarasvati 

put  limbs  and  frame  together, 

Giving  the  form  and  vital  power  of  Indra,  hundredfold, 
deathless  and  delightful  lustre. 

94  Sarasvati,  as  Consort  of  the  Asvins,  bears  in  her  womb  the 

nobly-fashioned  Infant. 

King  Varuna  with  waters’  wealthy  essence  begetting  Indra 
ill  the  floods  for  glory. 

95  Splendour  of  victims,  powerful  oblation,  honey  nud  mcath 

with  mdk  and  foaming  liquor, 

Healing  Sarasvati  eflu''od,  and  Asvins  j from  pressed  and 
unpressed  Sorna,  deathless  Indu. 

91  Jajnbc  and  meet  honey  : his  saliva  and  ilioniii  • M.ihidbara. 

94  Infant : Indra  whom  she  ba.s  hefliod  to  ivcieate 

95  Pressed  and  unpressed : parisrut  and  milk.  Soma : ‘ was  produced  ’ 
undei  stood. 


BOOK  THE  twentieth. 


Birth  placr  of  princely  power  art  thou ; centre  art 
of  princely  power. 

Harm  nut  thyself : do  me  no  harm. 

J Vanma,  Law’s  maintraner,  huth  sat  dovvn,  etc.,  as  in  X.  27. 
Save  me  from  death.  Save  me  from  lightning. 

3 Thee,  by  the  radiant  Savitai’s  impulsion,  with  arms  of 

Asvins,  with  the  hands  of  Pushan,  , , . , , 

With  leecl.-craft  of  the  Asvins.  I besprinkle  for  splendour, 

for  the  lustre  of  a Brahman  ; 

With  leech-craft  of  Sarasvati,  besprinkle  for  manly  vigour 

and  for  food  to  feed  thee ; atvorKrth  nf 

Besprinkle  thee,  by  speci.tl  power  of  Indra,  for  strength 

bod\  and  for  fame  and  glory. 

4 Thou  art  Ka.  Noblest  Ka  art  thou.  Thee  for  the  state  and 

rank  of  Ka.  ^ ^ 

Sumahgala  ! Susloka  1 Satyarajan  . 

6 My  head  be  grace,  my  mouth  be  fame,  my  hair  and  board 

be  brilliant  sheen  ! . , , , 

My  breath  be  King  and  deathlessness,  mine  eye  Sole  Lord, 

mine  ear  the  Prince  1 ^ 

6 My  tongue  be  bliss,  my  voice  be  might,  my  mind  be  wra  , 

JorsVeTytugoS  and  delight  my  members,  conquering 
Strength  my  friend  ! _ 


The  Sautramanl  is  continued.  j 

(see  XIX.  16,  86)  representing  ^ ",fthe  Lrthern  ground  A 

“T“t' of  the 
«„l’^i\^lwhiiareLaomru..ao^^^^  , 

other,  and  recites  the  benedictory  formulas. 


7 Let  niy  two  arms  be  Indra’s  power,  my  hands  bo  doed  of 

manly  might,  my  soul  and  breast  be  princely  rule  ! 

8 My  ribs  be  royal  government,  my  belly,  shoulders,  neck, 

and  hips, 

Thighs,  elbows,  knees,  the  people,  yea,  my  members  univer- 
sally ! 

9 My  navel  intellect,  etc.,  etc 

Duty  am  I in  legs  and  feet,  established  King  among  the 

folk. 

10  I take  rny  stand  on  princely  power  and  Kingship,  on  cows 

am  I dependenr,  and  on  horses. 

On  members  I depend,  and  on  the  body,  on  vital  breath 
dependent  and  on  welfare,  on  heaven  and  earth  and 
sacrifice  dependent. 

11  May  Deities,  eleven  threes,  the  three  and  thirty  bounteous 

Ones 

Whose  House-Priest  is  Briliaspati,  by  imjmlso  of  bright 
Savitar,  the  Gods  protect  me  with  the  Gods, 

13  May  the  first  Gods  with  the  second,  the  second  with  the 
third,  the  third  with  Truth,  Triitli  with  Sacrifice,  Sacii- 
fice  with  sacrificial  texts,  sacrificial  texts  with  Siimans, 
Samaiis  with  ptaise-vcrsos,  praise-verses  witli  fore  and 
after-sentences,  foio-sentencos  with  inviting-texts,  iiivit- 
ing-tcxta  with  Vasliat-calls,  Vashat-calls  with  oblations, 
and  oblations,  fulfil  my  desires.  Earth  ! All-bail ! 

13  Mv  hair  is  effort  aud  attempt,  my  skin  is  revoiouco  and 

approach. 

My  flesh  is  iucliiiatioii,  wealth  my  bone,  ray  marrow  rever- 
ence. 

14  Gods,  Deities,  whatever  fault  of  ours  have  stirred  the  wrath 

of  Gods, 

May  Agni  set  me  free  from  that  iniquity  and  all  distress. 

15  If  in  the  day-time  or  at  night  we  have  committed  acts  of  sin, 
May  Vayu  set  me  free  from  that  iniquity  and  all  distress, 

10  He  steps  down  on  a black-antelope’s  skin. 

12  Earth!:  Bhdh  ; a iny.^ical  exclatuation  used  in  sacrifice  Cf.  HI-  5. 

13  TheSacrificer  drinks  the  remainder  of  the  Graba  or  bbation,  and 
recites  the  formula  attributing  all-controlling  powers  and  infiueueea  to  tne 
constituent  elements  of  his  body.  Jieverence  and  approach : that  is,  sp- 
proaohed  with  reverential  inteutions.  Rereienee:  p<dd  to  lue  by  o lera. 

14  The  Avabhritha  or  Purificatory  Gereiiiony  is  begun,  by  floating  a jar 
of  Mlsara  (see  XlX.,  introductory  note)  in  water,  aud  reciting  the  pros- 
cubed  formulas. 


188 


TUS  texts  op  TM  [BOOK  XX. 


16  If  when  awake  or  in  our  sleep  we  have  coinmittei  acts  of 

May  Sarya  set  me  free  from  that  iniquity  and  all  distress. 

17  Each  fault  in  Village  or  in  wild,  company  or  corporeal  sense, 
Each  sinful  act  that  we  have  done  to  Sudra  or  Arya,  or  to 

cither’s  disadvantage,  e’en  of  that  sm  thou  ait  the  expi- 
ation. 

18  Waters,  Inviolable  ones,  etc.  Said  to  be  repeated  from 

0 ever-moving  Cleansing  Bath,  etc.  Repeated  from  III.  48. 

19  Thy  heart  i'l  in  the  flood,  etc.  Repeated  from  VIII.  25. 

To  us  let  Waters,  etc.  Repeated  from  VI.  22. 

20  As  one  unfastened  from  a stake,  or  cleansed  by  bathing 

As^butter  which  the  sieve  hath  purged,  let  water  clean  mo 
from  my  sin. 

21  Looking  upon  tlie  loftier  light  above  the  darkness  we  avo 

ToS^rva,  God  among  the  Gods,  the  light  that  is  most  ex- 
oellent. 

22  Tlie  waters  1 this  day  have  sought,  and  to  their  essence 


have  we  come.  i i -ir 

Agni,  come  hither  rich  in  milk,  splendour  and  brilliancy 

bestow  on  me,  and  progeny  and  wealth. 

23  A brand  art  thou  : fain  would  we  thrive.  Fuel  art  thou 
and  splendour  : give  me  splendour.  „ ,i 

Eirth  comes  again,  the  Dawn,  the  Sun.  This  Univers.  a 

May  I possess  Vaisvanara’s  light,  may  I attain  my  vast  desires. 
Eaitli  1 All-hail  1 


■ lnvilta,corin«M,etc.^t  tll.  ^5. 

a V.iisvA.  To  either'9  dUadrantaye  : ag-unst  the  interest  w. . 

Saciificer  or  his  wife,  according  to  Mahidhara.  T ton  . ]■  ‘ ‘ • 

18  This  beginning  of  a verse  is  the  reading  of  the  Taltti.lya  >ecension 
td  Bllok  Yalurvedl  differing  slightly  from  the  passage  referred  to.  Se. 
S.  B.  E.  XXVI.  p.  206,  note.  * ^ vt  ^ 

20  Taken,  with  a variation  {‘water’  for  ‘all’)  from  A.  V.  VI.  115.  d. 

21  Taken  from  R.  V.  I.  50  10, 

22  Varied  from  R.  V.  I.  23.  24.  * - r 

23  He  takes  up  a piece  of  wood  and  lays  it  on  the  Ahavantya  fire.  Earth 

her.  the  Sa^ritor  offers  an  oblation  of 

tamivarttii  accoiding  to  MaWdhara^mojyatb  >*  1“  > P'" 

see  verse  12. 


2i  0 Agni,  Master  of  the  Vow,  on  thee  I lay  the  kindling, 
stick. 

To  the  fast-vow  and  faith  I come.  I,  consecrated,  kindle 
thee. 

25  Fain  would  I know  that  holy  world  where  Deities  with 

Agni  dwell, 

Where  priestly  rank  and  princely  power  together  in  accord- 
ance move. 

26  Fain  would  I know  that  holy  world  where  want  and  languor 

are  unknown, 

Where  in  complete  accordance  move  Indra  and  Vayu  aide 
by  side. 

27  Let  thy  shoot  be  united  with  his  tendril,  joint  combine 

with  joint. 

Imperishable  sap  for  joy,  thine  odour  be  the  Soma's  guard  1 

28  They  pour  it  out,  they  sprinkle  it,  they  scatter  it,  they 

make  it  pure. 

In  the  brown  Suia  s ecstasy  he  says  Wbat  .art  thou  ? What 
art  thou  1 

29  Indra,  at  morn  accept  our  cake  accompanied  with  grain  and 

groats,  with  wheateu  bread  and  hymns  of  ])rai6e. 

SO  To  Indra  sing  the  lofty  hymn,  Maruts  ! that  slayeth  Vptra 

Whereby  the  Holy  Ones  created  for  the  God  the  radiant 
light  that  never  dies. 

31  Adhvaryu,  on  the  straining-cloth  pour  thou  the  Soma  press- 

ed with  stones  : 

Purify  it  for  Iiidra’s  drink. 

32  The  Sovran  Lord  of  living  thinga,  he  upon  whom  tho  world* 


Mighty"  the  mighty’a  Kiug-by  him  I take  thee,  take  thee 
ou  myself.  

24  He  lay,  three  kindling-Btioks  <.n  UieAhavanlya  6re,  and  rvcitea  three 
formulas.  Mailer  of  the  yow:  see  I.  5-  j 

27  The  Surd  ia  add.  eased  and  minijled  with  the  Soraa.  Thj  jAoet . 
part  thou  hast  in  the  mixture.  Ua  : the  bniiw  a I’"  ' , , 

H-  V-  via. 

cribed  off’eriugs  to  the  tbirty-tbiee  Gods,  which  he  takes  up  a 
vessel. 


lyv 


33  Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  Thee  for  the  Asvins.  This  is 

thy  home,  etc. 

34  Guard  of  my  breath  and  outward  breath,  the  guardian  of 

mine  eye  and  ear,  . 

All-healer  of  my  voice,  thou  art  the  mollifier  of  my  mind. 

35  Invited  I feed  upon  thee  invited,  j 4. 

Whom  Asvins,  whom  Sarasvati,  whom  Indra,  Good  Protec- 
tor, made, 

36  Kindled  in  forefront  of  the  Mornings,  Indra  with  forward 

light,  long-active,  waxing  mighty, 

With  three  and  thiity  Gods,  the  Thunder  wielder,  smote 
Vritra  dead  and  tlirew  the  portals  open. 

37  Son  of  Himself,  the  Praise  of  Men,  the  Hern,  measuring  nut 

the  sacrificial  stations. 

Rich  in  bulls’  fat,  anointing  with  sweet  butter,  wise,  bright 
with  gauds  of  gold,  he  sacrificeth. 

38  Lauded  by  Gods,  Lord  of  Bay  Steeds,  the  Helper,  showing 

his  greatness,  worshipped  with  oblations, 

Fort-render,  Cowpen-cleaver,  Thunderwielder,  may  he  ap- 
proach our  sacrifice  rejoicing. 

39  May  Indra,  Lord  of  Bays,  sit  by  direction  eastward  on  earth 

accepting  our  oblation. 

And  sacred  grass,  fair,  far-spread,  widely-stretching,  anoint- 
ed by  Adityas  and  by  Vasus. 

40  To  the  strong  Hidra  go  the  sounding  Portals,  dames  with  a 

goodly  husband,  swiftly  moving  I 
Well-manned,  divine,  wide  be  the  Doors  thrown  open,  ex- 
panding ill  their  greatness  for  the  Hero  ! 


33  JlfpeateU  tioin  A -3/.  . r.,  ^ 

34  The  omciating  priests  inhale  the  odour  of  the  remains  of  the  oblation. 

3(5  Tlie  Adhvaryu’s  part  of  the  ceremony  is  finished,  and  the  Hotar  now 
begins  to  officiate.  The.  portals : of  the  lain-cloud,  which  the  demon  of 
drought  had  obstructed 

37  This  and  the  seven  following  verses  form  an  Apil  or  propitiatory 

hymn  constituting  the  Inviting-prayeis  at  the  pray^jns  or  fore-ofimn-a 

of  an  animal  sacrifice  They  are  addressed  to  a series  of  Deitic.s  or  dnfied 
objects,  all  of  which  are  ieg.nded  by  Siyana  as  minifestationsof  Agni  Sec 
The  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,  Index  of  Himself  ■ or,  Taiinnapat,  Fire, 

lighted*  fiom  Fire,  a title  of  Agm.  The  Fruise  of  Men  or  De.sii  e "f  Men, 
NaiilBainsa  ; Agni  Some  families  must  invoke  Tan  uupit  and  others  Nara 
samsa  as  their  tutelary  Deity.  , , i i 

‘ 38  indra  is  invited  to  the  .sacrifice.  Fort-render:  splitting  the  cI-okI 
castles  of  the  demons  of  drought.  Coicpen  ekaver : oiiener  of  the  stores  ol 
fertilizing  rain 

39  On  earth  • on  the  sacrificial  ground. 

40  For  tab : of  the  sacrificial  hall.  See  R.  V.  II.  3.  5. 


41  Dawn  and  Night,  lofty,  sapful,  richly.yielding,  tair  showing 
^ as  they  weave  with  varied  colour 
The  long-extended  thread  in  concert,  worsliip  the  CJod  of 
Gods,  the  lofty  Hero  Iiidra. 

43  Tl.riving  by  sacrifice  may  the  three  Bright  Ones,  taking  de- 

light  like  wedded  dames  in  Indra,  ^ 

Sarasvati,  Ida  Bliarati  all -surpassing,  with  milk  preserve 
our  sacred  thread  unliroken. 

44  May  I vashtar  coming  from  afar,  the  active,  give  strcn-^tli 

and  plenty  to  strong  glorious  Indra,  ° 

And  strong,  prohKc,  worshipping,  the  Mighty  at  sacriheo’s 
head  give  the  Gods  honour. 

45  Let  the  divine  Stake,  like  an  In.molator,  hind,  as  one 

ordered,  to  himself  the  victim, 

And,  filling  Indra’s  belly  with  oblations,  season  the  sacrifice 
with  sweets  and  butter. 


46  Indra  the  Bull,  swift  coiKjucror,  wildly  rushing  biill-like  to 

meet  the  Indii  of  tlie  drop[iings — - 
Delighting  in  a mind  ilwt  scatteis  fatness,  lot  the  immortal 
Gods  rejoice  in  Svaha. 

47  Mi^  Indra  come  to  ns  for  our  protection,  here,  lauded 

Hero,  he  our  feast-companion. 

Miiy  he  whose  powers  are  many,  waxen  mighty,  cherish, 
like  Dyuus,  the  sovran  sway  of  princes. 

48  From  near  or  far  away  may  mighfy  Indra,  giver  of 

succour,  come  for  onr  protection, 

Lord  of  men,  armed  with  thunder,  with  the  Strom^est, 
shiying  his  foes  in  confiict,  in  the  battles. 


41  Of.  R V.  II.  3 6 Lonfj  extended  thread:  their  perpetual  ceurae  of 
suecession  to  each  otlier. 

42  Two  ....  J/otarx  ■ Agni  aivl  V.tyii,  .acef.nli'ug  W Maiiidliara.  AecorJ- 
OK  to  olyana,  two  Agnis,  tenestrial  and  liirn.iiuental 

It  V ^‘‘dfjht  Ones:  or,  Godde8.ses,  conneeted  with  aaerifice.  .See 

45  iituLe.  Vaiiaspati,  the  Tree the  .S.icrificial  Stake  regarded  a.s  a form 
Agni.  ® 

InimoLator  : the  priest  who  sl.umhteis  tlie  victim. 

4tJ  Induof  the  droppiaejs : Soma  connected  witli  tlie  flripping  fat  or 
niai  row.  ° 


47  Taken  from  R.  V.  IV  21  1. 

18  laken  from  R.  V.  IV.  2U  1.  The  Utronfjcst : thcMarutB. 


49  May  Indra  cooig  to  us  with  Tawny  Coursers,  inclined  to  us, 

to  favour  and  enrich  us. 

May  Maghavan,  loud-voiced  and  wielding  thunder,  stand  by 
us  at  this  sacrifice,  in  combat. 

50  Indra  the  Rescuer,  Indra  the  Helper,  Hero  who  listens  at 

each  invocation, 

Sakra  I call,  Indra  invoked  of  many.  May  Indra,  Bounte- 
ous Lord,  prosper  and  bless  us. 

61  May  helpful  Indra  as  our  Good  Protector,  Lord  of  all  trea- 
sures, favour  us  with  succour, 

Baffle  our  foes  and  give  us  rest  aud  safety,  and  may  we  be 
the  lords  of  hero  vigour. 

52  May  wc  enjoy  the  grace  of  him  the  Holy,  yea,  may  we  dwell 

in  his  auspicious  favour. 

May  helpful  Indra  as  our  Good  Preserver  drive  from  us  even 
from  afar,  our  foemen. 

53  Come  hither,  Indra,  with  Biy  Steeds,  joyous,  with  tails  like 

peacock  plumes. 

Let  no  mou  check  thy  course  as  fowders  stay  the  bird ; pass 
o’er  them  as  o’er  desert  lands. 

54  Verily  the  Vasishthas  hymn  with  praises  Indra  the  mighty 

One  whose  arm  wields  thunder. 

Praised,  may  ho  guard  our  wealth  in  men  and  cattle,  lo 
Gods,  preserve  us  evermoic  with  blessings. 

55  Fire  bath  been  kindled,  Aavius  Twain  ! the  Gharma  warmed, 

the  Radiant  pressed, 

Here  the  Milch-Cow  Sarasvati  hath  poured  bright  Soma, 
Indra’s  own. 

56  When  Soma  flows  Sarasvati  and  both  the  Asvins,  Leeches 

and  , 

Body-guards,  bear  to  Indra  strength  by  passage  through 

the  realms  of  air. 


49  Taken  from  R.  V.  IV.  20.  2.  Maghavan : the  Bounteous  Lord,  Indra. 

50—52  Taken  from  K.  V.  VI.  47.  11—13. 

53  R V.  Ill  45  1. 

54  R.  V.  VII.  23,  6. 

55  The  Radiant : or  the  Ruler,  the  Prince  ; Soma.  Twelve  propitiatory 
verges  tollow  in  praise  of  the  Asvins  and  Sarasvati.  The  Asvuis,  as  the 
divine  Physicians,  attend  Indra  as  a matter  of  course,  but  Saia^vatt’s  part 
in  his  cure  is  not  so  easily  accounted  for.  According  to  the  Sitapatluj 
Brahmana,  V.  5.  4.  16,  Sarasvati  here  is  Vak,  Speech,  the  healing  Word 
Prof  VVeber  suggests  the  rationalistic  explanation  that  Sarasvati  the  riwr, 
that  is,  cold  water  (Amrit  is  in  the  waters,  in  the  waters  healing  modicuie. 
R.  V,  I 23.  ia  referred  to. 


57  When  Soma  flowed  the  Asvins  Twain,  the  Leeches,  brought 

sweet  medicine, 

With  Men’s  Desire  Sarasvati  for  Iiidra,  S<una,  Nagmdiu^ 

58  M orsliipped,  Sarasvati  bestowed  on  Indra,  senses,  manly 

power. 

The  Asvins,  through  oblations  paid,  combined  food,  cncigv, 
and  wealth. 

59  The  Asvins  brought  fiom  Namuchi  pressed  Soma  bright 

with  foaming  juice. 

Sarasvati  with  sacred  grass  brought  tliat  to  Indra  for  his 
drink. 

<19  Sarasvati  and  Indra  with  the  Asvins  Twain  milked  out 
desires 

From  heaven  and  earth,  the  regions,  the  resounding  and 
expansive  doors. 

<51  Ye  Asvins,  Dawn  and  Night,  by  day  and  in  the  evening,  fair 
of  hue, 

Acco*’dant,  with  Sarasvati,  dock  Indra  with  surpassing 
powers. 

62  Guard  us,  0 Asvins,  through  the  day,  guards  ns  by  night, 

Sarasvati. 

(Jelestial  Hotars,  Leeches'  both  guard  Indra  when  the  juice 
is  pressed. 

63  The  Asvins,  and  the  Three,  apart,  Sir.isvati,  Idl,  Lhar.iti, 

As  drink  to  gladden  Indra,  poured  strong  Soma  with  the 

foaming  juice. 

64  The  Asvins,  our  Sarasvati,  and  Tvashtar,  when  the  juice 

was  shed, 

Gave  liidra  balm,  yea,  mead  as  balm,  glory  and  farr.o  and 
many  a shape. 

65  Praising  with  fcaining  liquor  at  duo  times,  Indn,  Yanaspati, 
Saimvati  as  cow  gave  forth  sweet  bevciage  with  the  Afivins 

Twain. 

66  Asvins.  to  Indra  ye  with  cow.s,  with  M:\sara  and  foaming 

drink 

Gave,  with  Sarasvati— All  hail!— the pressed-out  Somajiiice 
and  mead. 

,^)7  Men's  Desire : or  the  Praiae  of  Men.  Nanfiutisa,  Agni  Sacrifice.^  &'•- 
cording  to  Mahidhara.  .Vaywa/tu ; the  di  ug  used  for  feriuentiug  the  Surd. 
See  XIX.  14,  83. 

59  Nanuichi : see  X.  33. 

<53  Foaming  juice : Surd. 

65  Sweet  beverage  : kildla.  See  II  34  ; III.  4o 
13 


67  The  Asvlns  and  vSara.svati  by  wit  from  fiendish  Naimichi 
Brought  unto  Indra  sacred  food,  strength,  brilliant  treasure, 
ample  wealth. 

6S  That  Indra,  strong  through  sacrifice  by  Asvins  and  Sarasvat', 
Cleft  Vala  through  to  win  him  wealth,  with  Naniuohi  of 
Asura  birth. 

69  Supporting  him  in  sacrifice  with  sacred  food  and  mighty 

poweis, 

Sarasvati,  both  Asvins  and  the  cattle  hymned  that  India’s 
praise. 

70  Indra  whom  Bhaga,  Savitar,  and  Vanina  supplied  with  po\i  cr, 
Lord  of  the  sacrifice,  may  he,  Good  Guardian,  love  the  wor- 
shipper. 

71  Savitar,  Vanina  bestow  gifts  on  the  liberal  offerer, 

Strength,  power  and  treasure  which  the  Good  Protector  took 

from  Nsmuchi ! 

72  Varuna  giving  sway  and  power,  S.ivitar  grace  with  happiness, 
The  Go^  Protector  giving  strength  with  fame,  obtained 

the  sacrifice. 

73  With  cows  the  Asvins,  mighty  power,  with  horses  manly 

vigour,  strength, 

With  sacred  food  Sarasvati,  made  Indra,  Sacrificer,  strong. 

74  May  those  Nasatyas,  fair  of  form,  the  Men  who  ride  on  paths 

of  gold. 

Oblation  rich  Sjirasvati,  thou,  Indra!  help  us  in  our  rites. 

75  Those  Leeches  righteous  iu  their  deeds,  She,  lich  in  milk, 

Sarasvati, 

That  Viitra-slayer  hundred-powered,  invested  Indra  with  his 
might. 

76  Ye  Asvins  and  Sarasvati,  joint  drinkers  of  tlie  Snra  drau^dit, 
[n  Namiichi  of  Asura  birth,  g.ve  aid  to  Indra  in  his  deeds. 

77  As  parents  aid  a son,  etc.,  as  in  X.  34. 

78  Be  in  whom  horses,  bulls,  oxen,  and  barren  cows,  and  rams, 

when  duly  set  apart,  are  offered  up,— - 
To  Agni,  Soma-sprinkled,  drinker  of  sweet  juice,  Disposer, 
with  thy  heart  bring  forth  a pleasant  hymn. 


6S  Vala : the  rain-with-holding  cloud,  personified  as  a demon  of  drou^-^ht 
who  stole,  like  Cdcus,  the  cows  of  the  Gods  and  concealed  them  iu  a cave. 
See  K.  V.  X.  68.  5-10. 

74  Nasatyas:  the  Asvins. 

78  Taken,  with  variations,  from  R.  V.  X.  91.  14  Dispose':  Airanger  of 
the  sacrifice  ; priest.  The  Adhvaryu  is  addressed.  Briny  forth, : or,  beget. 


79  Within  thy  mouth  ia  poured  the  offering,  Agiii,  as  Soma  in- 
to  cup,  oil  into  ladle. 

Vouchsife  US  wealth,  strength-winning,  blest  with  heroes 
wealth  lofty,  praised  by  men,  and  full  of  spleudoiir, 

SO  The  Aavinagave,  with  lustre,  sight,  Sarasvati  manly  strcin'tli 
with  bienth.  ® 

Iiidra  with  voice  and  mij^ht  gave  Iiidra  vigorous  power. 

81  With  kine,  Nasatyaa ! and  with  steeds,  come,  Asvins,  Uiid- 

ras  ! to  the  house,  the  sure  protector  of  its  men ; ^ 

82  Such,  wealthy  Gods ! as  none  afar  or  standing  near  to  ns 

may  harm,  yea,  no  malicious  mortal  foe. 

83  D)  ye,  0 longed-for  Asvins,  lead  us  on  to  wealth  of  varied 

form,  wealth  that  shall  bring  us  room  and  rest. 

84  Wealthy  in  spoil,  enriched  with  hymns,  may  pure  Sarasvati 

desire  with  eager  love  our  sacrilico. 

85  She  who  awakens  sounds  of  joy,  inspires  our  hymns,  Saras 

vati,  she  liath  allowed  our  sacrifice. 

8i)  Sar  isvatk  the  miglity  flood,  she  with  her  light  illuminates, 
she  brightens  every  pious  thought. 

87  0 Indra,  marvellously  bright,  come,  those  libations  long  for 

thee,  thus  by  fine  fingers  purified. 

88  Urged  by  the  holy  singer,  sped  by  song,  come,  Indra,  to  the 

prayers  of  the  libation-pouring  priest. 

80  Approach,  0 Indra,  hasting  thee,  Lord  of  Bay  Horses,  to  the 
prayer:  in  our  libations  take  delight. 

00  Acconlaiit  with  Sarasvati  let  the  two  Asvins  drink  the  rneath. 
May  Indra,  Vritra-slayer,  Good  Guardian,  accept  the  Soma 
meath. 


79  Taken  from  R.  V.  X 91  15. 

81-83  T.iken  from  R.  V.  II  41.  7-9. 

Jiudras : here  a title  of  the  A'^vina,  the  Bright  Pair. 
84— 89  Taken  from  R.  V.  I 3.  10-12.  4-  6 
90  Soma  meath:  the  sweet  libation  of  Soma  juice. 


BOOX  THE  TWENTY-FIRST. 


Vaeuna,  hear  this  call  of  mine:  be  giacions  unto  us  this 
day. 

Longing  for  help  I yearn  for  thee. 

2 I ask  this  of  thee  with  my  prayer,  etc.,  as  in  XVI II.  49. 

3 Do  thou  who  knowest  Varuna,  0 Agni,  put  far  away  from 

us  the  God’s  displeasure. 

Best  Sacrificer,  brightest  One,  refulgent,  remove  thou  far 
from  us  all  those  who  hate  us. 

4 Be  thou  the  nearest  unto  us,  0 Agni,  our  closest  Friend 

while  now  this  Morn  is  breakim;. 

Reconcile  Varnna  to  us,  be  bounteous  : show  thy  compas- 
sion and  be  swift  to  hear  us. 

5 We  call  to  succour  us  the  miiihty  Mother  of  those  whose 

sway  is  just,  the  Queen  of  Order, 

Strong-ruler,  far- expanding,  ne’er  decaying,  Aditi  gracioiis 
guide  and  good  protectress. 

6 Sinless  may  we  ascend,  for  weal,  this  vessel  rowed  with 

good  oars,  divine,  that  never  leaketh, 

Earth  oiir  strong  guard,  incomparable  Heaven.  Aditi  gia- 
cious  guide  and  good  protectress. 

7 May  I ascend  the  goodly  ship,  free  from  defect,  that  leaketh 

not, 

Moved  by  a hundred  oars,  for  weal. 

8 0 Mitra-Varuna,  gracious  Pan,  with  fatness  dew  our  pas- 

turage, 

With  mead  the  regions  of  the  air. 


The  formulas  of  the  Sautfilmaiii  are  continued. 

1 2 A rice-cake  is  offered  to  Varuna  with  .an  Inviting  Prayer  (1)  Uken 
from  K V.  I.  25.  19,  and  an  Offering  Prayer  (2)  from  R.  V.  I.  24.  11,  re 
peated  from  XVIII.  49. 

3,  4 Similar  prayers,  taken  from  R.  V.  IV.  1.  4,  5,  addressed  to  Agni  as 
the  Mediator  or  Intercessor, 

5 An  Inviting  Prayer,  taken  with  a slight  variation  from  A.  V.  VII  6 - 
addressed  to  Aditi  to  whom  a c/iaru,  or  oblation  of  rice,  barley,  and  piiht 
boiled  with  butter  and  milk,  is  to  be  offered. 

6 Taken  from  A.  V.  VII.  6.  3,  varied  from  R V.  X.  63.  10. 

7 The  goodly  ship:  sacrifice,  which  bears  us  beyond  this  world  to  heaven. 
Hundred  oars : verses  of  piaise  and  chanted  hymns. 

8 ObUtioM  of  milk  and  curda  ara  offerad  to  Mitra  and  Varu>^  regarded 
as  Kain  Gods  (II.  16).  The  rerae  is  taken  from  K.  V.  Ill  62  16.  TalnW. 
fertilizing  rain. 


^ stretch  forth  your  arms  and  let  onr  lives  bo  lengthened : 
with  fjvtness  dew  the  pastures  of  our  cattle. 

\c  Youthful,  make  us  fanifid  among  the  people:  hear, 
Mitra-V^aruna,  these  mine  invocations. 

10  Bless  us  the  Coursers  when  we  call,  etc,  as  in  IX.  16. 

11  Deep-skilled  in  Law,  etc.,  as  in  IX.  18. 

12  Kindled  is  Agni  with  the  brand,  yea,  kindled  well,  the 

excellent. 

The  metre  Gay.itri,  the  steer  of  eighteen  mouth'^,  give  power 
and  life  ! 

13  T-in'inMp\t  whose  acts  are  pure,  our  bodies’  guard  Sara.svati, 
Ushniha  metre  and  the  steer  of  two  years’  age  give  power 

and  life  ! 

U Agui  with  oflferiugs,  meet  for  prai-ie,  and  Soma  the  immortal 
God, 

Anushtop  metre  and  the  steer  of  thirty  months  give  power 
and  life  ! 

15  Agni  wdth  goodly  grass  sfiread  out,  deatldess  with  I’ushau 

at  his  side, 

Brihati  metre  and  a steer  of  three  years’  age  give  power 
and  life  ! 

16  The  D'-ors  divine,  the  mighty  Regions,  Brahma,  Goil  Bri- 

haspati, 

The  mar  re  Paukti,  here  a hull  in  his  fourtli  year,  give 
power  and  life  ! 

17  The  two  young  Dawns  of  lovely  form,  the  deathless  Univer- 

sal Gods, 

The  Tnshtiip  metre,  here,  a hull  in  Ids  sixth  year,  give 
power  and  Ufa  1 

IS  The  two  celestial  llotars,  both  PhysicMiH,  IiuUms  close 
knit  friends. 

The  metre  Jagati,  an  ox  who  draws  the  wain,  give  power  and 
life  ! 

19  The  rhreo,  Idi.  Sarasvati,  and  Bharati,  the  Marnt  folk, 
Viii)  the  metre,  here,  a cow  in  milk,  a bull,  give  power  and 
life  ! 

9 Tik^n  from  R V.  VI I 62.  .6,  , 

12  This  an'1  the  ten  foil  »wmg  verses  form  an  Amt  or  I lopitiatory  Hymn 
in  honour  of  In  lr.u  The  ^terr  to  l.e  saerifire.l  ^r'//r  m Imlra 
n Tmd>ia/>dt:  8nn  of  Himself.  Agni  See  V r>.  / 

17  Tmyemng  Morning  and  Night,  ■ ins..p  u-al.ly  eynn.cted  and 

ever  born  anew'.  Here  ■ in  this  and  other  versos  m-  ming  to  InUt  -i. 

18  Hotars:  Agni  and  V-iyu,  or  terrestrial  and  firmamcnt.il  Agm. 

19  Polk : or  cUua. 


i///i  ifiAi.5  Ulf  THE 


[BUUK  2LXI. 


20  Tvishfcfir  the  <voadrous,  full  of  seed,  Indr^gui  furtherors  of 

weal, 

DvipaiU  metre,  and  a cow  and  vigorous  bull  give  power  and 
life! 

•21  Our  slaughterer  Vanaspiti,  Savitar  who  promoteth  wealth, 
The  metre  Kakup,  here,  a cow  who  casts  her  calf,  give  pnwei 
and  life  ! 

22  With  Sv^ha  mighty  Vanina  give  healing  power  to  Sacrifiee  ! 
Tlie  Atichhandas,  Brihat,  and  a steer  and  bull  give  power 

and  life  I 

23  With  the  Spring  Season  may  the  Gods  the  Vasus  praised 

with  triple  hymn 

And  with  Rathantara,  give  life  to  Tndra,  splendour,  sacrifice. 

21  With  Summer  may  the  Riidras,  Gods,  praised  in  the  Pahclia- 

dasa  hymn 

With  Brihat,  give  to  Iiidra  strength;  with  fame,  and  sacri- 
fice and  life. 

2o  May  the  Adityas  with  the  Rains,  lauded  in  Saptadasa 
hymn 

And  with  Vairupa,  with  folk,  strength,  give  Indra  sacrifice 
and  life. 

2G  With  4utumn  may  the  Ribhiis,  Gods,  praised  in  the  Eka- 
vimsa  hymn 

And  with  Virlja,  give  with  grace  to  Indra  grace,  life, 
sacrifice. 

27  With  Winter  miy  the  Maruts,  Go  Is,  praised  in  the  laud  of 
thrice  nine  parts, 

The  Si'cvaris,  with  strength  give  might  to  Indra,  sacrifice 
and  life. 


20  fndrdynt : Indra  and  Agiii  as  a du.d  Deity.  Doipadl : two  footed  ; 
comprising  two  PAdaa  or  verae-divisiona. 

2 1 Slaughterer : Im.nol.itor  of  the  victims  tied  to  the  Stake.  Kakup:  a 
metre  of  8-i-12  + 8 syllablea. 

22  Atichhandas : hyperineter;  redundant  metre,  containing  more  than 
f()rty-eight  syllables. 

23  Triple  hymn  : the  Tiivrit.  See  IX.  33  ; X.  10, 

24  Pafichadasa:  Fifteenfo’ld  ; .^e  Xil.  4 ; XIV  22. 

25  Set/jfuciasa ; Seventeenfold.  See  XIII.  56.  Vairdpa:  a Saman.  See 
X.  12. 

26  Ribhns  : three  artificers  of  ancient  time  whose  wondrous  skill  and 
workminship  obtained  for  them  iinmort.ility  and  a pi. ice  among  the  GoiD 
They  are  usually  invoked  with  Indr.i.  Ekaviipsa  : having  twoiity-one  verats 
or  parts.  See  XIII.  57  ; XIV.  23.  Vainiju:  See  XIII.  57. 

27  Sakvaris:  metres  consisting  of  seven  feet. 


2S  With  Dew-time  may  the  deathless  Gods  praised  in  tike 
Thirty-three-part  laud, 

The  Revatis,  with  truth  give  sway  to  Iiidra,  sacrifice  and 
life. 

29  Let  the  Hotar  sacrifice  with  fuel  to  Amii  in  the  place  of 
libation,  to  the  Asvins,  Lidra,  Sarasvat^  A grey -colour- 
ed he-goat  wirh  wheat,  jnjii  )e-friiit  and  sprouts  of  nee 
becomes  a sweet  salutary  remedy,  splendour,  might,  milk, 
Soma.  Let  them  enjoy  sweet  butter  with  foaming  luiuor. 
Hotar,  present  offerings  of  butter. 

39  Let  the  Hotar,  'ranunapit,  worship  Sir.isvati  A sheep, 
a ram,  a salutary  remedy  on  the  honey-sweet  patli,  bear- 
ing to  the  Asvins  and  Indra  heroic  streiurth,  with  jnjnbe- 
frnit,  Indr  i-graiiis,  sprouts  of  rice,  becomes  a salutury 
remedy,  milk,  Soma.  Let  them  enjoy,  etc.,  as  in  verse  29 

31  Let  the  Flotar  worship  N.uaSinisa  and  the  Ijord  Nagnahn. 

A ram  with  Sura  a salutary  remedy,  Sirasv.iti  the  Physi- 
cian, the  golden  car  of  the  Asviiis,  the  victim’s  omentum, 
with  jujube-fruit,  Iiidra-grams,  and  rice-sprouts,  become 
a salutary  remedy,  the  manly  strongtli  of  Indra,  milk, 
Soma.  Let  them,  etc. 

32  Let  the  Hotar,  magnified  with  oblitions,  offering  sacrifice, 

worship  Sarasvati  and  Indra,  increasing  them  with 
strength,  with  a bull  and  a cow.  Strength  and  mediemo 
to  the  Asvins  and  Indra  are  meath  with  jnjnbe-friiit, 
Masara  with  parched  gram,  milk,  Soma.  Let  them,  etc. 

33  Lot  the  Hotar  worship  the  wool-soft  Altar-gras.s,  the  lMi\>i- 

cians  Njlsatyas,  the  Physicians  Aevins.  A mare  with  a 
foal,  a milch-cow  is  a physician.  Saiasvati  the  Physician 
yields  medicine  to  Indra,  milk.  Soma.  Lot  them  enjoy,  etc. 


28  Dew  tim  : see  11.  32  ; X 14  llmitU  • the  name  of  a ver^e  (11.  V I 
30.  13)  begiiiiimg  with  this  word,  which  is  called  the  womb  or  oiigm  of  the 
Itaivata  Saman, 

29  Let  the  LMav  : the  divine  Hotar,  the  exemplar  to  be  followed  by  Ins 

counterpart  on  earth  present  offerings  ■ the  human  priest  is  ml- 

divssed. 

30  Tundmpit.-  According  to  Mahl.llmra,  the  nom  iwtive  c.-.h-ms  used  in 
the  8.ni,se  of  the  accusative  : worship,  or  .‘jaciitice  or  say  tlie  oHering-piaj  f r 
to,  TannnapU.  Mi/k,^ionia-  Mahidhara  take.s  these  nominatives  as  accusa- 
tives, supplying  ‘ let  them  drink,’  or  ‘ let  them 

31  Nar/nahu:  the  drug  used  to  foment  tin*  Snri.  Malii.lhaia  turns. 
Sarasvati  ami  rat/iah,  car,  bt.th  nominatives,  into  accHatives. 

33  A mare,  etc. : witli  reference  to  the  horses  givju  as  fees  to  the  piiists. 


TUE  TEXTS  OF  TIIF 


[BOOK  XU 


'ZQ(J 


3t  Let  the  Hotar  worship  the  Doors,  the  Regions,  the  resound- 
iiii/,  expansive  Doors,  the  Regions,  with  the  A^ins.  Indra 
milks  the  two  milky  worlds.  The  Milch-cow  Saraavati 
yields  medicine  for  the  Asvins  and  Indra,  pure  light  and 
strength.  Milk,  Soma.  Let  them,  etc. 

35  Let  the  Hotar  worship  the  two  fair-formed  Dawns.  At 
night  and  by  day  the  Asvins  with  Sarasvati  compose  im- 
petuous power,  like  healing  balm,  in  Indra,  like  a falcon, 
Misara  with  light,  thought,  and  grace.  Milk,  Soma.  Let 
them  enjoy,  etc. 

35  Let  the  Hotar  worship  the  two  divine  Hotars,  the  Physician 
Asvins,  and  Indra.  Watchfully  by  day  and  night  Saras- 
vati  as  Physician,  with  balms,  with  lead,  yields  strength 
and  power.  Milk,  Soma.  Let  them  enjoy,  etc. 

37  Let  the  Hotar  worship  the  three  Goddesses.  The  throe  active 
ones,  With  three  sacrificial  elements,  lay  balm  and  golden 
hue  on  Indra.  The  Asvins,  Idi,  Bhai’ati — Sarasvati  with 
Speech  yields  might  and  power  to  Indra.  .Mil.,  Soma. 
Let  them  enjoy,  etc. 

33  Let  the  Hotar  worship  Tvashbir  full  of  good  seed,  the  Bull 
active  for  men,  Imira,  the  Asvins,  Sarasvati  the  Phy>i- 
cian.  Vigour,  speed,  power,  a fierce  wolf  as  physieiau, 
fame  with  Sura  is  a medicine,  Masara  with  grace.  Mdk, 
Soma  Let  them  enjoy,  etc. 

33  Let  the  Hotar  worship  Vanaspati  the  Immolator.  the  Lord 
of  Hundred  Powers,  and  awful  Passion,  the  King,  the 
Tiger,  and  the  Asvins,  with  reverence.  Sansvatl  the 
Phy.'sieiiin  yields  wrath  and  power  to  Indra.  Milk,  Soma. 
Let  them  enjoy,  etc. 


34  'fZ/e  that  is,  ktio  I>v)rs  of  the  s^ciificul  hall  which  .are  .is 

expansive  as  the  Quaiters  of  the  .sky. 

35  Dawiif  • Morning  and  Night. 

3f>  With  Imd:  supernatuiMl  virtues  areasciibed  to  this  nriet.il.  See  A.  V. 
I 16  2,  4 ; XII  2 1,  19  2e,  53 

37  Three.  0 Hllc'isa : of  saciitioo  and  prayer,  Sarasv.itt  Id  I,'  Bhiiail. 
IViree  active  one<^  • th^^  gut  the  r-nn.  and  the  null  which  are  otterol  re'<[iec- 
tively  to  tlirt  Asyiin,  Saiasvali.  and  India  Three  sacrijidal  etemenU:  con- 
stituting chief  offerings,  ..secondary  otforing-*,  rtud  by-otferings  with  diSerent 
pat  ts  of  their  bodie.s. 

3^  Full  of  (foil  SPC'I  • as  the  prolific  creator  of  all  forms  of  living  hciine!. 
Wolf:  with  reference  to  the  wolt’a  hair  mixed  with  the  Su*  a.  See  XI X. 
9,  note. 

39  Lord  of  Hundred  Poxurs:  ludra.  Tiger:  the  exemplar  of  royalty, 
Indra. 


XER^t.  40.  j 


yytiiih  lAJiRVEDA. 


201 


^0  Let  the  Hotar  worship  Agni.  Of  the  drops  of  clai  ified  bolter, 
Svaha ! Of  the  fat,  omentum,  etc,  severally.  Svaha  ' 
Svaha  ! the  goat  for  the  Asvins.  Svaha  ! the  ram  foriVxrns- 
vati.  Svaha  the  bull  forludra.  To  the  Lion,  to  his  might, 
power.  Svaha  ! Agni  the  salutary  remedy.  Svaha  ! Soma, 
the  power.  Svaha  I Tndra  the  (lood  Deliverer.  Ssvitar, 
Varuiia  Lord  of  Physicians.  Svfiha  ! Vaimspati,  beloved, 
food  and  medicine.  Sv-iha  ! Gods  who  diink  clanhed 
butter.  Agni  accepting  the  medicine.  Milk,  Soma. 
Let  them  enjoy,  etc. 

41  L>.'t  the  Hotar  worship  the  Asvins  with  the  omentum  of  a 

he-goat.  Let  them  enjoy  the  fat.  Hot.ir,  otfer  the  saeri- 
ficial  oblation. 

Let  the  Hotar  worship  S.irasvati  with  the  omentum  of  a 
ram.  Let  her  enjoy  the  fat.  Ilofcar  offbr  the  sacnhtml 
oblation. 

Let  the  Hotar  worship  Indra  with  the  omentum  of  a bull. 
Let  him,  etc. 

42  Let  the  Hofrar  worship  tho  Asvins,  .Sanisv.itg  Indra  the 

(iood  Duliverer.  I’hcso  your  Soma'*,  p^e^8ed,  rejoicing 
with  gouts,  rams,  bulls,  giving  pleaaure  with  rice-shoots„ 
young  blades  of  corn,  p.irohed  gram,  joy-givers  adv>r3ed 
with  Masiiia,  bright,  milky,  immortal,  pK’scntel,  drop- 
ping honey,  these  let  the  Asvins,  Sarasvati,  Indra  tSo 
D'ood  Deliveior,  Vritra-slayer,  accept.  Let  them  drink, 
re|oice  in,  enjoy  the  Soma  meath.  Hotar,  s.ictilice. 

43  Let  the  Hotel*  worship  the  Asvins.  Ijet  them  eat  ot  tlio  ho- 

goat,  the  sacrifice.  1/et  them  to-day  eat  the  fit,  taken 
from  the  middle,  before  tho.se  who  hate  us,  }>efore  huiMaa 
liaiidiiug  Yea,  let  them  oat  amid  the  fodder  of  iields 
Lesh  with  rnooituie,  wuh  their  cxp-inse  ot  bailey,  lnnh> 
of  those  tasted  by  Agni,  belonging  to  the  Ifundrci  I’/idra-*, 
})0itionH  covered  with  fat,  from  the  sides,  from  the 
from  the  fore-feet  from  the  chin*.  Fimn  every  meod.cr 
of  the  divided  nctims  thc.se  two  make  their  repast,  h inis 
let  the  Aoviiis  accept,  Hotar,  offer  the saciificial  oblatioo. 


The  Lion  • InJra. 

43  Bffove  those  who  hate  us  ■ before  the  A.s'oas  .md  nuiliii  'in  It, 'll  .sH.i.s.h 
^‘iiry  oft  the  sacnHciiil  fift’rings.  Fie/d.y;  luetaphoncMlIy,  f"r  wi-ll  utm- 
ndied  litnba  of  the  victims  Tasted  hy  Aqni : wheu  roasting  for  Hiicrilic- 
Te!orufh,g  to  the  Hand  ed  Rudras  • th.it  is,  to  Kiuba,  Lord  of  C.ittle  in  his 
inanifold  manift\sUtions  (XVL,  introd.ictoiy  note.  ; accordinii;  to  M'M  lln- 
landed  with  many  texts  ; rudra  meaning  ‘ praiser  accuidiug  to  \.isk», 

h'lghantus,  3.  16. 


202  THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  XXl 

44  Let  the  Hotar  worship  Sarasvati.  Let  her  approach  the  ram, 

the  sacrifice. 

To-day  let  her  eat,  etc.,  the  rest  of  verse  13  repeated  mutaU 
mutandis, 

45  Let  the  Hotar  worship  Indra,  etc.,  as  in  44  mutatis  mutandis. 

46  Let  the  ilotar  worship  Vaiuspati.  Ho  has  held  with  a very 

well  formed  and  very  strong  rope.  I'here  where  thofavoa- 
rite' stations  of  the  Asvinsare.  of  the  he-goat  the  sacrifict*, 
of  Sarasvati,  of  the  lani  the  sacritice  ^ of  India,  of  the 
bull  the  sacrifice ; there  where  the  favourite  stations  of 
Agni  are,  of  Soma,  of  Indra  the  Good  Deliverer,  of  Savi- 
tar,  of  Vanina,  the  favourite  places  of  Vaiiaspati,  thu 
favourite  stations  of  Gods  who  drink  clarified  butter,  and 
of  Agni  the  Hotar,  there  let  him  arrange  these  victims 
when  he  has  praised  and  lauded  them,  and  perform  whmi 
he  has  made  them  very  strong.  Let  divine  Yauaspati 
accept.  Hotar,  offer  oblation. 

47  Let  the  Hotar  worship  Agni  Svishtakrit.  Let  Agni  worship 

the  favourite  stations  of  the  Asvins,  of  the  he-goat  the 
sacrifice  ; of  Sarasvat\  of  the  ram  the  sacrifice  of  Lidr.i, 
of  the  bull  the  sacrifice  j there,  etc.,  to  ‘butter  as  in  46 
Let  him  worship  the  favourite  stations  of  Agni  the  Hotai. 
Let  him  worship  his  own  m.ijcsty.  Let  him  win  for  hiinst  .f 
by  sacrifice  food  worthy  of  sacrifice.  Let  him,  Knower  "f 
Huings,  perform  the  sacred  rites.  Lot  him  accept  the 
sacrificial  food.  Hotar,  offer  oblation. 

48  The  Grass  divine,  for  the  right  Gods,  Sarasv.iti,  the  Asvins 

Twain, 

Give  Indra  splendour,  with  the  GraS'i,  sight  of  his  eyes  and 
mighty  strength!  For  gun  of  wealth  let  thorn  enjoy 
Thou,  Hot.ir,  otter  sacrifice. 

49  The  Djors,  the  Doors  divine,  the  Two  Asvins,  Leecln', 

Sarasvati  — 

May  they  give  breath  to  Indra  in  his  nostrils,  and  heroic 
strength. 

For  gam  of  wealth,  etc.,  as  in  verse  48. 


46  He  held;  tlie  victims.  This  is  Mahldhara’s  explanation  of  adhiui' 
Station dainties  Egy:eling 

47  Sinsk'aLrit.  M.i\er  of  Good  S .orifice  Worship  hhoion  nn}esty  ■ th.o 
ia,  tiling  it  to  iho  .sacrifice  In  several  of  the  preceding  Apii  verses  (30 
there  are  difficulties  and  obscurities,  and  Mafiidfiara’s  attempted  explau* 
tious  liy  turning  nominatives  into  accusatives,  etc.  are  futile. 


XER^t,  oy.J 


WHITE  TAJrRVEDA. 


203 


May  Diiwn  and  Night,  the  Goddosaes,  both  Asvma,  and 
Saras  vati 

Lay,  with  both  D.iwns,  strength,  voice  within  India  the 
Good  Deliverer’s  mouth. 

For  gam  of  wealth,  etc. 

B >th  anrsiiig  G >dde8se5,  the  P.iir  oi’  Asvina,  and  Sirasvati 
Have  with  both  nurses  given  strength  to  indra,  fame,  and 
power  to  hear. 

For  gain  of  wealth,  etc. 

Briiigers  of  strengthening  sacrifice,  both  Goddesses,  well- 
yielding  cows, 

S.irasvati,  both  Asviris,  the  Physicians,  tliesc  are  Indr.i’s 
guards. 

Forth  from  their  breasts  by  sacrifice  they  give  liim  bnlliant 
light  and  power. 

Fur  gain  of  wealth,  etc. 

5o  Both  Gods,  the  Hotars  of  the  Gods,  the  Asvins  the  Phy- 
siiuans  and 

SaiMsvati  with  Vashat-calls,  with  the  two  Hotars  have  bes- 
towed on  Indra  brilliant  light  and  power,  and  jilaiitoil 
wisdom  in  his  heart. 

For  gain  of  weath,  etc. 

H Goddesses  three,  tliree  Goddesses— Asvins,  Tdi,  Sarasvati 
in  Indra’s  midinost  navel  have  laid  stole  of  energy  and 
power. 

For  gain  of  wealth,  etc. 

^0  God  Narasamsa,  Indra  thrice-protecting,  whose  car  moves 
by  Sarasvati  and  Asvins  - 

Miy  Tvaslitar  lay  seed,  deathless  form  in  Indra,  a fitting 
place  of  birth  and  mighty  powers 
For  gain  of  wealth,  etc. 

God  with  the  Gods,  Vaiiaspati  of  golden  leaves  and  goodly 
fruit 

Ripens  till  Indra  finds  it  sweet,  with  Asvins  and  S.irasv.iti. 

>7  Strewn,  soft  as  wool,  in  sacrifice,  with  Asvins  and  Sarasvati, 
The  sacred  robe  of  wa'^er-plaiits  be,  Indr.i,  a fair  seat  lor  thoo  ! 
Together  with  the  sacred  grass  may  they,  tor  sovranty,  bes- 
tow King  P.ission  and  great  power  on  thee. 

For  gain  of  wealth,  etc. 

Both  nursiuj  Goih/rases . Heaven  and  Earth,  pr  Day  and  Night. 

54  Barmvati:  and  Bhlrati,  underistood. 

I 5?  Robe  of  water -plants  mixed  witii  the  oarhir.  or  altar  covering  of  giasH. 
r'l'/  Passion:  see  verso  39.  Mahidhaia  explain.-!  |•dJdnala  by  clrpyanniyiamf 
Lniug. 


204 


WUITH  lAJLKVhVA, 


launiv  A XI 


58  Let  the  God  Agni  Svishtokrit  worship  the  Gods  as  is  meet 

and  right  for  each,  the  two  Hotars,  Indra,  the  Asvins, 
V&k  with  speech,  Saras vati,  A'jfiii,  Soma.  Svishtaknt 
has  been  well  worshipped,  Indra  Good  Deliverer,  S.ivitar, 
Vai  una  the  Physician  have  been  worshipped.  The  Gud 
Van.ispati.  the  Gods  who  drink  clarified  butter  have  been 
well  worshipped,  Agni  by  Agni.  Let  the  Hotar  Sviglitv 
krit  give  the  Hotar  fame,  groat  power,  energy,  honour, 
Ancestral  libation. 

59  To-day  this  Sacrificer  cooking  viands,  cooking  sacrificial 

rice-cakes,  binding  a goat  for  the  Asvins,  a rain  for  Sar.'^ 
vati,  a bull  for  Indra,  pressing  Sura  and  Soma  juices  for 
the  Asvins,  Sarasvatl,  and  Indra  the  Good  Deliverer,  has 
chosen  Agni  as  Hotar. 

60  To-day  the  divine  Vanaspati  has  done  good  service  to  the 

Asvins  with  a goat,  to  Sarasvati  with  a ram,  to  Lidni 
with  a bull.  They  have  e.iten  these  from  the  marrow 
onwards,  they  have  accepted  the  cooked  viands,  they  hafe 
waxed  strong  with  the  rice-cakes,  'fhe  Agnis,  Sar.isv&ti, 
and  Indra  have  drunk  the  Sura  and  Soma  draughts. 

61  Thee,  to-day,  ORishi,  Rishi’sson,  descendant  of  Rishis,  hatl; 

this  Sacrificer  chosen  for  many  collected,  saying:  llio 
(Agni)  shall  win  by  sacrifice  for  me  choice-worthy  tica 
snres  among  the  Gods.  0 God,  what  gifts  the  (lods  h.i\t 
given,  these  do  thou  desire  and  apjirove.  And  thou  nrl 
a commissioned  Hotar,  a human  H >tar  sent  torward  f i 
benediction,  for  good  speech.  Speak  thou  gooil  words. 


61  0 RItki:  the  E-otnr,  representaiive  of  .\gni  the  diriue  Hotar,  is  ivl 
dressed.  For  many . asst^mbled  Gods.  0 God : Agni. 


BOOK  THE  TWENTY-SECOND. 


Splendour  art  thou,  bright,  deathless,  life-protector.  Pro- 
tector of  my  life  be  thou. 

By  impulse  of  God  Savitar  I take  theo  with  arms  of  Asrins, 
with  the  hands  of  Pushan. 

2 This  girdle,  which  in  their  religious  meetings  sages  assum- 

ed in  earlier  time  of  worship, 

Is  present  with  us  here  at  this  libation,  in  the  Lp^vv’s  hymn, 
proclaiming  rich  abundance. 

3 Ffiinous  art  thou,  thou  art  the  world,  coniroller  aiui  up- 

holder thou. 

Go,  consecrate  by  Svaha  to  Agni  Vaisvanara  widely-famed. 

4 For  Gods  and  for  Prajapati  1 fit  thee.  For  Gods  and  for 

Prajapati,  0 Brahman, 

Will  I tie  up  the  horse.  Thence  may  I ])ro«por!  Binding 
him  for  Prajapati  and  God.s  be  thou  successful. 

5 Thee  welcome  to  Pr.ijapati  1 sprinkle.  I sprinkle  thoe  wel- 

come to  Indra-Agni.  I sprinkle  thee  acceptable  to  VAvu. 
Thee  welcome  to  the  All-Gods  1 beoprinkle.  Thee  wel- 
come to  all  Deities  I sprinkle. 

With  fury  Varuna  attacks  the  man  who  fain  would  slay  the 
steed. 

Avaunt  the  man  ! Avaunt  the  dog  ! 

B'l'ika  XXII — XXV.  contain  tlie  formulas  of  the  Asvamedlm  or  Horne- 
cacritiOf',  a very  ancient  and  most  important  ceremony  wliicii  onl^r  a King 
can  perform.  Us  object  is  the  acquiHitiou  of  power  ami  gloi} , acknowledged 
}iie(  lamence  t)ver  neighbouring  pniices,  and  the  general  pio.sjxMity  of  the 
kingdom  by  the  fuliiliuent  of  the  wUhes  expressed  in  verse  22  of  this  JJook 

1 The  Adlivaryu  ties  an  ornament  of  gold,  perhaps  a chain,  round  the  neck 

of  the  Sacrificer,  and  makes  him  recite  the  formula.  Thon  • he  addi crises 
the  ornament.  Deathless  • as  a symbol  of  tlie  8uri,  and  identified  with  light 
( 17  ),  or,  accoiding  to  Maiudhaia,  because  gold  confers  iininortality  by 

being  presenteil  to  the  priests  Bii  itnjmlse,  etc  ■ lepea ted  from  I 10  Thee 

rasaitd,  giidle,  or  girth  of  Darbhagiass,  thiiteen  ells  in  length,  with  vvhicli 
the  sacrificial  horse  is  to  be  girded. 

2 In  the  Law’s  hymn  ; when  the  Saman  of  sacrifice  is  chanted. 

He  girds  and  addresses  the  liorse 

^ I jit : svagA,  an  indeclinable  saciificial  word,  Good-speed  ! and  karomi, 
f make  or  prepare,  understood. 

5 He  sprinkles  the  horse  in  standing  water  With  fury  etc  ■ he  threatens 

man  who  kills  the  horse,  and  so  prevents  the  saciifice,  with  the  vengeance 
"f  the  royal  Varuna,  and  a dog  is  killed  { to  indicate  the  punishment  of  the 
^iQuer  ] by  a low  caste  man,  the  son  of  a Sudra  by  a Vaisyft  woman. 


206 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


{BUUK  JLX.ll 


6 To  Agni  Hail ! To  Soma  Hail!  Hail  to  the  Waters’  Joy!  Hail 

to  Savitar  1 Hail  to  Vayn  ! Hail  to  Vi'shnul  Hail  to  Iiulra' 
Hail  to  Biihaspati  ! Hail  to  Mitra  I Hail  to  Varuna  I 

7 Hail  to  the  sound  hin  ! Hail  to  the  uttered  hiii  ! Hail  to 

the  neigh!  Hail  to  the  down-ncigh ! Hail  to  the  siioit! 
Hail  to  the  roar  ! Hail  to  his  smell ! Hail  to  him  smelt 
at ! Hail  to  him  seated  ! Hail  to  him  seated  down  ! linl 
to  him  weary  ! Hail  to  him  going  ! Hail  to  him  sittini,^! 
Hail  to  him  lying!  Hail  to  him  sleeping!  Hail  to  him 
waking  ! Hail  to  him  whinnying  ! Hail  to  him  wakened' 
Hail  to  him  yawning  ! Hail  to  him  outstretched  ! Hail  to 
him  drawn  together!  Hail  to  him  risen!  Hail  to  his 
going  ! Hail  to  his  good  going  ! Hail ! 

8 Hail  to  him  as  he  goes  ! Hail  to  him  running  ! Hail  to  him 

running  away  ! Hail  to  him  when  he  has  run  aw.iy ' 
Hall  to  the  cry  Shoo!  Hail  to  him  scared  with  Shoo' 
Hail  to  him  seated  ! Hail  to  him  risen  I Hail  to  his 
speed  ! Hail  to  his  strength  ! Hail  to  him  rolling  ! Hail 
to  him  when  he  has  rolled  ! Hail  to  him  tossing  about ' 
Hail  to  him  when  he  has  tossed  about!  Hail  to  him 
listeuing!  Hail  to  him  hearing.  Hail  to  him  lookiii^it| 
Hail  to  him  looked  at!  Hail  to  him  closely  looked  at: 
Hail  to  his  closing  his  eye  ! Hail  to  his  food ! Had  to 
his  drink ! Hail  to  his  stale ! Hail  to  him  in  action ' 
Hail  to  what  he  has  done  ! 

9 Hay  we  attain  tliat  excellent  glory  of  Savitar  the  God  : 

So  may  he  stimulate  our  prayers. 

10  Fov  our  protection  I invoke  the  golden-handed  Savitar  : 

He  knoweth,  as  a God,  the  place. 

11  We  specially  invoke  the  grace  of  Savitar,  observant  God, 
The  great  good-will  that  gives  true  boons. 

1 2 We  seek  the  eulogy  and  gift  of  Savitar  who  strengthens  giMCC, 
Yea,  of  the  God  who  knows  our  thoughts. 

13  1 invocate  the  heroes’  Lord,  free-giving  Savitar,  and  call 
The  Cheerer  to  the  feast  of  Gods. 


6 The  horae  is  led  back  to  the  sacrificial  fire,  and  ten  obLttions  of  elnnhe' 
butter  are  offered,  with  their  respective  formulas  to  the  deities  mentions 
TIu  Waters'  Joy : Soma  who  delights  the  waters  witli  which  he  is  spt.ni 

7 He  offers  an  oblati-m  iu  the  Southern  fire.  Ihh : onomatopoetic  , 

horse’s  low  neigh  or  whinny  : originally,  the  syllable  to  be  uttered,  or  n- 
gound  to  be  m.ide  in  reciting  S&ma  hymns.  , . t)  f nb 

9 Six  verses  follow  constituting  the  Inviting  and  Offering  Pravers  of 
iJious  presented  to  Savitar.  The  first  verse  i 

Glvatrt Lr  excellence,  repeated  from  III.  35,  and  taken  from  R.  V.  Ill  fi- 
ll) Taken  from  R.  V.  I,  22.  5. 


a The  judgment  of  bright  Savitar,  that  cheers  the  All-Gods’ 
coujpauy, 

With  pra_yer  wo  estimate  as  Idiss. 

[5  Wake  Agui  with  thy  kud  and  set  the  Immortal  One  aflame, 
let  him  ’ 

Bestow  our  otferings  on  the  Gods. 

16  Ooktioii-bearer,  well-iiicliiied,  immortal,  eager  Messeix^'r 

Agui  comes  near  us  with  tlic  thought.  ^ 

J Agui,  Envoy,  1 place  in  frout,  the  obktiou-beurer  1 address ; 
Here  let  him  seat  the  Deities. 

,8  Yea,  Pavamaua,  thou  didst  generate  the  Sun  and  spread 
the  moisture  out  with  power, 

Hasting  to  us  with  plenty  vivitied  with  milk. 

9 Mighty  through  thy  dam,  eminent  thioimh  thy  sire,  tlioii 

art  a horse,  thou  art  a steed,  thou  uit  a courser,  thou 
alt  a comfort,  thou  art  a racer,  thou  art  a yoke  horse 
thou  art  a strong  steed,  Mioii  art  a stallion,  thou  art 
manly-minded  Thou  art  called  Yayu,  thou  art  called 
SiSLi.  Follow  thou  the  flight  of  the  Adityas 
Gods,  Warders  of  the  Kcgions,  protect  for  the  Gods  this 
horse  besprinkled  for  saciifiee. 

, Here  is  delight.  Hero  take  thy  pleasure.  Hero  is  c(»ntent. 

1 Here  is  self  content. 

lo  Hiiil  to  Ka!  Hail  to  Whol!  Hail  to  Which  ? ! Hail  to 
him  who  has  expeiienccd  [lain  ! Hail  to  Bnijapati  who 
knows  the  mind!  Hail  to  him  who  discerns  tio*  thought  ' 

I.*!  Three  Inviting  Verses  to  Agni  follow 

ll)  Taken  from  R.  V.  ill  11.  2.  Wdk  the  IImikjIU-  when  we  think  of, 
r piav  to,  him. 

17  Taken  from  R V.  VIH.  44  3.  Place  in  frout:  for  adoratKai. 

18  Taken  from  U V,  IX.  110  3 Piaiseaii'l  piayer  addre-setl  Ot  Xoina. 

10  The  Atihvaryu  and  the  Sactilicer  whisper  the  loimuia  in  the  liiPihc’s 
e.ir.  Then  the  horse  (who  must  be  more  th.in  twenty  fmir,  and  h'hs 

tiiui  a liiindred  years  old  ) is  loosed  tow.mls  the  North  cast  to  wande;  fiH! 
h yo.ir  ( or  for  half  a year  or  a still  .shortoi  tune  aeeorduig  to  .some  ant  lio 
),  a.s  a sign  that  his  ma.stei’.s  p.iramount  sovereignty  is  aeknowledg(‘-l 
f all  neighbouring  piinces.  The  wandering  liorse  is  Httemhd  by  a liundj  v i 
aiig  men,  sons  of  princes  or  high  Court  ottiiial.s,  aimed  with  all  sojIh  (,f 
fill  e weapon.s,  who  are  to  watch  and  guard  him  fioru  all  d.ingeis  and  in- 
iivenience.  lluring  the  ahsenee  of  the  hoi. se  an  nnintcrniptcd  senes  i f 
'-^eiiited  ceremonies  is  performed  at  the  .S.icnheei’s  home. 
y>syii-  meaning  Goer  or  .Sacrificial.  Stsu:  or  Colt  ; u enplicminin  for  a 
of  Somewhat  mature  agr*. 

Oblations  are  offered  and  homage  is  paid  to  various  Iieilies.  Ka  .. 
hui  Which  I : Prajapati.  .Seel  6,  note.  Of  the  hufhv'ny  9 : Pushan  as  a 
G id  is  guardian  of  road.s  and  guide  of  travelleis.'  Mavy  f<n  niif  ol  li  vii.g 
"ig-i  created  by  him  Nibhhyapa.  the  oiigin  and  meaning  of  fin;  woxi 
* unknown.  Accordinij  to  Mahtdhara  the  title  mc.ins  Presei  ver  by  means 
his  repeated  incarnations  of  the  Fish,  the  I'oitoise,  etc.  SipivislUu. 
'duii  title  of  unceitaiu  me  mug.  See  XVT.  note. 


2^8 


TliS  ThAlts  ur  laa 


Hail  to  Aditi ! Hail  to  good  Aditi ! Hail  to  gracious 
A'iil^!  Hail  to  Sarasvati  1 H ul  to  purifying  Sarasvati! 
Hail  to  great  Sarasvati ! Hail  to  Pushan ! Hail  to 
PtAshan  of  the  highways  ! Hail  to  Phshan  observer  d 
men!  Hail  to  Tvashtar ! Hail  to  swift  Tvashtar  ! Hail 
to  Tvashtar  of  many  forms ! Hail  to  Vislmu  ! Hail  to 
Vishnu  Nibhuyapa  ! Hail  to  Vishnu  SipivishU  I 

21  Let  every  mortal  man  elect,  etc.,  repeated  from  iV.  8. 

22  0 Brahmau,  let  there  be  born  in  the  kingdom  the  Brahman 

illustrious  for  religious  knowledge  ; let  there  be  born  the 
llajanya,  heroic,  skilled  archer,  piercing  with  shafts, 
mighty  warrior;  the  cow  giving  abundant  milk  ; the 
good  at  carrying;  the  swift  courser;  the  indimtrmus 
woman.  May  Parjanya  send  rain  according  to  our  demi?, 
may  our  fruit-he.iriug  plants  ripen  ; mav  acquisition  anl 
preservation  of  property  be  secured  to  ns. 

23  Hail  to  vital  breath  ! Hail  to  out-breathiiig  ! Kail  to  dif 

fusive  breath!  Hail  to  the  eye!  Hail  to  the  ear! 
to  Speech  ! Hail  to  Mind  ! , ■ 

04  Hail  to  the  Kastern  Region!  Hail  to  the  hitherward  Region 
Hail  to  the  Southern  Region  ! Hail  to  the  hitherwnri 
Ecnoii!  Hail  to  the  Western  Kegioii ! Hail  to  tli 
hitLi-ward  R -jiinn  ! Hail  to  the  Nnrtlieni  Region  ! Hi.i 
to  the  hitherward  Region  ! Hail  to  the  Upward  Reg.oa' 
Hail  to  the  hitherwaid  Region  ! Hail  to  the  Dowuwiirl 
Region  ! Hail  to  the  hitherward  Region  ! . „ , 

03  Hail 'to  waters!  Hail  to  floods!  Hai!  to  water  I Had  U 
" standing  waters!  Hail  to  flowing  waters!  Hail  to  trickin; 
waters!  Had  to  well  waters!  Hail  to  spring  waters!  Hr; 
to  the  foaming  sea!  Had  to  the  ocean!  Hail  to  the  deep 

26  Hail  to  wind!  Hail  to  mist!  Had  to  vapour  ! Hail  t- 

cloud  ’ Hail  to  cloud  lightening  1 Hdil  to  cloud  thund'r 
inev ! Hail  to  it  bursting  ! Had  to  it  raining  ! Had  to  i: 
nonring  ! Hail  to  it  violently  raining  ! Had  to  it  swifrlj 
1-ainin^.  Hail  to  it  holding  up  ! Hail  to  it  when  it  hr 
held  up  ! Hail  to  it  sprinkling  I Hail  to  it  driszling ! Hr 
to  its  drops!  Hail  to  thmiderboits  ! Hail  to  hoar  trosh 

27  Hail  to  Agni ! Hail  to  Soma ! Hail  to  Iiidra  ! Hail  to  Km h 

Hail  to  Firmament ! Hail  to  Sky  ! Hail  to  Regions  1 I r 
to  Quarters  ! Hail  to  the  Upward  Region  I Hail  to  ti. 

Downward  Region  ! . 

” 02  ThTA^varyu  whispers  to  the  Brahman  priest  the  blessings  aaI*' 
the  King  hopes  the  sacrifice  will  secure  to  his  kingdom.  . 

2a  The  remaining  verses  of  this  Book  contain  formulas  af  h c- 
variouraods  and  nftni-al  and  terrestrial  objects,  accompanying  the  I'l  ' 
tation  of  oblations  made  of  various  materials. 


28  Hail  to  the  lunar  asteriems  ! Hail  to  those  connected  with 

the  lunar  asteriams  ! Hail  to  Day  and  Night  ! Hail  to 
the  halt-months  ! Hail  to  the  months  ! Hail^o  tlie  Sea- 
sons ! Hail  to  the  Season-gronjis ! Hail  to  the  Year ! 
Hail  to  Heaven  and  Earth  ! Hail  to  the  Moon  ! Hail  to 

the  Sun  ! Hail  to  hia  rays!  Hail  to  the  Vasus ! Hail  to 

the  Hiidras  I Hail  to  the  Adityas ! Hail  to  the  Manus  ! 
Hail  to  the  All-Gods ! Hail  to  loots!  Hail  to  branches! 

Hail  to  forest  trees  ! Hail  to  flowers  ! Hail  to  fruits  ' 

Hail  to  herbs ! 

29  Hail  to  Earth  ! Hail  to  Firmament!  Hail  to  Sky  ! Hail  to 

Sun  ! Hail  to  Moon  ! Hail  to  lunar  asterisms ! Hail  to 
waters!  Hail  to  herbs!  Hail  to  forest  trees!  Hail  to  crea- 
tures that  swim  ! Hail  to  tilings  moving  and  stationaiy  1 
Hail  to  things  that  creep  and  crawl ! 

30  Hail  to  breath!  Hail  to  the  Vasu  ! Hail  to  the  Mighty! 

Hail  to  Vivasvaii  ! Had  to  the  trooping  one!  Jlml  to 
the  Troop’s  Lord!  Hail  to  the  Snjierior ! Hull  to  tlio 
Overlord!  Hail  to  Strength!  Hail  to  Samsarpa  ! 11. ul 
to  the  Moon!  Hail  to  light ! Hail  to  Malimlucha  ! Hail 
to  him  who  flies  by  day  ! 

31  Hail  to  Madhu  ! H<iil  to  Madhava  ! Hail  to  Sukra  ! Hail  to 

Suchi ! Hail  to  Nablias  ! Hail  to  Naldiasya!  Hail  to  Islia' 
Hail  to  Crja  1 Hail  to  Sahas  ! Hail  to  Sahasya  ! Hail  to 
Tapas  ! Hail  to  Tapasya  1 Hail  to  Ainhasaspati  ! 

32  Hail  to  Strength!  Hail  to  impulse ! •Hail  to  After-horn! 

Hail  to  will!  Heaven,  Hail!  Hail  to  the  head!  Hail  to 
Vyasnuvin!  To  the  final,  Hail!  Hail  to  the  mundane 
final ! Hail  to  the  Lord  of  the  world  ! Hail  to  the  Over- 
lord ! Hail  to  the  Lord  of  Creatures  ! 

33  May  life  succeed  by  sacrifice,  Hail!  May  breath  snoccc'd 

by  sacrifice,  Hail!  May  downward  breath,  dillnsivo 
breath,  upwaid  breath,  digestive  hiealh,  vision,  lieanng, 
speech,  mind,  self,  devotion,  light,  hea\on,  liymn-ai range 

ment,  sacrifice  succeed  by  saciiHce.  All-liaili 

34  Hail  to  One!  Hail  to  Two!  Hail  to  Hundred  .Had  to 

Hundred-and-Onc  ! Hail  to  Day’oreak  ! Hail  to  Heaven 


VMn  : the  Bright  Ooe  ; tho  Sun  Thctroojdn.j 
^ruts.  The  Troop's  Lord:  India.  an  inteicaU.y  inonlli 


30 

of  Manits.  The  Troop.- - - 

Malimlucha  : another  n.nne  of  tlie  inteical.uy  month. 

31  Tbi.ver«cm,tain.«a,„e,„f  th.  m.mtl,,;  “ "f 'vl.  cb  t «vo  r . 1 

m earlier  Books.  See  VU  3«,  uoto.  .ImWvaU.  Lord  of  l.ouble  , the 
Genius  of  the  intercalary  month.  See  V 11  3 • ^ Vii(i»nnrin  a 

32  After-born:  the  intercalary  month  Cp.  11  V I f ^ * 

Oeiuurt  of  food,  according  to Mahidhara.  lorthcies  o e - > I 

33  Cf.  IX  21. 

34  He  salutes  the  Genii  of  Numbers, 


BOOK  THE  TWENTY-THIRD. 


In  the  beginning  rose  Hiranyagarbha,  etc. 

2 Taken  upon  a Uise  art  thou.  I take  thee  welcomie  to  Pfajapati 
Thii  is  thy  place:  Siirya  thy  majesty. 

The  majesty  that  haa  accrued  to  thee  in  the  day,  in  a year, 
that  majesty  winch  has  accrued  in  the  wind,  in  the  tirma^ 
ment,  to  that  majesty  of  thine,  to  Prajapati^  to  the  Gods, 
All-liail ! 

8 Who  by  his  grandeur  hath  become  sole  Rider  of  all  tlic 
moving  world  that  breathes  and  slumbers  ; 

He  who  is  Sovran  of  these  men  and  cattle — what  God  shall 
we  adore  witli  our  oblation  ? 

4 Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  I take  thee  welcome  to  Praj^apati. 
This  is  thy  place:  the  Moon  thy  majesty. 

Tliv  majesty  that  has  accrued  to  thee  by  ni<glit,  hi  a year, 
thy  majesty  that  has  accrued  in  tlie  earth,  in  Agid,  in  the 
stare  and  in  the  Moon,  to  that  majesty  of  tldne,  to  Piaja- 
pati  and  to  the  Gods,  All-hail  ! 

5 They  wlm  stand  r.innd  him  as  he  moves  harness  tlm  bright, 

the  ruddy  Steed: 

The  lights  are  shining  in  tlie  sky. 

6 On  both  sides  to  the  car  they  yoke  the  two  Riy  Coursers 

dear  to  him, 

Bold,  tawny,  bearers  of  the  Chief. 

7 When,  swift  as  wind,  tlie  Horse  has  reached  the  form  that 

liktra  loves,  the  flood. 

Again,  0 singer,  by  this  path  bring  thou  oiir  Courser  hither- 
waid. 

Tlie  ceremoiii'es  suboeq-ueat  to  the  return  of  the  Horse  frora  his  wander- 
ings are  continued. 

1 I’iie  S^icriticcr  offers  two  oi  Oranckur  lib.ations,  so  caHed  fmm 

the  name  of  the  golden  vessels  in  which  tliey  a^e  pre^entotl,  and  recites  the 
text,  repeated  from  XIH.  4,  taken  fiorn  R.  V.  X.  1^1.  1.  fliruriyaqarhha 
the  Gold-Geim,  or  Golden  Child;  Praj.iiuti,  with  wliom,  the  Sacrihcial 
Horse  is  identified,  i 

2 Thoit,.  the  Clip.  Mnjesty : or  grMideur  ; mahimi : thy  grandeur  in  I'k® 
the  Sun’s. 

3 Taken  fiom  U V.  X 12>1.  R What  Goch^ ' other  than.  Prajapati.  Oc, 
according  to  Maliidhara  : Worship  we  Ka  the  God.  See  I.  6,  note. 

5 He  yoke.^  the  House  to  a gilded  chariot,  reciting  the  text  taken  from 
R.  V.  I.  6.  1. 

6 Three  other  horses  are  harnessed  to  the  same  chariot,  with  the  text 
from  R V.  I.  6.  2. 

7 TH  fiood : the  water  to  wljich  the  Horse  is  dj'iven  to  be  bathed. 


K/l/tO/i  lO.J 


ic  / a,/ C'/i  r /i//a. 


'^ll 


8 Let  the  Vasns  anoint  thco  with  Gayatii  metre.  Let  the 

Bndras  anoint  tliee  with  'I'rishtup  metre.  Let  tbe  Adityaa 
anoint  thee  with  Jagnti  metre.  Earth  ! Ether!  Heaven  I 
0 Gods,  eat  this  food,  parched  grains  and  groats  in  the 
product  of  barley  and  in  the  product  of  cows : eat  this 
food,  Praj  ipati. 

9 Who  inoveth  single  and  alone  1 Who  is  brought  forth  to  life 

again  1 

What  is  the  remedy  of  cold,  or  what  the  great  receptacle  1 

10  The  Sun  moves  single  and  alone.  The  Moon  is  bronglit  to 

life  again. 

Fire  is  the  remedy  of  cold  ; Earth  is  the  greit  rei;eptaclc. 

11  What  was  the  antecedent  thought?  Wliat  was  the  bird  of 

mighty  size  1 

The  slippery  matron,  who  w.m  she?  Wlm  was  the  reddish- 
coloured  one  ? 

12  Heaven  was  the  antecedent  thought  Tlie  Courser  was  the 

mighty  bird. 

The  slippery  matron  was  the  earth.  Night  was  the  reildish- 
coloured  one. 

13  Vi\yu  help  thee  with  cooked  viandC  Blackneck  with  goats ; 

Nyagrodha  witli  cups;  Silmali  with  incre.ise;  this  .Stal- 
lion here,  gool  for  the  chariot— let  him  verily  come  with 
his  four  feet.  Brain nakrishna  help  us!  Oboi.sance  to  Agiii ! 


8 When  the  Horse  h-is  been  biought  bach  from  the  water,  thoClopf  QuHca 
aivl  two  other  r<ryal  (^msorts  anoint  him  witli  olaiiti*"'!  butter,  leoiting  t.heir 
respective  formulas.  The  Chief  Queen  anoints  the  fore  <juarters,  an*!  th  ) 
others  the  liarrel  and  luiiii-cjuarteis.  Aur/A  ' e/c  : with  the'C  Haci^ficial  er:- 
rlainations  the  three  Queens  respectively,  entwine  the  hair  of  the  M'-rse  s 

belli,  neck,  and  tail  with  cluins  or  otlier  ornunents  of  },'old  0 frwf^-the 

Sicrificer  offers  the  Horse  the  remain.^  of  the  night-ohlation  of  giain,  wlndi 
IS  thiowii  info  the  water  if  lie  lefuses  to  eit  it,  Product  of  mm : the  sour 
r ods  with  which  the  oblation  was  mixed,  Pcajdpati.  mo.uiing  the  deified 
Horse. 

!)  [fere  intervene.s  a Brahmodyam.  a di-icnsaion  in  question  and  answer  of 
rosin'igonical  and  mystic-’-theological  doctiine  The  qin’-tiiuH  .ire  eouc  le^ 
ill  designeilly  enigmitical  langnatje  constitutini'  a .soil  of  ‘ eomiiio  ch.o.tde, 
asPiof.  M Bloomfield  calls  it.  Wkomoceth;  etc.;  the  Braliia-n  qnesLiona 
the  Hotar. 


10  The  Hot.ar  replieg. 

11  The  Hotar  questions  the  Brahman. 

12  The  Brahman  .eplies  ' rain,  according  to 

nr  C\»,rrr:  tl,.  Sa<-nlicul  Ho.,.  had  tint  tl.o  « ,h» 

ofl,Mi,.,.lao  he.ivon.  ex|.U,ut..o.l  of  auh  (.lieep  . 

wo-tllen  cloth  ; Soina-straiiieO  Slippc-ry  . after  rain. 

13  The  Horse,  a hornless  h * go.at,  an  1 .a  Oornriga  or  wi’d  ox 

are  bound  to  saciihcial  stakei  near  th.  tiie,  ana  .eieuteeu  olher  viUmis,  a 


212 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  XXIII, 


14  The  car  is  fitted  with  the  rein,  the  steed  is  fitted  with  the  rein. 
Fitted  in  waters,  water-born,  is  Brahma  following  Soma’s  lead. 

15  Steed,  from  thy  body,  of  thyself,  sacrifice  and  accept  thyself. 
Thy  greatness  can  be  gained  by  none  bnt  thee. 

16  No,  here  thou  diest  not,  thou  art  nut  injured;  only  by 

fair  paths  to  the  Gods  thou  goest. 

May  S.ivifcar  the  God  in  that  world  place  thee  where  dwell 
the  pious,  whether  they  have  journeyed. 

17  Agni  was  the  victim.  With  him  they  sacrificed.  He  won  thig 

world  in  which  Agni  is.  'fins  shall  become  thy  woild, 
Tins  shalt  thou  win.  Drink  these  waters.  Vayn  was  the 
victim.  With  him  they  sacrificed.  He  won  this  world 
in  which  Vayu  is  This  shall  become,  etc,,  as  above. 
Surya  was  the  victim,  etc.  He  won  the  world  in  whith 
Surya  is.  This  shall  become,  etc. 

18  To  vital  breath.  Hail!  To  out-breathiiig,  Hail!  To  diffusive 

breath.  Hail ! 

Amba ! A'libika ! Amhalika ! No  one  is  taking  me  away. 
The  sorry  horse  will  lie  beside  another,  as  Subhadra  the 
dweller  in  Kampda. 

he-goat  and  a rain  .imong  them,  are  attached  to  the  Horse  To  the  othf-r 
stakea  are  tied  a great  number  of  animale,  tame  and  wild,  the  total,  aceool 
iug  to  the  Commentator,  amounting  to  SIX  hundred  and  nine,  Vdi/u  Ivlp 
thee,  the  Horse  is  addiessed.  Blackneck:  Agni,  the  fire  with  its  daik  smoko. 
Nyagrodha  : the  Picu.s  Indica,  of  whose  wood  sacrificial  vessels  are  made. 
Salnmli ; the  Scemul  or  Silk  Cotton  tree,  also  used  for  s.^cred  purposes. 
With  his  four  feet : with  all  speed.  Bmlm'lkrishna:  the  Brahman  in  whom 
there  is  no  black  spot ; said  to  mean  the  Moon. 

14  Pitted’’  or,  quickened.  Brahmii . the  Qreat  One,  the  Horse.  ^ Wntei- 
born  : as  identified  with  tfie  Sun  who  springs  out  of  the  ocean  of  air.  See 
R.  V,  I.  1613.  1.  Soma's  lead ; to  hoavep. 

1 6  The  Horse  is  slaughtered, 

16  The  Horse  is  addressed  The  first  line  is  taken  from  R V.  I,  162.  21, 
and  the  second  from  a funeral  hymn  R.  V.  X.  17  4. 

17  Agni  was  the  victim : offered  by  the  Gods  of  creation.  Thy  world' 

the  Horse  is  addressed.  In  which  VAyu  is:  the  firmament.  In  which  Sdryo, 
is : the  sky.  ' 

18  To  vital  breathy  etc. ; three  fire-oblations  are  offered  with  these  three 
formulas,  Ambd,  etc. : women’s  u.imes.  The  Chief  Queen  calls  on  her  fellow 
wives  for  pity,  as.  to  obtain  a son,  she  has  to  pass  the  night  in  disgusting 
contiguity  to  the  slaughtered  Hoise  : “ No  one  takes  me  (hy  foree  to  the 
horse)  ; (but  if  f go  not  of  my«elf).  the  (.spiteful)  horse  will  He  with  (an 
otlier,  as)  the  (wicived)  Subhadr.l  who  dwells  in  K.hiipna.”— Weber,  Hist  'i) 
of  Indian  Literature,  p.  114.  SuAfecKfi’d ; probably  the  wife  of  the  King  oi 
Kiimplla  in  the  country  of  the  Pafichllas  in  the  North  of  India.  The  Cli"' 
Queen  must  submit  to  the  revolting  ceremony,  or  its  benefits  will  go  to  an 
o4;hcr  wouiau.  See  Ramiyana,  Book  I.  Cantu  XilL  Schlegel’a  editiuu. 


nnSE  36.] 


WHITE  YAJURYEDA. 


213 


19  Thee  we  invoice,  tVoop-lord  of  tVoops.  Thee  we  invoke,  the 
loved  oues’  lord. 

Thee,  lord  of  treasures,  we  invoke.  My  precious  wealth  ! . 


32  Now  have  I glorified  with  praise  strong  Dadhikravan,  con- 

qiiering  steed. 

S\Veei  may  he  make  our  mouths : may  he  prolong  the  days 
we  have  to  live. 

33  Gayatrl,  Trishtnp,  Jairati,  and  Pafikti  witli  Atmshtnp  joined, 
Brihati,  K.iknp,  Ushuihi  pacify  thee  with  needle-points  ' 

34:  Two-footed,  those  that  have  four  feet,  those  with  three  feet 
and  those  with  five, 

Metreless,  with  one  metre,  these  pacify  thee  with  needle- 
poinrs  I 

35  May  Mahanamnis,  Revatis,  all  far-spread  Regions  of  the  sky, 
Voices,  and  lightnings  from  the  cloud  pacify  thee  with  needle- 
points ! 

36  May  married  dames  of  human  birth  skilfully  separate  thy 

hair : 

The  Regions,  Consorts  of  the  Gods,  pacify  thee  with  needle- 
points ! 

19  The  three  Queens  walk  nine  times  round  tlie  Horne,  recitmp  tlio  for- 
mulas. The  Cliief  Queen  then  begins  the  perfoi in.iucc  ol  the  levolting 


ceremony. 

20  MakisM  avayamcv^§v(islsnamdhUhv(i  »^^(iyon(iu  Tins  nnd 

the  following  nine  st.iuzas  are  not  repioducihle  even  in  the  seini-o  >stMii  ity 
of  a leanied  European  language  ; and  stanzas  30,  31  would  he  umntclligi- 
ble  without  tiiein. 


32  On  the  following  morning  the  officiating  priests  raise  the  Chief  Qne.n 
from  the  place  where  she  has  .spent  the  nigiit,  and  recite  the  e'l , a ' 
from  R V,  IV.  39  0.  to  purify  their  meuth.s  aftei  Urn  ahominahle 

ties  which  they  have  uttered.  DadhiMvan  : or  in  tl.e  shorter  fo.  m,  IM.llu- 
krds  or  Dadhikni,  described  as  a kind  of  divine  or  deilied  hoiw,  and  pio  -a  j- 
ly,  like  TdrUshya  {XV  18),  a yxersonilication  of  the  morr>mg  huh.  Ih'  \e 
is  called  the  Dadhikil.  and  is  used  as  a pnufier  after  foul  Uiiguage.  m. 
The  Hymns  of  the  Atharva-Veda,  Vol  II.  Appendix,  p 4,)7, 

33  The  three  Qiieene  with  » hundred  and  one  nee<IIe%  gold. 

copper,  mark  out  the  lines,  on  the  b.Hly  of  the  hor.e.  wh.<  h tl,.  dne.  otor  . 
Inife  is  to  follow.  Piici/ii : or,  send  to  rest ; a sacrificial  cuidiemisiu. 

34  ver.es  with  two  pi<f™  or  metrical  divisions. 
^^ith  one  metre:  having  the  same  metre  throughout. 

35  whose  name  is  great  ; nine  vefsesof 

Sak vat  1 metre.  Aerfif?* ; verse'j  flora  which  the  Ran-i  < ‘ - t.r  * 

60  named  from  R.  V.  I.  30.  13  in  which  the  word  wah.nplemUd,  or  wealthy, 


occurs. 


214  THE  TEXTS  OF  T^HE  [nOOK  XXIIl 

37  Thftv,  made  of  silver,  gold,  and  lead,  are  used  as  helpers  k 

the  work. 

As  lines  on  the  strong  Courser’s  skin  may  they  console  and 
give  thee  rest. 

38  What  then  1 As  men  whose  fields  are  full  of  barley,  etc.,  a; 

in  X.  32. 

39  Who  flays  thee*!  Who  dissects  thee*!  Who  prepares  thy  limbs 

for  sacrifice  ? 

Who  is  the  S.ige  that  slaughters  thee  1 

40  In  due  time  let  the  seasons  as  thy  Slaughterers  divide  thy 

joints, 

And  with  the  splendour  of  the  Year  sacrifice  thee  with  holy 
rites. 

41  Let  the  Half-months  and  let  the  Months,  while  sacrificing, 

flay  thy  limbs : 

Let  Day  and  Night  and  Maruts  mend  each  fauli1>in  sacrificing 
thee. 

42  Let  the  divine  Adhvaryus  flay  thy  body  and  dissect  thy 

fiame, 

And  let  the  sacrificing  lines  prepare  thy  members  joint  by 
joint.  '*• 

43  May  Sky,  Karth,  Air,  and  Wind  supply  each  failing  and  de- 

fect of  thine : 

May  Surya  with  the  Stars  of  heaven  duly  prepare  a world 
for  thee. 

44  Well  be  it  with  thine  upper  parts,  well  be  it  with  the  parts 

below ! 

Well  bo  it  with  thy  bones  and  with  thy  marrow  and  with  all 
thy  frame ! 

45  Who  moveth  singly  ? etc.,  as  in  verse  9. 

46  The  Sun  moves  singly,  etc.,  as  in  verse  10. 

47  What  Instie  is  like  Surya’s  light  ? What  lake  is  equal  to  the 

Sea? 

37  Lead : iiie.iiiiug,  piobably,  copper  oi  iiou,  as  Mahidbara  explains. 

39  WhQ^  <v  Ka,  that  is  Prajapati  him-ielf  performs  these  saciificial  opera- 
tions, and  not  I the  human  piiest. 

42  The  divhte  Adhmri/ us ; the  iavios,  the  Adhvaryus  of  the  Gods.  Sa<^ 
ficing  lines;  traced  on  the  body  of  the  horse  to  guide  the  Immolators  knife. 
See  ver.se  33, 

43  Stars .-  or  lunar  asterieina. 

4.5  Before  the  vapd  or  omentum  is  offered  as  a burnt-oblation  the  follow- 
ing i^rahmgdyam  verae  9)  intervenes.  Verses  45,  46  are  repeated  from 
9 and  10, 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


215 


rmsJi  55.] 


What  is  more  spacious  than  the  Earth  ? What  thing  is  that 
whicli  naught  can  mete  1 

4^  Biahnia  is  lustre  like  the  Sun.  Heaven  is  a flood  to  match 
the  Sea. 

Iiuira  is  vaster  than  the  Earth.  Beyond  all  measure  is  the 
Cow. 

40  Friend  of  the  Cods,  T ask,  for  information,  if  thou  in  spirit 
hast  obtained  the  knowledge, 

Hath  Vishnu  this  whole  Universe' pervaded  in  the  throe  stc[)s 
wherein  the  Cod  is  worshipped  ? 

50  I also  am  in  those  three  steps  of  Vishnu  wherewith  this  Uni- 

verse he  permeated. 

The  earth  and  heaven  I circle  in  a moment  and  this  lieaven’s 
summit  with  a single  organ. 

51  What  are  the  things  which  Purusha  hath  entered!  Wlnit 

things  hath  Purusha  contained  within  him  i 
This  riddle  we  propound  to  thee,  0 Brahman.  \V  hy  dost 
thou  give  no  answer  to  my  question! 

52  Within  five  things  hath  Purusha  found  entrance:  these 

Purusha  hath  within  himself  «onnecte<l. 

This  is  the  thought  \^ich  I return  in  answer.  Thou  art 
not  my  superior  in  wisdom. 

o3  What  was  the  antecedent  thought!  etc.,  as  in  verso  11. 

54  Heaven  was  the  antecedent  thought,  etc,  as  in  12. 

55  Who,  tell  me,  is  the  yellowish  she?  Who  is  tho  daikly* 

yellowish  ? 

• Who  moves  with  rapid  spring  and  bouii(M  Wiio  glides  and 
winds  along  the  path  ? 


48  5ra\;aa:  holy  lore  in  the  shape  of  the  three  Vedus,  according  to 

Mahidhara.  ; as  Hupplying  the  eleaients  ut  .saci  dice. 

49  The  Brahman  questions  the  Udgitar,  tlie  priest  who  chants  the  Si- 
mans.  Three  steps:  or  places  ; earth,  air,  and  sky.  over  ant  iroag  ‘ 

he  strode  as  the  Sun  ; according  to  Mahidhara,  tlie  (xirhapatya,  Aliavaiuy.1, 
and  Dakshina  fires  are  intended, 

50  The  UdgAtar  replies.  Single  organ : my  mind. 

51  The  UdgiUr  qUPStious  tUo  l)r.iiniiaii  Purusha:  the  P""™  j 

flity ; the  Coimic  Man,  or  Embodied  Spirit , dtmi,  the  suul  er  aelf,  «r..'.rd 
ing  to  Mahidhara. 

52  The  Brahman  replies.  Five  tkiii'ji : the  hue  vital  hreathinga.  2 /.«)«; 
the  senses  ; the  substrata  of  hearing,  etc. 

53  The  Hotar  questions  the  Adhvaryu.  The  question  and  tho  answer  are 

fopeated  from  verses  11  and  12.  ,, 

6.5  The  Adhvaryu  questions  the  Hotar.  Yclhimk  . . . darkbj-yelhmsh . 
he  precise  colours  inteuded  are  uucei  tain. 


216 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  xxin. 


56  Th(3  she-goat,  Sir,  is  yellowish,  dark-yellowish  is  the  porcu- 

pine. * 

The  hnre  moves  swift  with  leap  and  bound  : the  snake  creeps 
winding  on  the  path. 

57  How  many  different  forms  hath  this,  how  many  syllables, 

biirnt-oblations,  brands  for  kindling  ? 

Here,  of  the  rites  of  sacrifice  I ask  thee.  How  many  Hotars 
in  due  season  worship  1 * 

68  Sixfold  its  form,  its  syllables  a hundred,  eighty  burnt-offer- 

ings, just  three  brands  for  kindling. 

To  thee  1 tell  the  rites  of  sacrificing.  Seven  Hotars  worship 
in  appointed  season. 

69  Who  knoweth  this  world’s  central  point  1 Who  knoweth  the 

heaven,  the  earth,  and  the  wide  air  between  them  1 
Who  knows  the  birthplace  of  the  mighty  Surya  1 Who  knows 
the  Moon,  whence  lie  was  generated  1. 

60  I know  the  centre  of  the  world  about  im.  I know  heaven, 
earth,  and  the  wide  air  between  them. 

I know  the  birthplace  of  the  mighty  Surya.  I know  the 
Moon,  whence  he  was^geuerated. 

611  ask  thee  of  the  earth’s  extremedt  limit,  where  is  the  cen- 
tre of  the  world,  I ask  thee. 

I ask  thee  of  the  Stallion’s  genial  humour,  I ask  of  highest 
heaven  where  Speech  abideth. 

62  This  altar  is  the  earth’s  extremest  limit;  this  sacrifice  of 
ours  is  the  world’s  centre. 

This  Soma  is  the  Stallion’s  gfenial  humour,  this  Brahman 
highest  hea^n  where*Speech  abideth.  _ 


56  Tlie  Hotal  repliea.  The  she-(f(Mi:  (^3^  here  is  expl.imect  by  Maliidhan 
(wlio  takes  the  word  iu  the  sense  of  birthless)  as  Maya,  Illusion,  phenouio- 
nal  Nature  ; or  Night. 

57  The  Br.ahman  questions  the  0ag.^tnr.  ifcryw  ; according  to  MahJdlia- 

ra,  viands  or  kinds  of  food.  * This  : sacrifice...  ^ , 

' 58  Sixfold:  according  to  Mahidhara,  referring  te  the  six  principal  tastes 
sweet,  bitter,  salt,  etc.  SyUabUs:  ottbq.pacrgd  metnesj  twenty-four  of  the 
GiyatiJ,  etc  Burnt  oblations:  nfoamng  bnds  of  victims  for  such  ' 

Eighty:  four  tie,Vto.each  of  twenty  stakes.  Seven  p\ir 

travarunn,  Aclichh'av.'ifca,  ^r.lvastut,  Biahmanachohhanid,  Agnidhra.  P-tar.^ 
59  Ti'ie  Udgatar  questions  the  Btahraan,  w^p  replies  in  the  following 

^Tl^  Tlie  Sacrificer  questions  the  Adhvaryu.  The  verse  is  taken  from 
R.  V.  I.  161.  34.  .V.  P U 

62  rAi«ci/<ar.' as  the  place  nearest  heaven,  the  the 

visit  men.  TheStaUion:  Dyaus  or  Heaven,  f/emai  humow 

fertilizing  rain  which  impregnates  the  earth.  This  ,y  rO. 

the  texts  of  the  Veda  represents  the  abiding- place  of  Speech  or  the  Wor 


* WHITE  TAJURVEDA.  217 

63  The  Stronsf,  the  Self-existent  One,  the  First,  within  the 

mighty  flood 

Liid  down  the  timely  embryo  from  which  Praj.vpnti  was  horn. 

64  Let  the  Kotar  sacrifice  to  Praj^pati  from  the  Niihiman-Soma. 

Let  him  accept.  Let  him  drink  the  Soma.  Hotar,  sacrifice. 

65  Prajapati,  thou  only,  etc.,  as  in  X.  20. 


63  At  the  end  of  tha  Brahmodyatn  the  Adhv.iryii  draws  tlio  Mahiinani 
libation  for  Prajapati  in  a golden  cup.  Tlic  Fir»t:  Piiiusha;  the  Soil. 

64  The  Hotar:  the  Hkir  of  the  Gods.  Mahiman-ifoma,  couUiued  iu  tlwa 
gold  Clip  called  Mabimaii,  Glory,  .seo  verse  1,  note, 

Hotar,  sacrifice:  the  human  Hotar  is  addressed. 


BOOK  THE  TWENTY-FOURTH. 


Horse,  hornless  goat,  Goinriga,  these  belong  to  Prajapati. 
A black-necked  goat,  devoted  to  Agni,  ( is  to  be  bound) 
in  front  to  the  forehead  ( of  the  horse  ) j Sarasvati's  ewe 
below  his  jaws ; two  goats  belonging  to  the  Asvins,  with 
marks  on  tiie  lower  parts  of  the  body,  to  his  fore-legs ; a 
dark-coloured  goat,  ISoma’s  and  PUshan’s,  to  his  navel ; a 
white  and  a black,  sacred  to  Soma  and  Yama,  to  his  sides; 
Tvaahtar’s  two,  with  bushy  tails,  to  his  hind  feet ; Vayu’s 
white  goat  to  his  tail ; for  Indra  the  Good  Worker  a cow 
who  slips  her  calf ; a dwarf  belougiiig  to  Vishnu. 

2 The  red  goat,  the  smoky-red,  the  jujube-red,  these  belong  to 

Soma,  The  brown,  the  ruddy-brown,  the  parrot-brown, 
these  are  Varuna^s.  One  with  white  ear  holes,  one  vvitli 
partly  white,  one, with  wholly  white,  belong  to  Savitiir. 
One  with  fore  feet  white,  partly  white,  wholly  white,  be- 
longs to  Brihaspati.  Sbe-goats  speckled,  with  small  spots, 
with  big  spots,  these  belong  to  Mitra-Varuna. 

3 The  bright-tailed,  the  wholly  bright-tailed,  the  jewel-tailed, 

these  belong  to  the  Asvins.  The  wliite,  the  white  eyed, 
the  reddish,  these  are  for  Rudra  Lord  of  Beasts.  Long- 
eared  goats  are  for  Yama;  proud  ones  for  Rudra;  cloud- 
, coloured  ones  for  Parjanya. 

TLiis  Book  O'lntaina  au  exact  euumeri^ion  of  the  anini<ilB  that  are  to  be 
tie<l  to  the  Bacrificial  stekea  and  in  the  intei  mediate  Bpaces,  with  the  names 
of  the  deities  or  <leified  entities  to  which  they  are  eevetally  dedicated.  The 
principal  stake,  the  eleventh  and  midmost  of  the  itwenty*»)ne,  called  the 
Aguish Lha  because  it  stands  nearest  to  the  saciificial  fiie,  is  mentioned  first. 
About  fifteen  victims  are  bound  to  eacli  of  these  stakes,  all  domestic  animals, 
the  total  number  being  327.  In  the  spaces  between  the  stakes  282  wild 
animnls.  fiom  the  elephant  and  the  i hiuoceros  to  the  bee  and  the  fly,  are  t^- 
porarily  confined,  to  be  fieed  when  the  ceiemony  is  concluded,^  bringing 
the  total  number  of  assembled  animals  up  to  609.  There  is,  perhaps,  some 
exaggeration  in  the  number,  an*l  >oiiie  almost  impossible  animals  are  men- 
tioned, but  it  must  be  remembered  tlnat  the  Asvamedha  was  a most  impoi- 
taut  tribal  solemnity  of  rare  occurrence  and  that  no  effort  would  be  spared 
to  assure  its  performance  witli  all  possible  splendour. 

Several  of  the  wild  animals  cann»)t  be  identifiejl^.  Some  of  the  names  are 
conjecturally  reudeted  and  some  are  left  in  their  native  forms.  The  Com- 
mentator is  not  of  much  assistauce  in  doubtful  cases,  ‘ a k nd  of  beast  or 
‘ a kmd  of  bird ' beiug  all  the  information  that  he  has  to  give. 

1 Gomriga:  the  Gayal  or  Bos  Qavaeus.  Dwarf:  with  reference  to 
Vishnu's  Dwju'f  Incarnation. 

3 Bright’tailed:  ‘ goat  ’ is  to  be  understood  with  this  and  similar  epithets. 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA. 


219 


rEnsE  13.]  

4 Goats  spcokled.  transversely  speckled,  upward  speckled  are 

for  tlie  Maruls  The  reddish  she-fioat,  the  red-haiied,  tlio 
white,  these  belong  to  Siirasvati.  Tlicp>at  A\itl»  dihonsed 
cars,  the  short-eared,  the  red  eared  are  Tvaslitar’s.  The 
black  iK'cked,  the  white-flanked,  one  with  hri^ht-colouied 
thijrhs  belong  to  India  and  \gni.  Those  with  black  marks, 
small  marks,  large  marks  belong  to  Dawn. 

5 Farti  coloured  female  victims  belong  to  the  All-Gods ; red- 

coloured,  eighteen  montlis  old  toViik;  victims  wdtlutiit 
distinguishing  maiks  to  Aditi ; those  of  one  same  colour 
to  Dhatar;  weaned  kids  sacred  to  the  Consorts  of  the  Gods. 

6 Black-necked  victims  for  Aumi ; white  browed  for  the  Vasus, 

red  fur  lludra  ; bright  ones  for  the  Adit} as  ; cloud-colour- 
ed for  Parjauva. 

7 The  tall  goat,  the  sturdy,  the  dwarf,  these  are  Tndra-Vish- 

nii’s;  tlie  tall,  the  white  fore-footed,  the  hlack-backed, 
indra-Brihaspati‘s  ; parrot-coloured  the  Vujiiis’ ; speckled 
Agui-Maruts’ ; dark-coloured  Pushans. 

S Variei-ated,  Indra-AitiuV ; two  coloured,  Agni-Soma’s ; dwarf 
oxen,  Agni-Vislinu’s;  barren  cows,  Mitra-Vurunas  ; partly 
variegated,  Mitia’s. 

9  Black-ueeked  0H03,  Asni’a;  ; wldte.  Viyu's  ; 

uudbtinguished,  Aditi’s ; self-coloured,  Dhatais,  ucan- 
lings,  the  Gods’  Consorts. 

10  Black  oner  for  Earth  ; smoke-coloured  for  ^ 

ones  for  Sky ; brindled  ones  for  Lightumg ; blotched  outs 

for  Stars. 

11  Smoks-colourcd  ones  he  sacrifices  to  Spring  ; ^ 

Summer-  hlack  to  the  Uuins;  red  ones  to  Autumn, 
speckled  to  Winter;  reddish-yellow  to  the  Dewy  Season. 

12  Calves  eighteen  months  old  to  i, 

a half  ;-ears  to  Tr.shtnp ; two  rear  old  « " f;-:  “ ’ 
three  year  olds  to  Annshtup ; four  year  olds  to  Uslinih.  ^ 

13  Four  year  old  steers  to  Viraj ; 

ttrmig  hulls  to  Kakup;  draught  oxen  to  lankti, 

COWS  to  Atichhandas. 

7 Vdjins : the  deified  Coursers  of  the  Goda  ; a claaa  of  divinitus,  ac 

IrS:..  ...ran.  UkesaaA  tie.  ap  ; a eap.— 

12,  13  The  sacred  metres  are  deified  ]].  XII.  80. 

supreme  harmony  and  the  efficacy  of  prater. 


220  THE  TElTS  OP  THE  [BOOR  XKIV. 

14  Black-neoked  victims  sacred  to  Agni ; brown  to  Soma ; spott- 

ed to  Savitar ; weaned  ahe-kids  to  Sarasvati ; dark-colour- 
ed goats  to  Pdshan  ; speckled  victims  to  the  Maruts ; 
many-coloarod  to  the  AU-Quds ; barren  coWs  to  Heaven 
and  Earth. 

15  Called  contemporary,  the  dappled  belong  to  Tndra-Agni, 

bhMik  ones  to  Varuna;  speckled  to  the  Maruts  ; hornless 
he-goats  to  Ka. 

16  To  Agni  foremost  in  place  he  sacrifices  firstling  goats ; to 

the  consuming  Maruts  those  born  of  one  mother ; to  the 
Maruts  who  perform  domestic  rites  those  horn  after  a long 
time  ; to  the  sportive  M.iruts  those  born  together ; to  the 
solf-strong  Maruts  those  born  iu  succession. 

17  Called  contemporaneous,  the  dappled  belonging  to  Indra- 

Agnij  those  with  projecting  horns  to  Mahendra;  the 
many-coloured  to  Visvakarman. 

18  Smoke-coloured,  those  of  brownish  hue,  to  be  offered  to  the 

Soma-possessing  Fathers ; the  brown  and  the  smoky-look- 
in<r  to  the  Fathers  who  sit  on  sacred  grass ; the  black  and 
the  broWnish-looking  to  the  Fathers  who  hare  been  tasted 
by  Agni } the  black  and  the  spotted  belong  to  Tryarabaka. 

19  Called  contemporaneous,  the  dappled  belong  to  Sana  and 

Sira^  wlute  ones  to  V^yuj  white  ones  to  Surya. 

20  To  Spring  he  offers  Kapinjalas  ; to  Summer  sparrows  ; to 

the  Rains  partridges;  to  Autumn  quads;  to  Winter 
Kivkaras;  to  the  Dewy  Season  Vikakaras. 

21  To  the -Sea  he  sacrifices  porpoises;  to  Parjanya  frogs;  to 

the  Waters  fishes } to  Mitra  Kulipayas ; to  Varupa  cro- 
codiles. 


15  /Ta;  Prajapati.  See  I.  6,  note. 

16  Co^>,mmg:  or  Fiery;  ./IntapmMyaK  Wh, 

grikaniedhlbliyah.  Sportive:  kridibkyah.  Self -strong:  svutavdbhguK , 

XVII.  85,  and  S.  R.  E.  XII.  pp.  408,  409. 

18  Three  classes  oi  Fathers  are  here  raentioned ; the  Somavantab.  the 
B-irhisliad-ih,  and  the  AgnishvatUh.  Trgambaka:  a name  of  Rudra.  bte 

III  58,  note. 

19  Suna  and  Sira:  two  deities  (xr  deified  objects  which  bless  or  are 
closely  connected  with  agriculture.  The  words  probably 

gested  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon,  plougsbare  and  plough.  See  ih 
Hymns  of  the  Athai  va- Veda,  III.  17.  5,  note. 

20  Kapinjalas:  heathcocks  or  francolius.  Kakara8...VLhakaras : un- 
identified. . 

21  Sultpayas:  nnidentified.  Crocodila:  the  eiaet  meaning  of 
lome  kind  of  aijuftbic  animal,  is  uncertain. 


WHITE  YAJURVEHA. 


221 


VERSE  30.] 

22  To  Soma  he  sacrifices  wild  geese ; to  Vayu  female  cranes  ; 

to  Indra-Agid  curlews;  to  Mitra  divers;  to  Varuna 
Chakravak.is. 

23  To  Agni  be  sacrifices  cocks ; to  Vatiaapatis  owls ; to  Agni- 

yoma blue  jays;  to  the  Aavius  peacocks , to  Mitra-Varuna 
pigeons, 

24  To  Soma  he  sacrifices  quails ; to  Tvaslitar  Kaulikas ; Mai- 

iias  to  the  Uods’  Consorts ; Kulikas  to  the  Gods  Sisters ; 
Farushnas  to  Agm  Loid  of  the  Homestead. 

25  To  Day  he  sacrifices  doves  ; to  Night  Sich^pus ; tothe.Ioints 

of  Day  and  Night  bats ; to  the  Months  gallmules  , to  the 
Year  great  eagles. 

26  To  Ground  he  sacrifices  rats;  to  Finnament  field-rats;  to 

Day  voles;  to  the  Quarters  iiiungooaes ; to  the  Inter- 
mediate Spaces  brownish  ichneumons. 

27  To  the  Yasus  he  sacrifices  black-bucks ; to  the  Hudras  stags  ; 

to  tiie  Adilyas  Nyauku  deer  ; to  the  All-Gods  spotted  deer; 
to  the  Sadhyas  Kulmga  antelopes. 

28  To  Ihdiiia  he  sacrifices  wild  asses;  to  Mitra  Gaiiras;  to  Varuna 

buffiiloes;  to  lirihaspati  Ga).ils;  to  Tvushtar  camels. 

29  To  Prajapati  he  sacrifices  men  elephants  ; to  Vak  white  ants ; 

to  Sight  flies ; to  Hearing  black  bees. 

30  To  FraiiipatiandtoVayuaGayalistoheoffered;  to  yanina 

a wiW  ram  ; to  Y.nua  a black  ram;  to  a human  king  a 
monkey;  to  the  Tiger  a red  doe;  to  the  Bui)  a female 
Gayalfto  the  Ksliiprasyena  a quail ; to  the  Nilangu  a 
worm  ; to  the  .Sea  a porpoise;  to  the  Snuwy' Mountain  an 
elephant.  

22  CkakmvAkas:  ru.ldy  ge.-se,  u!.»  .I'ui'l  " 

poets  as  ty pea  of  conjugal  love  ami  h Itl  ty.  J A.  V.  XIV. 

Mr,.'  lM  theChakr..vMand  h.»  mate  -Nuptml  Iljmu,  A. 

^ 01^' I'  Kulikas  Pirushnas-  viiiidentifiol  liirda.  Mmms: 

24  Kaultkat  . . Ku  ■ y , starhugs  (Coiacias  JmlKa). 

;•  settling  on  cows  , Indian  starnub  t twilicht. 

25  EichApUs;  uuideutified.  Joints:  evening  am  mo 
^'Ttuhyas-  meaBing.  probably,  ‘ 

Accor, bug  to  Yitek,.  ‘the  (lo,i»  whoa.  11;“  ;,.m  r 

Amarakosha  they  aie  named  aimmg  j^uUum  the  Hjiecies  have 

to  he  the  most  aneieut  of  the  Gods,  ^!/urda  AuUuya.  i 

not  been  identified.  i-n„„  .j  Uudra  Wild 

of  wolin  ; perhaps  a tape  woiw. 


222  THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [FOOK  XAVr. 

31  The  Kinnnra  belonpis  to  Pifijapati ; the  Ula,  the  Halikshna, 

the  cat  belong  to  Dhatar;  the  heron  belongs  to  the  Qioir- 
ters;  the  Dhnhksha  to  Agiii ; spanow,  red  snake,  STiras, 
these  are  Tvashtar’s;  the  curlew  belongs  to  Vak, 

32  To  Soma  an  antelope  is  to  bo  offered ; wild  goat,  mungoose, 

Saka,  these  are  Pushan’s;  the  jackal  is  the  Mayo’s;  the 
Gaura  Indra’s;  Pidva,  antelope,  cock,  theseare  Aiiuinatfa; 
the  Chakravaka  is  for  Echo. 

33  The  female  crane  is  Surya’s;  Sarga,  Srijaya,  S.iyandaka 

these  are  Mitra’s;  to  Sarasvati  belongs  the  human-voiced 
Maina;  to  Ground  the  porcupine;  tiger,  wolf,  viper  be- 
long to  Passion ; to  Sarasvan  the  human-voiced  parrot. 

34  The  eagle  is  Parjanya’s;  the  Ati,  the  Valiasa,  the  woo<l- 

pecker,  these  aie  for  Vayu  ; for  Brihaspati  Lord  of  Speech 
is  the  Paihgaraja;  the  Alaja  belongs  to  Finnaincnt ; 
pelican,  cormorant,  fish,  these  belong  to  the  Lord  of  Bivers; 
the  tortoise  belongs  to  Heaven  and  Earth. 

35  The  buck  belongs  to  the  Moon  ; iguana,  Ka'aka,  woodpecker, 

these  belong  to  the  Vanaspatis  ; the  cock  belongs  to  Savi- 
tar;  the  swan  is  Vata’s:  crocodile,  dolphin,  Kulipay'b 
these  belong  to  the  Sea;  the  porcupine  to  Moilesty. 

36  The  Black-doe  belongs  to  D.iy ; frog,  female  rat,  partridge, 

these  belong  to  the  Serpents;  the  jackal  belongs  to  tlie 
Asvins;  the  Black-buck  to  Night;  bear,  hat,,  Sushn-  t, 
these  belong  to  the  Other  Folk;  the  polecat  belongs  to 
Vishnu. 


31  K'lnnara:  ‘What  .sort  of  man?’,  or  Mayu ; proUMy  a numUw 
UUt  HdlLikmi : unidentidad  ; aw)rding  to  Maliidli.uM,  attei  is  a kin. 
of  lion  Cut vmhdnmsi,  ‘ tho  strong  biter;  is  thus  . xpLiiied  by  ' 
Commentator.  WtniU-.sk  • a kind  .d  bird,  says  MahiUh  u.i  Saras  t a 
Indian  or  Siberian  Crane  (Ardea  Sibinca)  ; a splendid  biid,  tiaHily  doiue.t 
cated. 

.32  Sihir  variously  explained  as  liird,  fly,  long-eare.1  beast  /FV/u 
probai’lv  a Kimpurnsha,  or  manlike  m<mKey.  Hidva  unid(0itilled  , a[ 
matt'  Divine  Favour  personified  Erlm : because  the  male  ami  " 

bird  are  condemned  to  pass  the  night  on  opposite  bniikB  of  a river,  iivces- 
santlv  callinir  to  each  other.  ^ 

33  Shffa,  Srijaij Siydndaka:  uiiideiilifie«l.  51f*ra.w2n-  Saraavatl  s Coti-" 

34  The  birds  and  beasts  whose  names  are  left  untianslated  ui  this  aiul 
following  verses  are  uiudentified.  Lord  of  Rivers  . Ocean. 

3.')  Vanaspatis  ■ Sacrilicial  Stakes. 

3(3  Othrr  Folk:  a euphemistic  e<pre«sion  for  certain  beings  who 
to  be  regarded  as  spirits  of  dukiiess  Sn,  in 

Folk,  People,  Neighboars  ; in  (ieriuany,  Little  tolk  ; ui  SwiUetlaiii. 
People  and  Eaith  People. 


WlIlT'E  YAJrnVtDA. 


223 


VERSE  40.] 


37  The  cackoo  belongs  to  the  H.ilf  Months  : antelope,  peacock, 
eagle,  these  are  the  Gaodliarvas’ ; tlie  otter  belongs  to 
the  Months;  tortoise,  doe-antelope,  iguana,  Golatliika 
belong  to  the  Apsarases ; the  black  snake  belongs  to  Death. 

3S  The  frog  belongs  to  the  Seasons ; the  vole,  the  rat,  the  nionso, 
these  are  the  Fathers’ ; tlie  Python,  the  liilaya  belong  to 
the  Vasus  ; Kapinjala,  pigeon,  owl,  hare  belong  to  Nirriti ; 
the  wild  ram  to  Yarn  pa. 

The  white  animal  belongs  to  the  A<lityas  ; the  camel,  the 
Glirinivan,  the  rliinoceros  to  Mati ; the  Srimara  l^dong  to 
the  Forest-God  ; the  Rinii  buck  is  Rmira’s  ; Kvayi,  cock, 
gallinule,  these  are  the  Yajins’ ; the  cuckoo  belongs  to 
Kama. 

40  The  Khihc^ais  the  All-Gods’ ; the  black  dog,  the  long-cared, 
the  ass,  the  hyena,  these  are  the  Raksbasas’;  the  R.ar  is 
for  Indra;  the  lion  is  for  the  Mamts  ; the  cbaindeoii, 
the  Pippaka,  the  vulture,  these  belong  to  {^vravya ; tlie 
spotted  antelope  belongs  to  the  All-Gods. 


Kapinjala. ^ see  verse  20.  YWi.  the  Gohlcds  ef  Death  and  De- 
struct, ion.  See  XII.  62.  0,,,, 

.39  tlh-intvU.  expl»i..e<l  by  MaM.Mmr.,  a, 
mi-  'rUouKWorI3evoti..n  «««  j S,,r.ui;. 

is  the  favourite  bird  of  Kdiim  the  Go<l  ot  l.ove. 


40  jStruvj/^:  the  at  row  personitied  as  a deity. 


BOOK  THE  TWENTY-FIFTH. 


I GRATIFY  Fresh  Grass  with  Ins  teeth,  Avak^  with  his  giima, 
Clay  with  his  tooth-sockets,  Tegas  with  his  fangs,  'ihe 
tongae-tip  for  Sarasvati ; 1 gratify  the  root  of  the  toii-ne 
and  the  palate  with  his  neigh,  Vaja  with  his  jaws,  the 
Waters  with  his  mouth,  the  IStallion  with  his  testicles, 
the  Adityas  with  the  beaid.  Path  with  his  eyebrows, 
Heaven  and  Earth  with  his  eyelashes,  Lightning  with 
the  pupils  of  his  eyes.  Hail  to  the  white  ! Hail  to  the 
black!  Effectual  are  his  eyelashes,  irresistible  aie  his 
lower  eyelashes;  irresistible  are  his  eyelashes,  eifectual 
are  his  lower  eyelashes. 

3 With  his  breath  I gratify  Vata ; with  his  outbreath  the  two 
Nostrils;  with  his  lower  hp  the  Upayama;  with  his  up- 
per lip  Existence,  With  his  bright  look  1 please  Antaia, 
with  his  reflection  Bahya  ; the  Whirlpool  with  his  head ; 
Thunder  with  his  frontal  bone  ; the  Lightning-flash  with 
his  brain  ; Lightning  with  the  pupils  of  his  eyes  ; Hear- 
ino-  with  his  external  ears  ; Ears  with  his  internal  ears; 
Bk)od  with  his  lower  neck  ; Waters  with  the  fleshle^s 
part  of  his  neck  ; Thought  with  the  hack  neck-tendons; 
Aditi  with  his  head;  Nirrili  with  his  lagged  head; 
Vital  Breathings  with  his  roars  ; Tempest  with  his  crest. 

3 I gratify  Flies  with  his  hair;  Indra  with  his  active  shoulder; 
Bnhaspati  with  his  cpiick  spring ; Tortoises  with  us 
hoofs;  Approach  with  his  fetlocks  ; Kajiifijalas  with  his 
heel-ropes;  Speed  with  his  two  thighs;  the  Way  with 
his  two  fore-legs ; the  Forest-God  with  a kneepan  ; Agm 
with  his  two  knees  ; Pushan  with  his  two  fore-feet ; the 
Asvins  with  his  shoulders ; Kudra  with  his  shoulder  joints. 


The  Horse-sacrihee  is  contiimed  In  the  fi.st  nme  verses  (which  cons 
tute  a Brahmana  or  Exegeticai  Tre.itise  as  di^stinct  from  the  Texts  .a 

Formulas)  oblation  Is  made  of  the  loasted  flesh 

victim  being  aseigneil,  with  the  cry  of  Sv.^ha  ' All-hail ! to  a hoat  of  deitu 
and  other  objects  which  are  regarded  as  deihed  for  the  occasion. 

1 Avakd:  \ water-plant.  See  XIII.  30  Teg  as : the  Cojnmentatn. 

alvea  no  explanation,  and  the  meaning  is  unknown.  Vdja  Stlengtl  , 
Sacrificial  Food.  The  Path : cf.  the  Way  m verse  3.  The  white : the  li^h 

coloured  pait  of  the  body.  _ ^ . o ri  . T..1  ei 

2 Umyditia:  the  formula  accompanying  certain  Soma  libations  . lak 
uoonihLe  (upayama)  art  thon  See  VII.  4 Brujht  look  accoulmg  ' 
M^alfldhara,  the  gloss  on  the  upper  part  of  his  body.  .4ri«arrt;  inteiio 
Ptdection:  gloss  on  the  lower  p.irt  of  his  body,  according  to  the  Com.ne 
tltor.  Mhya:  exterior.  Ragged:  nirjarjalpa ; the  w'ord  (apparently 
meaningless  here)  is  probably  used  as  a sort  of  play  upon  the  word ‘ > 

‘’t Vi.'.-  wtlich  lias  so  often  brast.e.1  tl.em  away.  Active .'  the  same  word 
is  sn  epithet  of  Inaw.  Jfoofi:  to  renovate  tlieir  shells  with  the  Uom) 
materiad.  Cf.  A.  V.  IX  4.  16  : They  gave  the  hooves  to  toitoiees. 


WUITE  YAJrRVEDA 


terse  8.] 

4 The  first  rib  is  Agni's;  the  second  Vayu’s;  the  tliird 

Indra’s  ; tlie  fourth  Soma’s;  t lie  fifth  Aditi’s  ; the  sixth 
Indraiii’s  ; the  seventh  the  Maruts’ ; the  ei.uditli  llnlias- 
pati’s  ; tlie  ninth  Aryanian’s  : the  tenth  Dh.itar’s  ; the 
eleventh  tiidra’s  the  twelfth  Varinia’s;  the  thirteenth 
Yania’s. 

5 (On  the  left  side)  the  first  rib  holon<zs  to  Indra-Agni  ; the 

second  to  Sarasvati  , the  third  to  Mitra  ; the  fonrtli  to 
the  Waters  ; the  fifth  to  Nirnti  , the  sixth  to  \gni-Sonia, 
the  seventli  to  the  Scrjienls  , the  eighth  to  Vishnii  , tlu' 
ninth  to  Pushan  ; the  tei  th  to  'rvasht.ir  ; the  elevimth  to 
Tndra;  the  twelfth  to  Vanina;  the  thirteenth  t(;  Y.una 
The  riiiht  tiank  belongs  to  Heaven  and  Harth,  the  lelt  to 
the  All-Hods. 

6 The  shoulders  belong  to  the  Maruts  ; the  fust  nb-eartilages 

to  the  All  Hods  ; the  second  to  tin'  Pudras  ; the  tliiial  to 
the  Adityas  ; the  tail  belongs  to  Vayn;  the  hmd-<)U'iit»'is 
to  Agni-lSonia.  1 gratify  the  two  (airlews  with  the  hijis  , 
Indra-Brihaspati  with  'the  thighs,  MitraA'aruni  with 
the  groins;  Approach  with  the  buttocks  , Stiength  with 
the  two  cavities  of  the  loins. 

7 I gratify  Pushan  with  the  lectum  ; Hlind-wonns^  with  the 

large  intestines  ; Serpents  with  the  entrails  ; Wot  ms  willi 
the  guts;  the  Wateis  with  the  bladder,  .scaotum  with 
the  testicles ; the  Vapns  with  Ins  penis,  Ollspimg  with 
his  seed,  lUue  jays  with  liis  hile ; Pissures  with  his 
arms;  Kiislnnas  with  his  lumps  ol  dung 

8 His  chest,  belmis>s  to  fiOiu  tiis  belly  t..  A.hli  Ins 

to  the  Quarters;  Ins  .lothcr  hnul-|m,t  to  -V'liti.  I .a  .Uilj 
Clouds  with  his  aorti;  Kir.naiiieiit  with  Ins  |Hn.aHlmni , 
Mist  with  Ins  belly  ; the  two  ('lukr.iv.ikas  with  his  e.ir 

diao  bones;  Sky  with  his  kulnejs  ; Momilams  w,  h liis 

ducts  ; Itocks  with  Ins  s,ile.n.  ; y.'-lnlls  wi  h Ins  bn,,s , 
Shrubs  with  his  heart-vessels  ; Stieauis  w,  h ; 

Lakes  with  his  flanks;  boa  will.  I.h  holly  , V.nstwn.n,. 

with  his  ashes.  —— — — - - - - 

4 Indrlnl.  liulr.i’s  Ooiibort. 

Bull  : VaU  the  receive^  the  tail  . he  st  r I 

witL.-A.  V.  IX  4 13.  U.e»Uy.a 

sacred  birds.  See  Uamayana,  I innknowu 

of  one  of  a pair.  Kd-dmas  unexplained  and  nnk.nu^ 

8 Cardiac  honea . two  bonc^,  ai  I hivctiaiH- 

heart.  The  word  matasne  more  probably  means  x j , 

lated  it  in  XIX.  S-V 
15 


226 


THE  TEXTS  OP  THE 


[BOOK  XXV, 


9  I gratify  Separation  with  his  navel ; Butter  with  his  flavour; 
the  Waters  with  his  bioth;  Sunbeams  with  his  drops  of 
fat;  Hoar-frost  with  his  heat;  Ice  with  his  marrow;  Hail- 
stones with  his  tears ; Thunderbolts  with  the  rheum  of 
his  eyes  ; Rakshasas  with  his  blood  ; Bright  things  with 
his  limbs  ; Stars  with  his  beauty  ; Earth  with  his  skin. 
All-hail  to  Jiimbaka ! 

10  In  the  beginning  rose  Hiranyagarbha,  etc.,  as  in  XIII.  4; 

XXIII,  1. 

11  Who  by  his  grandeur,  etc.,  as  in  XXIII.  3. 

12  Whose,  by  his  might,  are  these  snow-covered  mountains, 

and  men  call  sea  and  Rasa  his  possession  : 

Whose  are  these  arms,  w’hose  are  tliese  heavenly  regions. 
What  God  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  1 
|13  Giver  of  vital  breath,  of  power  and  vigour,  he  whose  com- 
mandment all  the  Gods  acknowledge  : 

Toe  Lord  of  death,  whose  shade  is  life  immortal.  Whut 
God  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  1 

14  May  powers  auspicious  come  to  us  from  every  side,  never 

deceived,  unhindered  and  victorious. 

That  the  Gods  ever  may  be  with  us  for  our  gain,  our  guar- 
dians day  by  day,  unceasing  in  their  care. 

15  Miy  the  auspicious  favour  of  the  Gods  be  ours,  on  us 

descend  the  bounty  of  the  righteous  Gods. 

The  friendship  of  tlie  Gods  have  we  devoutly  sought : so 
may  the  Gods  extend  our  life  that  we  may  live. 


9 Separation:  vidhriti ; the  ritual  name  of  two  blades  of  grass  laid 
wise  on  the  altar.  See  VII.  4 ; S.  B.  (4.  XII.  p.  93 ; XXVL  89.  Jimbaica 
a name  of  Varuna. 

10  Four  texts  follow  constituting  the  Inviting  and  Offering  Verses  of  the 
Sacrifice  of  the  Horse  and  other  victims  to  PrajApati.  Verse  10  i.s  repeater 
from  XIII.  4 and  XXIIl.  1. 

12  Taken  from  the  same  hymn  as  verses  10  and  11.  R.  V X.  121.  t 
JRasd : the  ancient  name  of  a river  in  the  north  of  India  ; somf-time.s  re 
g.arded  as  a stream  that  flows  round  the  eaith  .and  the  firmament  See 
Prof.  A.  Weber,  Vedische  Beitrage,  VII  pp.  10—12.  W/iut  God:  other 
than  Prajdpiti.  Or,  Ootl  Ka  let  us,  etc. 

13  Taken  from  R.  V.  X 121  2.  The  first  division  of  tlie  second  line  is 
difficidt.  Prof  M.  Muller  renders  it:  ‘Whose  shadow  is  immortality, 
whose  shadow  is  death.'  The  meaning  may  be  that  his  cold  shadow  ( 
di.spleasure,  or  ignorance  of  him,  is  death,  while  the  shadow,  reflection,  er 
knowledge  of  his  bright  gloiy  makes  his  worshipper  immortal. 

14  Ten  stanzas  follow  constituting  the  Inviting  and  ^ " 

the  oblations  of  marrow  or  omentum  and  rice-cakes  to  the  All  Uotls.  ; 
are  taken  from  R.  V.  I.  89.  1—10. 


YERSE  23.J 


WHITE  Y A JURY  ED  A. 


227 


16  We  call  them  hither  with  a hymu  of  olden  time,  Bhaga,  the 

friendly  Daksha,  Mitra,  Aditi, 

Aryaman,  Varuna,  Soma,  the  Asvins.  May  Sarasvati,  aus- 
picious, grant  felicity. 

17  May  the  Wind  waft  to  us  that  pleasant  medicine,  may  Earth 

our  Mother  give  it,  and  our  Father  Heaven, 

And  the  joy-giving  stones  that  press  the  Sonia's  juice.  As- 
vins, may  ye,  for  whom  our  spirits  long,  hear  this. 

18  Him  we  invoke  for  aid  who  reigns  supreme,  the  Lord  of  all 

that  stands  or  moves,  inspirer  of  the  soul, 

That  Pushan  may  promote  the  increase  of  our  wealtli,  our 
keeper  and  our  guard  infallible  for  our  good. 

19  Illustrious  far  and  wide,  may  Indra  prosper  us:  may  Pushan 

prosper  us,  the  Master  of  all  wealth. 

May  Tarkshya  with  uninjured  fellies  prosper  us:  Bnliaspati 
vouchsafe  to  us  prospeiity. 

20  The  Maruts,  Sons  of  Prisni,  borne  by  spotted  steeds,  moving 

in  glory,  oft  visiting  holy  rites. 

Sages  whose  tongue  is  Agiii  and  their  eye.s  the  Sun,— hither 
let  all  the  Gods  for  our  protection  come. 

21  Gods,  may  we  with  our  ears  listen  to  what  is  good,  and  with 

our  eyes  see  what  is  good,  ye  Holy  Ones. 

With  limbs  and  bodies  firm  may  we  extolling  you  attain  the 
term  of  life  appointed  by  the  Gods. 

22  A hundred  autumns  stand  before  us,  0 ye  Gods,  within 

whose  space  ye  bring  our  bodies  to  decay; 

Within  whose  space  our  sons  become  fathers  in  turn.  Breat 
ye  not  in  the  midst  our  course  of  fleeting  life. 

23  Aditi  is  the  heiivoii,  Aditi  is  mid-air,  Aditi  is  the  Muthor 

and  the  Sire  and  Sun. 

; .1  creitive  Power  aswiated  wilU  Aditi,  and 
therefore  sometimes  ideutitied  with  Prajapati. 


19  Tdrhhya  ■ see  XV.  18. 

20  Prisni:  see  VII.  16.  , , 

days,  nor  an  old  mnn  that  hath  not  filled  hi»  < ays  . 

Fathers,  according  to  the  same  authority. 


228  THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  XXV. 


Aditi  is  all  Oods,  Aditi  five-classed  men,  Aditi  all  that  hath 
been  boni  and  shall  be  born. 

24  Slight  ns^not  Varuna,  Aryaman,  or  Mitra,  Kibhukshan, 

Tndra,  Ayn,  or  the  Maruts, 

When  we  declare  amid  the  congregation  the  virtues  of  t!ie 
Strong  Steed,  (Jod-descended. 

25  What  time  they  bear  before  the  Oourscr,  covered  with  trap- 

pintrs  and  with  wealth,  the  grasped  oblanon. 

The  d.ippled  goat  goeth  straiirhtforward,  bleating,  to  the 
place  dear  to  IndiM  and  to  Pushan. 

26  Dear  to  all  Oods,  this  goat,  the  share  of  Pushan,  is  first  led 

forward  with  the  vigorous  Courser, 

While  Tva^hUl•  sends  him  f.>rward  with  the  Charger,  accept- 
able for  sacrifice,  to  glory. 

27  When  thrice  the  men  lead  round  the  Steed,  in  order,  who 

gocth  to  the  Gods  as  meet  oblation, 

The  goat  prccedetli  him,  the  share  of  Pushan,  and  to  the 
Gods  the  sacrifice  aimounceth. 

28  Invoker,  ministering  priest,  atoner,  fire-kiudler,  Soma- 

presscr,  saue,  reciter, 

With  tins  well  ordered  sacrifice,  well  finished,  do  ye  fill  full 
the  clianncls  of  the  rivers. 

29  The  hewers  of  the  post  and  those  who  carry  it,  and  those 

who  carve  the  knob  to  dock  the  Horse  s stake  j 
Those  who  prepare  the  cooking  vessels  for  the  bteed,  niaj 
the  approving  help  of  these  promote  our  work. 

30  Forth,  for  the  regions  of  the  Gods,  the  Charger  with  lii-^ 

smootli  hack  is'eome  ; my  prayer  attends  him. 

In  him  rejoice  the  singer  and  the  sages.  A good  friend 
have  we  won  for  the  Gods’  banquet. 


24  The  Aavastuti  or  Eulogy  of  the  Hor.so  follows,  comprised  in  twenty 
two  versos  which  form  Hymn  lfi2  of  Bo(,k  T.  of  the  lligverla.^  Eihhid-slm 
a name  of  India  as  Imd  of  the  Rihhus,  the  three  season-making  deities  who 
pethaps  represent  the  pa.st.  the  present,  and  the  future.  Ayn  ’ said  hV 
Silvana  and  M.diidhara  to  be  used  in  this  place  for  Vayu.  It  is  apparent  y 
a name  of  Agm,  the  Living,  Lively  One,  as  in  V.  9 God-descended  ■ sprung 
from  the  Gods.  or.  according  to  Saya  ui,  born  as  the  type  of  various  deitie^ 

25  Grasped  oblation . the  offering  of  clarified  butter  taken  from  the  re 
mams  of  a previous  burnt-offering.  Goat:  that  is  to  be  tied  to  the  Hoi^ 

the.  saerilicial  stake.  See  XXIV.  13.  P<hhan:  said  by  Sayana  to 
stand  for  Agni  m this  and  the  two  following  verses.  ^ . 

28  Invoker,  etc. : these  are  the  de.signations  of  eight  of  the  sixteen  F'*:'’  '’ 
employed.  Sage : the  Brahman,  a pi  iest  of  profound  knowledge  (see  V.  ^ , 
VIT.  45)  who  siiperinteiida  the  ceremony.  Fill  fu.ll  the  channels;  ob  ai 
blessings  in  abundance. 


terse  41,] 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA. 


229 


31  May  tlie  fleet  Oonrscr’s  halter  and  his  heel-ropes,  the  head- 
stall and  the  girths  and  cords  about  him, 

And  the  grass  put  within  his  month  to  bait  him,  — amom» 
the  Gods,  too,  let  all  these  he  with  thee. 

33  What  part  of  the  Steed’s  flesh  the  fly  hath  eaten,  or  is  left 
sticking  to  the  post  or  hatchet, 

Or  to  the  slayer’s  hands  and  nails  ndhereth,— among  the 
Gods,  too,  may  all  this  he  with  thee. 

33  Food  undigested  steaming  from  his  belly,  and  any  odour  of 
raw  flesh  remaining, 

This  let  the  immolators  set  in  order  and  dress  the  saerilice 
with  perfect  cooking. 


34  What  from  thy  body  which  with  fire  is  roasted,  when  thou 

art  set  upon  the  spit,  distilleth, — 

Let  not  that  lie  on  earth  or  grass  neglected,  but  to  the  long- 
ing Gods  let  all  be  offered. 

35  They  who,  observing  that  the  Horse  is  ready,  call  out  and 

say,  The  smell  is  good  ; remove  it ; 

And,  craving  meat,  await  the  distribution, — may  thou 
apjiroving  help  promote  our  l.diour. 

36  The  trial-fork  of  the  flesh  cooking  caldron,  the  vessels  out 

of  which  the  broth  is  spriidvied. 

The  warinmg-pots,  the  covers  of  the  dislics,  hooks,  carving- 
boards, — all  these  attend  the  Gliarger. 

37  Let  not  the  fire,  smoke-scented,  make  thee  crackle,  nor 

glowing  caldron  smell  and  hrc.ik  to  pieces. 

Ofilicd,  beloved,  approved,  and  consecrated,— such  Ghaiger 
do  the  Gods  accejit  with  favour. 

The  starting-placG,  his  place  of  rest  and  rolling,  the  ropes 
wherewith  the  Chargei's  feet  were  (aslencd, 

The  water  that  ho  drank,  the  food  lie  tasted,— among  the 
Gods,  too,  may  all  these  attend  thee. 

39  The  robe  they  spread  upon  the  Hor.^e  to  clothe  him,  the 
upper  covering  and  tlic  golden  trappings, 

The  halters  which  re.straiu  the  Steed,  the  heel-ropes, -all 


these,  as  grateful  to  tlie  Gods,  they  oiler. 

40  If  one,  when  seated,  with  excessive  urging  hath  with  his 

heel  ot*  with  his  whip  distressed  thee, 

All  these  thy  woes,  as  with  oblation’s  ladle  at  sacnliccs, 
with  my  prayer  1 banish.  , , 

41  The  four-and-thirty  ribs  of  tlie  swift  Courser,  km  to  die 

Gods,  the  slayer’s  hatchet  pierces. 


230  WHITE  YAJURVEDA.  [BOOK  XX7. 

Cut  ye  with  skill  so  that  the  parts  be  flawless,  and  piece  by 
piece  declaring  them  dissect  them. 

42  Of  Tvashtar’s  Courser  there  is  one  dissector:  this  is  the  cus- 

tom : two  there  are  who  guide  him. 

Such  of  his  limbs  as  I divide  in  order,  all  these,  amid  the 
lumps,  in  fire  T offer. 

43  Let  not  thy  dear  soul  burn  thee  as  thou  comest,  let  not  the 

hatchet  linger  in  thy  body. 

Let  not  a greedy  clumsy  immolator,  missing  the  joints, 
mangle  thy  limbs  unduly. 

44  No,  here  thou  diest  not,  thou  art  not  injured  : only  by  easy 

paths  to  Gods  thou  goest. 

Both  Bays,  both  Spotted  Mares  are  now  thy  fellows,  and  to 
the  Ass’s  pole  is  yoked  the  Courser. 

45  May  this  Steed  bring  us  all-sustaining  riches,  wealth  in 

good  kine,  good  horses,  manly  offspring. 

Freedom  from  sin  may  Aditi  vouchsafe  us;  the  Steed  with 
our  oblations  gain  us  lordship  ! 

46  We  will,  with  Indra  and  all  Gods  to  help  us,  bring  these 

existing  worlds  into  subjection. 

With  the  Adityas,  with  the  band  of  Maruts,  may  Indra 
give  us  medicine  to  heal  us. 

Our  sacrifice,  our  bodies,  aud  our  offspring  may  Indra  re- 
gulate with  the  Adityas. 

47  0 Agni,  bo  our  nearest  Friend,  etc , as  in  III.  25. 

To  thee  then,  0 Most  Bright,  etc,  as  in  III.  26. 

Moon,  the  five  planets,  .ami  the  tweuty-eeven  nalcahatras  or  lunar  astensms. 
See  Ludwig,  Der  Uigveda,  III.  p.  186.  Piece  by  piece . the  dissectors  aio 
to  name  the  .several  parts  as  they  divide  them,  each  part  being  as.sigued  to 
a separate  deity. 

42  One  dissector : in  chief.  The  lumps : the  portions  of  meat  made  up 
into  balls. 

43  Burn  thee : make  thee  aad. 

44  Both  Bays,  etc. : thou  art  now  associated  in  heaven  with  the  two  bay 
horses  of  Indra,  the  two  spotted  mares  of  the  Maruts,  aud  the  a^s  (repie- 
senting  the  grey  or  dun  colour  of  early  morning)  that  draws  tbe  chariot  of 
the  Asvina. 

46  Taken,  with  variations,  from  R.  V.  X.  157.  1,  3,  2. 

For  a description  of  an  Asvamedha  in  later  times,  see  Rftrailyana,  Book 
I.  10-15. 

The  Dakshinils  or  honoraria  bestowed  upon  the  officiating  priests  are  not 
mentioned  in  the  text.  They  cousisteil  chiefly  of  a large  proportion  of  the 
booty  taken  from  the  ruler  and  the  people  of  the  conqueied  country.  Ac- 
cording to  a Commentator,  the  spoil  of  the  east  was  given  to  tbe  Hotar,  and 
that  of  the  south  to  the  Brahman.  The  Adhvaryu  received  a maiden  (the 
daughter  of  the  Sacrificer,  says  a Commentator),  and  the  Sacrificer’s  fourth 
wife.  See  Hillebrandt,  Ritual-Litteratur,  p.  162, 


BOOK  THE  TWENTY-SIXTIL 


Agni  and  Prithivi,  closely  connected,  may  they  bring  low  for 
me  the  boon  i mention. 

Vayu  and  Firmament,  closely  connected,  may  they,  etc. 
Closely  connected  Dyaus  and  the  Aditya,  may  thoj^,  etc. 
Closely  connected  V<iriina  and  Waters,  may  they,  etc. 

Lord  of  the  seven  communities  and  her  wlio  forms  all  be- 
ings, eighth. 

Make  onr  ways  full  of  pleasantness:  may  So  and-So  and  I 
agree. 

2 That  I to  all  the  people  may  address  this  salutary  speccli, 
To  priest,  und  mdileiiian,  Smlra  and  Ar\a,  to  one  of  onr  own 

km  and  to  the  stranger. 

Lear  may  I be  to  Cods  and  gnerdon-givcr.  Fulfilled  be  this 
my  hope  : be  that  iny  portion  ! 

3 Give  us,  Brihaspati,  that  wondrous  treasure,  that  winch  ex- 

ceeds the  merit  of  the  foem.m. 

Which  shines  among  the  Iblk  etfoctuol,  splendid,  that.  Son 

of  Law,  which  Is  Avith  might  refulgent. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  tlmn.  Thee  lor  Brihaspati.  ilns  is 
thy  home.  Thee  for  Bn  hasp, ui, 

4 Como  hither,  Indra,  lich  in  kiiie  ’ Drink  Soma,  Bold  of 

Hundred  J^owers, 

Effused  by  braying  pressing-stones.  ^ ^ 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  Thee  for  Indra,  licb  in  liinc. 
This  is  thy  home.  Thee  for  Indra,  rich  m kine 


Books  XXVI-XXTX  contain  .siiciificial  te.xts  and  fornuil.is  connected 
with  the  Lunar  Bacntices,  Obl.itu’n  to  the  JlaufM,  the  Agiulnttra,  t le  > ' a- 
soiiid  Sacrifices,  the  Vajapeya,  the  lUj  isuya,  the  S.tutr.innini.the  AHv.iuiti  i.i, 
etc.,  which  have  formed  the  hutijectb  of  e.ohei  Ixioks.  1 o tluMt*  «.ici nci  a 
tbe.se  supplementary  foimiibis  aie  to  he  aii])hed  as  occasion  ie<iuiieM. 

1 Bring  low:  under  my  control;  into  my  |M.sse«sion  rkchom  J nien- 
tion:  a blank  prayer,  the  specual  blessing  tii.it  is  de.sired  inns  jesan 
when  the  formula  i.s  used.  Seven  nmwnaitm  probably  meaning,  .Ul  tne 
people.  See  It.  V.  VIII.  81.  20  According  tn  Mabidhar.i,  Uiesey.n  oig.uis 
of  perception  aie  intended,  and  PatamHin.l  the  Supreme  Se!  , is  , ii.ir  < >r<  • 
BigAih:  Earth,  or  Vak.  These  words  are  in  the  nomniatiye  cayo,  am  tbe 
verb,  7/iak,  is  in  the  .econd  person  singular  of  the  impeiative.  Malm  liara 
therefore  supplies  He  Srumin,  yasya  lava,  0 Lord,  whose  are. 

some  mau  witli  whom  the  speakei  is  at  vari.ini*e,  amt  whose  name  is 
•'ipplied  as  occasion  requires.  Cp.  VII.  3;  l.\.  38,  40. 

2 Arya:  the  Vaisva,  the  man  of  the  people,  the  .ignculturi^t  ^ 

of  the  third  class  Be  that  the  special  boon  pmyed  fm,  wealth,  kine,  son  , 
or  whatever  it  may  be,  is  to  be  declared  when  the  formnla  is  used 

3 Taken  fiom  It  V.  II.  23.  15.  The  foernan  the  '‘J 

creed.  Son  of  Law:  who  hast  thy  being  in  lu-cordauce 

Truth,  or  eternal  Law  and  Order,  7%  ilLriati 

addre3.sea  the  cup  of  Soma  juice  which  he  take.s  or  draws  fm  Liihaspati. 


232  THE  TEXTS  OP  THE  [BOOK  XXVl 

5 0 Indra,  Vritra-slayer,  come.  Drink  Soma,  Lord  of  Hun- 

dred J^owers, 

Expressed  with  stones  whose  wealth  is  kino. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou,  etc.,  as  in  verse  4. 

6 Vaisvanara  tlie  riii^hteoiis  One,  the  Lord  of  sacrifice  and  light, 
The  heat  that  wastetli  not,  we  seek. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  Thee  for  Vaisvanara. 

This  is  thy  home:  thee  for  Vaisvanara, 

7 Still  in  Vaisvanara’s  grace  may  we  continue:  yea,  he  is 

King  Supreme  o’er  all  tilings  living. 

Sprung  hence  to  life  upon  this  All  he  looketh.  Vaisvanara 
hath  rivalry  with  Surya. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou,  etc,  as  in  verse  6. 

8 Hitherward  come  Vaisvanara  to  succour  us  from  far  away, 
Agni  through  laud  that  brings  him  near! 

Taken  ujion  a base,  etc , as  in  verse  6. 

9 Agiii  is  Pavamana,  Sage,  the  Tribe-Priost  of  the  Kaces  Five 
To  him  of  mighty  wealth  we  [irav. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  Thee  for  lustre.  This  is  thy 
home.  Thee  for  lustre. 

10  May  mighty  Indra,  thunder-armed,  may  ShodasI  protect  us 

well,  and  slay  the  wicked  man  who  hatetli  us. 

Taken  upon  a base  art  thou.  Thee  for  Mahendra.  This  is 
thy  homo.  Thee  for  Mahendra. 

11  As  cows  low  to  their  calves  in  stalls  so  with  oar  songs  we 

glorify 

This  Indra,  e’en  your  wondrous  God  who  checks  assault, 
who  joys  in  the  delicious  juice. 

12  Agni’s  IS  the  most  fetching  song.  Shine  mightily,  thourieli 

in  light  I 

Like  the  Chief  Consort  of  a King,  riches  and  strength  proceed 
from  thee. 


5 W/ione  wealth  in  kitie  ’ libations  of  Soma  juice  beiii^  thus  Tewaided 

6 The  heat  that  wusteth  not:  ‘ Exliausde.ss  beat  am  1 (Ai'iii)’ :-rli  V HI 

26.  7. 

7 Sprung  hence:  produced  from  these  two  aranis,  the  fire  drill.  Tl)'^ 
text  is  taken  from  K.  V.  1.  t)8.  1. 

9 Taken  from  R.  V IX.  66.  20.  Purnmdna:  Self-purifying;  anepIUi't 
applied  both  to  Soma  and  to  Agni.  Tribe  Priest : or  Puroluta 
Five:  tlie  four  castes  and  Nishadas  or  aboriginal  tribe.s,  according  to  tlie 
commentators. 

10  a title  of  Indra.  See  VlII.  33,  note.  Mahendra:  Great  India. 

11  Taken  from  R.  V.  VIII.  77.  1.  Cows  • milked  for  sacrificial  purpoa-.^ 
and  tempiirariiy  separated  from  their  calves.  See  I.,  introductory  note 

12  Taken  from  R.  V.  V.  25.  7.  Most  fetching,  most  effectually  attract-^ 
ing  and  biinging  to  the  sacrifice.  Like  the  Chief  Consort:  like  a chief 
queen  proceeding  from  her  home  in  royal  state. 


VERSE  21.] 


WHITE  ruVRVEDA. 


233 


13  Ccnie,  here,  0 A?:ni,  v.'iU  I sin"  venly  otlier  song.s  to  thee, 
And  with  these  drops  sh-i!t  thou  grow  strong. 

11-  The  Seasons  spread  tliy  saern'ioe ! the  Months  protect  t'.iine 
oflering  ! 

May  the  Year  guard  our  .sacrifice  for  thee  and  keep  cur  cinld- 
ron  safe. 

If)  There  \vhere  the  niountain.s  dov/uwnrd  .slope,  there  hy  the 
meeting  of  the  streams 
The  sege  was  ruanifcst  with  s^mg. 

1C  High  is  thy  juice’s  birth : though  set  in  heaven,  on  earth  it 
hath  obtained 

Strong  sheltering  power  r.nd  great  renor/n, 

17  Finder  of  room  and  freedom,  fiow  for  Iiidra,  meet  for  worship, 

flow 

For  Vanina  and  tlic  Marnt  host. 

18  Striving  to  win,  with  him  wogi.m  all  wealth  of  the  ungodly 

one, 

Yea,  all  the  glories  of  mankind. 

FJ  May  we  he  prosperous  with  biave  sons,  crttle,  horses,  each 
vvi5>h  of  ours,  and  /aric'^  ble^’sings, 

Witli  quadrupeds,  and  with  the  men  about  us.  May  the 
Hods  guide  our  sacrifice  in  season. 

20  0 Agni,  bring  thou  hitherward  the  yearning  I’onsorts -if  Hie 
Gods, 

Bring  Tvashtar  to  the  Soma-draught. 

2!  0 Neshbir  girt  by  Dames,  accept  our  sacrifice  ; willi  Ib.a 
drink, 

For  thou  art  he  who  givelh  wcidtli.  


13  Taken  fioni  R V.  Vf.  Id  H).  . 

I'i  TalcMi  from  R V.  Vlil  d 28  Thenar'  I'l't'*-'’-  ^ I ' 

•Mon  of  the  purport  of  the  v.-rso  that  m<m  o\i;^lit  to  worship  w leie 
IS  nai.l  to  be  mainfcHted.’-Wilsmi  According  to  Mahi.Utar.*,  t i.‘  trim  I. - 
tioii  ^dl^^]d  be  ‘ Tlie  Sage  was  gendered  witli  the  tliougl.t  , .hat  js,  ,ie  ki  > , 
the  Soma  plant  sprang  to  life  with  the  kuowL-.lgc  that  men  would  u,s(‘  it  m 

their  sacrifices  . , , w u 

Id  Taken  from  R.  V.  IX  61.  10.  The  verse  is  .addressed 
17  Taken  from  R.  V.  IX.  61.  12  Ad.lressed  to  Soma.  Med  Jor 
yft/i/avc ; according  to  Prof.  M.  Muller,  the  pursuer 
IS  Taken  from  R.V.  IX.  61.11.  Jinn  Soma  . Ida 

20  Taken  from  R.  V.  I.  22.  9 TvaMnr . ‘probably  on 

creative  agency  in  the  womb,  Tvastr  is  closely  allmd  with  eoh  ^ . ■ 

('jnnh,  janayoh ) or  the  wive.s  of  the  gods  who  .are  his  uio.-.t  i(  i e 

ants ’—Macdoiiell,  Vedic  Mythology,  p 177.  u.n.u  forward 

21  Taken  from  R.  V.  I.  15  3.  Nesktar-  the  priest  who 

the  wife  of  the  Saenficer  and  prepares  the  t|ur.i  (sec  Y,  1 ‘ some 

this  place  Neshtar  is  said  to  be  a title  of  Tvashttr  I ” ^Y,tb  the  God 

‘>ocai^^ou  assumed  the  function  of  a Neshtar  priest,  hdu:  with  the  GoU 

7btu,  the  Ideason  deified ; or,  in  the  proper  season. 


234  WHITE  YAJURVEDA.  [BOOK  XXVI, 

22  He  with  the  Hitas  fain  would  drink,  Wealth-giver,  from  the 

Neshtar’s  bowl. 

Begin,  pay  offerings : hasten  ye. 

23  Thine  is  this  Soma : come  thou  near,  approach  it.  Drink 

thou  thereof,  benevolent,  and  cease  not. 

Sit  on  the  sacred  grass  at  this  our  worship,  and  take  these 
drops  into  thy  belly,  Irulra. 

24  Come  unto  us,  ye  swift  to  listen ! as  at  home,  upon  the 

sacred  grass  sit  and  enjoy  yourselves. 

And,  Tvashtar,  well  content  be  joyfnl  in  the  juice  with  Gods 
and  Goddesses  in  gladsome  company. 

25  In  sweetest  and  most  gladdening  stream  flow  pure,  0 Soma, 

on  thy  way. 

Pressed  out  for  Indra,  for  his  drink. 

26  Fieiid-f|ueller,  Friend  of  all  men,  he  hath  in  the  vat  attained 

unto 

His  place,  his  iron-fashioned  home. 

22  Taken  from  1\  V.  I 15  9 With  the  RUus:  with  the  deitied  Seasons; 
or  in  due  season,  AS  alx^ve  Wealth-giver:  Agni. 

23  Taken  from  11.  V.  III.  35.  6. 

24  Come  untom:  according  to  Mahidhara,  the  Gods’  Consorts  are  ad- 
dressed. 

25  Taken  from  R.  V.  IX.  1. 1. 

26  Taken  from  R V.  IX  1.  2,  with  a .slight  variation.  Iron-fashionrtl 
home  receptacle  that  has  been  hammered  or  formed  with  a tool  of  aym, 
iron  or  perliaps  bron/e. 


BOOK  THE  TWENTY-SEVENTH. 


Half-years  and  Seasons  strengthen  thee,  0 Agni,  the  Years 
and  all  the  Verities  and  Kishis ! 

Flash  forth  with  thy  celestial  eftnlgence;  illiuninc  all  four 
regions  of  the  heaven. 

2 Kindle  thee,  Agni,  wake  this  man  to  knowledge : rise  up 

erect  for  great  and  happy  fortune. 

Agni,  be  those  uninjured  who  adore  thee,  thy  priests  bo 
glorious  and  none  beside  them  ! 

3 The  Brahmans  present  here  elect  thee,  Agni : bo  thou  pro- 

pitious in  our  sanctuary. 

Slayer  of  rivals,  Agni,  quell  our  foeraen  : watch  in  thy  house 
with  care  that  never  ceases. 


4 Even  hero  do  thou,  0 Agni,  stablish  wealth  : let  not  oppres- 

sors injure  thee  by  thinking  of  thee  first. 

Light  be  thy  task  of  ruling,  Agni,  with  thy  power  : may  ho 
who  worships  thee  wax  strung,  invincible. 

5 Kind  to  the  people,  grasp  thy  power,  0 Agni : contend  thou 

with  the  Friend  by  way  of  friendship, 

Placed,  Agni,  in  the  centre  of  our  kinsmen,  flash  forth  to  bo 
invoked  by  Kings  around  thee. 

C Past  those  who  slay,  past  enemies,  past  thoughtless  men, 
past  tho.so  who  hate, — 

Yea,  Agni,  drive  away  all  woe  and  trouble : vouchsafe  us 
opulence  with  men  about  us. 

7 Holder  of  sway,  shine  here  refulgent,  Agni ! invincible, 
unconquered  Jatavedas. 

Light  all  the  regions,  chasing  human  terrors:  with  happy 
helps  guard  us  to-day  for  increase. 


1 Verses  1 — 9 are  to  be  used  at  an  aniinal  sacrifice  between  thi,  9th  and 
10th  of  the  normal  G.iyatrt  kindling-verses  recited  while  the  Haeiificial  hre 
is  being  lighted  or  when  additional  fuel  is  applied  to  it.  hee  * acm  o(uh 
of  the  East,  XLI.  pp.  167  (note),  168.  Half-years:  tarnah;  the  warm 
halves  of  the  years  as  distinguished  from,  and  equal  (sama  ofioc)  to  the 
himdh  or  winters,  See  Prof.  A.  Weber,  \edisclie  lleitiage,  VI  . pp-  > » 
and  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Lebcn,  p.  371-  Veises  1— -3  aie  taken,  wi  i van 
atioiis,  from  A.  V.  II.  6 1 — 3. 

4 Varied  from  A.  V.  VII,  82.  3 Let  not  let  not  Bie 

<uiticipating  our  worship,  secure  thy  attention  before  us,  am  , as  y 

adorers,  insult  and  degrade  thy  majesty. 

5 A.  V.  II.  6.  4.  The  Friend:  the  God  Mitra.  By  way  of  friendship: 
fnitradhd. 


6 A.  V.  II.  6.  5,  slightly  varied. 

7 Varied,  from  A.  V.  VII.  84.  1. 


236 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  XX vn. 


8 Brihaspati,  Savitar,  give  this  innn  knowledge  ; sharpen  hin 

thoroughly  tliongh  already  sh:ir[)3nGd. 

To  great  and  high  felicity  exalt  him:  in  him  let  all  the  Gods 
rejoice  and  trinmpli. 

9 As  thou,  Brihaspati,  from  curse  hast  fretd  us,  from  dwelliii;^^ 

yonder  in  the  re:dm  of  Yama, 

The  Asvins,  Leeches  of  the  Gods,  0 Agni,  have  chased  Death 
f:ir  from  us  with  mighty  powers. 

10  Looking  upon  the  loftier  light,  etc.,  as  in  XX.  21. 

11  Uplifted  are  the  brands  that  are  his  fuel : lofty  and  brilliant 

are  the  flames  of  Agiii, 

Splendidly  bright  of  the  Son  fair  of  aspect. 

12  'I'an'inapat  the  Asnra,  all-possessing,  God  among  Gods,  the 

God  with  mead  and  batter  shall  bedew  the  paths 

13  With  mead  to  sacrifice  thou  comest,  Agni,  comest  as  friendly- 

minded  Narasainsa,  and  Savitar  righteous  God  wliohruigs 
all  blessings. 

14  He  eorneth  hitherward  with  pov/er  and  flitncsc,  the  luminout', 

implored  with  adoration. 

While  rites  proceed  the  ladles  move  to  Agni. 

15  Let  him  pay  worship  to  this  Agni's  greRtness,  daintily  fed. 

he  verily  gives  enjoyments : 

The  wisest  Vasii  he,  and  best  wealth  giver. 

16  Widely  expansive,  ruling  by  foundation,  the  Doors  divine— 

and,  after,  all — 

Presei  ve  this^Agni’s  holy  works. 

17  May  Dawn  and  Night  protect — his  hoavenly  Consorts — in 

his  home  this  our  saerifioial  worship. 

18  Ye  two  celestial  Hotirs,  greet  with  praises  this  lofty  rite  of 

ours,  the  tongue  of  Agni. 

Cause  that  our  sacrifice  be  well  conducted. 


8 Varied,  from  A.  V.  VII  18.  Brihaspati,  SaAtar . meaning  Agni  ^di  > 
is  identitiea  with  these  Gods. 

11  Varied,  ftom  A.  V.  V.  27.  1.  This  and  the  eVven  following 
form  an  Ajnl  or  Piopitiat<»ry  Hymn,  the  whole  of  wliidi  is  found,  witii 
variations  in  the  same  Atharva-veda  hymn.  The  Si>n:  Agni  is  called  the 
Son  of  the  Suorilicer  as  being  pioduced  and  Bupjiorteci  by  him. 

12  A>tura:  Lord  Divine.  The  paths:  the  ways  or  courses  of  the  Sacrifire 
14  The  luminous : vahnih;  or,  the  priest ; or,  the  furtherer  (of  obUtioim,'. 

See  M.  Muller,  Vi-dic  Hynins,  I pp  37  sqq. 

16  Boors;  of  the  saciificial  hall,  deified.  And  all:  there  is  no  substan- 
tive ; dev(^'h,  God-s,  is  probably  understood. 

17  Bavin  and  Nl<fht:  personified  as  Goddesses. 

18  Celestial  llotan:  Agni  with  Aditya  or  Varuna,  or  Agni  terrestrial  aiw 
firmameutal. 


VERSE  28  ] 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


2i7 


19  Upon  this  p^rass  three  fJocLIcsses  bo  seated,  Ida,  Sarasvati, 

Dhiirati  the  Mighty  glontiod  with  song. 

20  This  our  productive  wondrous  flow  may  Tvaslitar  pour  down 

on  this  man’s  kin,  and  wealth  and  heioes. 

21  Vanaspati,  presenting  (d  thyself,  send  (lod-ward  ! Let  Agni, 

Immolator,  season  oiir  ohliUion. 

22  Pay  sacrifice  to  Indra,  Jatavedai  Agin  ! with  Hail  ’ All  (lods 

accept  the  gift  we  oiler  ' 

23  Wise,  bright,  arranger  of  his  teams,  he  soeketh  men  v itli 

rich  food  whose  treasures  are  abundant 
They  have  stood  firm  of  one  accord  with  Vayu  : yea,  the 
men  wrought  all  noble  o[)endions. 

24  The  God  whom  both  these  worlds  broiurht  foith  for  viele's, 

whom  heavenly  Dhishana  for  our  wealth  apn  untelh  - 
llis  team  of  harnessed  horses  w.iits  on  VAyu  and,  foieniost, 
on  the  radiant  tre.isure-hohier. 

25  What  time  the  mighty  waters  came  containing  the  nnivcisal 

germ,  producing  Agm, 

Tlienco  sprang  the  Gods’  one  spirit  int>>  heiug.  Vvhat  God 
shall  we  adore  witli  onr  obiatuni'^ 

2C  Who  in  his  might  surveyed  the  Hoods  enclosing  productive 
force  and  generating  Worsliip, 

He  who  is  God  mid  Gods,  ami  none  beside  him— What  God 
shall  we  adore  with  our  uUation  I 

27  The  teams  wherewith  tlnni  Bcckcst  him  who  oilers,  within 

his  house,  0 Vayn,  to  direct  him, 

Therewith  send  wealth  to  ns  with  full  enjoyment,  a hero  son 
and  gifts  of  kmc  and  horses. 

28  With  thy  yoked  teams  in  hundreds  and  i:i  thousands  come 

to  our  sacrifice  and  solemn  worship. 

0 Vayu,  rmikc  thee  glad  at  this  libation.  Preserve  us  ever- 
moie,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. 


19  Three  Goddesses:  of  Prayer  and  Devotion. 

21  Vuna$pati  the  sacrificial  .stake,  regarded  as  a foim  of  Agni.  Send 

our  offerings  to  the  G>id,s  in  heaven. 

23  This  aii(l  the  folh)wing  verse,  taken  re.si)ect,ivcly  from  U.  V VII  91. 

3 and  90.  3,  are  used  at  the  sa.-nlice  of  a whim  hornless  he-g<.at  to  V.iyu. 

24  Dhishand  ■ a Goddess  of  abundance  and  prospetity.  ^ 

2.5  This  and  the  f.dlowing  vers.-,  in  honour  of  Pr.aj  tpati,  are  taken  frota 
It.  V.  X.  121.  7 8.  What  Gml  shall  vx  adore:  or,  Worshiii  wc  K.i  ttie,  i..o(i. 

27  This  and  the  following  verse  are  taken,  in  continuation  of  verso  21, 
bom  R.  V.  VII.  91.  3,  5. 


238 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  XXVil 


29  Drawn  by  thy  team,  0 Vayu,  come : to  thee  ia  offered  this, 

the  pure. 

Thou  viaitest  the  presaer’s  house. 

30  Vayu,  the  bright  ia  offered  thee,  best  of  the  meath  at  holy 

rites. 

Come  thou  to  drink  the  Soma  juice,  God  longed-for,  on  thy 
team-drawn  car. 

31  Lover  of  worship,  leader,  come  Vayu  with  thought,  to  sacrifice, 
Propitious  with  propitious  teams  1 

32  With  all  the  thousand  chariots  that  are  thine,  0 Vayu,  come 

to  us, 

Team-drawn,  to  drink  the  Soma  juice. 

33  Come  thou  with  one,  ard  ten,  0 Self-Existent ! with  two 

unto  the  sacrifice,  and  twenty. 

Three  are  the  teams  and  thirty  which  convey  thee.  0 Vayu, 
in  this  place  unyoke  tliy  coursers. 

34  Wondeiful  Vayu,  Lord  of  Truth,  thou  who  art  Tvashtar’s 

Sonin-law, 

Thy  saving  succour  we  elect. 

35  Like  kine  unmilked  we  call  aloud.  Hero,  to  thee  and  sing 

thy  praise. 

Looker  on  heavenly  light,  Lord  of  this  moving  world.  Lord, 
Indra ! of  what  movetb  not. 

36  None  other  like  to  thee,  of  earth  or  of  the  heavens,  hath 

been  or  ever  will  be  born. 

Desiring  horses,  Indra,  Bounteous  Lord  I and  kine,  as  men 
of  might  we  call  on  thea 

37  That  we  may  win  us  wealth  and  power,  we  poets  call  on 

only  thee. 

In  war  men  call  on  thee,  Indra  1 the  hero’s  Lord,  in  the 
steed’s  race-course  call  on  thee. 

38  As  such,  0 Wonderful,  whose  hand  holds  thunder,  praised 

as  mighty.  Caster  of  the  Stone  ! 

29  Taken  from  R.  V.  11.  41  2.  The  pure:  Soma  juice. 

30  Taken  from  R.  V.  IV.  47.  1. 

32  R.  V.  11.  41.  1. 

34  R.  V.  VIII.  26  21.  Tvashtars  Son-in-laio : the  commentators  give  no 
satisfactory  explanation  Saranyu  (who  is  pei  haps  Ushas,  Dawn),  Tvashtir  s 
daughter,  was  wedded  to  Vivas vdn  who  cannot  be  identified  with  Vayu. 
See  Hillebrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  I p.  .'521. 

35  R.  V.  VII.  32  22.  Moving  world:  all  animated  beings. 

36  R,  V.  VII.  32.  23. 

37  R.  V.  VI.  46.  1.  In  war  : literally,  in,  or  among,  foes. 

38  R.  V.  VI.  46,  2.  The  Stone:  the  thunderbolt. 


VERSE  45.] 


WHITE  YAJURYEDA. 


239 


Pour  on  us  boldly,  Indra,  kine  and  chariot-steeds  ever  to  be 
the  conqueror’s  strength. 

39  What  succour  will  he  bring  to  us,  wonderful,  ever-prospering 

Friend  ? 

With  what  most  mighty  company? 

40  What  genuine  and  most  liberal  draught  will  spirit  thee  with 

juice  to  burst 

Open  e’en  strongly-guarded  wealth  ? 

41  Do  thou  who  arr  protector  of  ns  thy  friend.s  who  jaaiso  thee 
With  hundred  aids  apjiroach  us. 

42  Sing  to  your  Agiii  with  each  song,  at  every  sacrifice,  for 

strength. 

Come,  let  ns  praise  the  Wise  and  Everlasting  Cod  even  as  a 
well-beloved  Friend. 

43  Protect  us,  Agni,  through  the  first,  protect  us  through  the 

second  hymn. 

Protect  us  through  three  hymns,  0 Lord  of  Power  and  Might ; 
through  four  hymns,  Vasu  ! guard  thou  us 

44  The  Sou  of  Strength  ; for  is  he  not  our  Fiiend  I Let  us  servo 

him  for  offering  our  gifts 

In  battles  may  ho  be  our  help  and  strengthener,  yea,  be  tho 
saviour  of  our  lives. 

45  Thou  art  Sainv.itsara  ; thou  art  Parivatsara  ; thou  art  Ida- 

vatsara  j tiiou  art  Idvatsura  ; thou  art  Vntsaia. 

Prosper  thy  Dawns!  P«os|)er  thy  D.iy-and  Nights!  Trosper 
thy  Half-months,  Months,  Seasons,  and  Years' 

Combine  them  for  their  going  and  their  coming,  and  send 
them  forward  on  their  ordeied  courses. 

In  eagle’s  shape  thou  art  piled  up  and  layered.  With  that 
divinity,  Aiigiras-like,  he  steady. 

39  This  an.t  the  two  following  verges  aie  taken  from  It.  V.  IV.  31.  1 3. 


42  H V.  VI.  48  1.  , , , , . . 

43  R.  V.  VIII.  49.  9.  First,  eU.:  the  numbers  prohahly  have  reteronce  to 

the  four  quarters  of  the  sky.-  laidwig  Aeconlmg  tu  M..hhlhara,  ^rst  re- 
fers to  the  Rig  ; second  to  the  Yajur  ; tkret  to  Rig,  \aju.,  bama;  four  to 
these  three  ioid  Nigada  or  loud  recitathm.  ^ *1,,, 

44  R.  V.  VI  48.  2.  A continuation  of  verso  42  Son  ofStimfith.  in  tho 

accusative  ca.se  governed  by  ‘let  us  praise’  in  the  preceding  . . . 

45  The  formulas  contai.red  m this  ver^e  are  to  be  ^ 

chayana  ceremony  at  the  time  when  the  Saenheer  .ouo  " 9 ' Acrti  m 

ot  tlie  surface  of  the  iiewly-CDnstructed  Fire  altar.  . - 

addressed,  as  identified  with  Piajapati  the  Piesidmg  Dcty  of  the  ^ ^ ^ 

with  the  Altar.  Samvatvera  and  the  rest  are  the  name-,  g.  en  t'-  ^ ^ « 

of  the  five  year  cycle  intended,  with  the  anl  of  an  ^ 

adjirst  the  difference  between  the  luna.  f 

Altind^ches  Leben  p 370  In  eagles  shape  .see  M , hrst  n 

the  Fire-altar.  Aw/nu  lih.  M tboB  did-.l  when  coratrurted  by  Auktia.. 

bee  XII.  53 ; XI. 


BOOK  THE  TWENTY-EIGHTH. 


On  the  earth’s  centre,  at  hbation’s  place  let  the  Priest  ^(jr 
ship  Indra  with  the  kiiniling-stick. 

The  miglitiest  of  the  lords  of  men  is  kindled  cn  the  hci^dit 
of  heaven. 

Let  him  enjoy  the  butter.  Hotar,  v/orship. 

2 Him  let  the  Hotar  worship,  him  Tanunapat  v.nth  ready  aids, 

the  conqueror  never  overcome, 

Indra,  the  God  who  tinds  heaven’s  light  on  paths  most  nch 
111  pleasant  sweets,  with  Narasanisa  all  aglow.  Let  nun 
enjoy,  etc.,  as  in  verse  1. 

3 With  viands  let  the  Hotar  worship  Indra  immortal,  praised, 

receiver  of  oblations. 

The  God,  the  equal  of  the  Gods  in  vigour,  the  thiindei- 
wiclder,  breaker-down  of  castles.  Let  hun  enjoy,  etc. 

4 Lot  the  Priest  worship  Indra,  Bull  who  sitteth  on  sacred 

grass,  doer  of  manly  actions. 

Lot  him  be  seated  on  the  grass  with  Vasus  and  Rndras  and 
Adityas  for  companions.  Let  him  enjoy,  etc. 

5 Let  the  Priest  sacrifice.  The  Doors  have  strengthened  In- 

dra,  his  force  and  conquering  might  and  vigour. 

At  this  our  worship  let  the  Doors  be  o[)ened,  easy  to  pasfl, 
the  strongtheners  of  Order  : ^idc  let  them  open  out  for 
bounteous  Indra.  Let  them  enjoy,  etc. 

G Let  the  Piiest  sacrifice  to  Night  and  Morning,  the  tecmiie: 
Cows  of  Indra,  Mighty  Mothers. 

Indra  their  calf  with  lustre  have  they  strengthened,  even 
as  two  mothers  of  a calf  in  common.  Let  them  enjoy,  ct  . 
7 Let  the  Priest  worship  both  the  heavenly  Hotars,  Frieiub, 
Leeches,  healing  Indra  with  oblation. 

The  sages,  Gods  preeminent  for  wisdom  bestow  on  Indra  hi> 
surpassing  power.  Let  them  enjoy,  etc.  ^ ^ 

This  Cook  is  closely  connected  with,  and  siippleineutaiy  to,  Books  XIX.- 
XXI.  which  tieat  of  the  SautrAmaid  ceremony. 

1 Verses  1 -11  form  an  Apri  or  Propitiatory  Hymn.  See  XX.  37,  note. 
The  Priest:  the  divine  Hotar  in  heaven,  whose  example  the  human  11. itai  i 
to  follow.  Earth's  antre.  the  .dtar.  Hotar:  tlie  human  Hotar  is  addre^K'- 

2 TanUnapdt:  Son  of  Himself;  Agni  as  continually  reproduced 
other  lire.  JVai'dsofnsa  Praise  or  Uesire  of  uieu  , Agui. 

3 Castles  the  cloud-castles  of  the  demons  who  withhold  tlie  rain. 

5 Doors:  of  the  saciihchd  hall. 

7 Hotars  Fiimameiital  and  Terrestrial  Agni. 


VERSE  14.]  WHITE  YAJURVEDA.  241 

8 Let  the  Priest  offer  sacrifice  to  the  three  Goddesses  and  balm. 
Let  the  three  triple  active  Ones,  let  Ida  and  Sarasvati  and 
Bharati  the  mighty  Dames,  Consorts  of  Indra,  who  receive 
our  sacrificial  offerings,  enjoy  the  butter,  etc. 

0 Let  the  Priest  worship  Tvashtar  radiant  Indra,  Physician 
good  at  sacrifice,  graced  with  butter. 

Multiform  and  prolific,  rich  and  bounteous.  Lot  Tvashtar, 
giving  wondrous  powers  to  Indni,  enjoy,  etc. 

10  Let  the  Priest  worship  him,  the  Forest-Sovran,  the  Tmmola- 

tor,  Lord  of  Hundred  Powers,  the  lover  of  the  pra}er,  the 
friend  of  Indra. 

Balming  with  mead,  may  he  on  easy  pathways  sweeten  our 
sacrifice  with  savoury  butter.  Let  him  enjoy,  etc. 

11  Let  the  Priest  offer  sacrifice  to  Indra  : with  Hail ! to  Gods 

of  butter;  with  Hail!  to  Gods  of  marrow;  with  Hail! 
to  Gods  of  drops;  with  Hail!  to  Gods  of  oft'erings  paid  with 
Svaha ; with  Hail ! to  Gods  of  sacrificial  hymns. 

All-hail  1 May  butter-drinking  Gods  and  Indra  rejoicing 
taste  the  butter.  Hotar,  worship. 

12  Vigorous,  strewn  by  Gods  upon  the  altar  the  right  Gods’ 

sacred  Grass  hath  strengthened  Indra. 

Cut  in  the  day,  cherished  by  night  it  hath  ^surpassed  those 
who  have  sacrificial  Grass  with  wealth.  lor  gam  of  riches 
let  him  taste.  Pay  sacrifice. 

13  Firm,  closely  joined,  the  Doors  divine  have  strengthened 

Indra  in  the  rite. 

Pressed  by  a calf  or  tender  boy  may  they  drive  off  tho 
courser  as  he  tosses  up  the  sand.  For  gam  of  wealth  let 
them  enjoy.  Pay  sacrifice. 

II  Morning  and  Night,  the  Goddesses,  have  called  on  Indra  as 

the  rite  advanced.  , n i i 

May  they  well-pleased  and  ordered  well  make  the  Celestial 
Tribes  come  forth.  For  gam  of  wealth  let  them  enjoy. 
Pay  sacrifice. 

8 Three  Goddesm : see  XX.  43.  Active  Onee:  said  to  mean  Agtn,  Vayu, 
Sflrya. 

9 Radiant  Indra : identified  with,  or  mighty  aa,  Indra.  Multiform  ■ as 
creator  of  all  living  beings. 

10  Forest-Sovran : Vanaspati,  the  Sacrificial  Stake.  See  XX.  4. *5,  note. 

11  Of  drops:  who  enjoy  the  diipping  fat  or  marrow.  Of.  XX.  4 . 

13  Pressed  by  a calf,  etc. : that  is,  easily  closed  for  protection  from  raiders. 
Cf.  R V.  VI.  28.  4. 

14  CelvMial  Tribes:  Vasus,  Rudnis,  Alityas,  Ail-Gods,  Maruts,  etc. 


16 


242  THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  XXVlli 

15  Two  Goddesses,  wealth-givers,  kind,  have  heightened  radiant 
Indra’s  strength. 

One  drives  away  hatreds  and  sins ; the  other  shall  bring  the 
Sacrificer  boons  and  treasure. 

Instructed,  let  them  both  enjoy,  for  gain  of  wealth.  Pay 
sacrifice. 

IG  Bringers  of  strengthening  sacrifice,  the  Goddesses,  the  teem- 
ing Cows,  have  prospered  Indra  with  their  milk. 

Let  o'liG  bring  food  and  energy,  the  other  feast  and  banqueting, 
Bringers  of  strengthening  sacrifice,  allotting  the  several  por- 
tions tliey  have  put  together  old  energy  with  new  and  new 
with  olden,  strengthening  boons  and  treasures  for  the 
Sacrificer.  Instructed,  let  them,  etc.,  as  in  verse  15. 

17  The  two  Celestial  Hotars,  Gods,  have  heightened  radiant 

Indra’s  niiiiht. 

Freed  from  slain  sinners  these  have  brought  the  Sacrificer 
wealth  and  boons.  Instructed,  let  them,  etc. 

18  Goddesses  three,  three  Goddesses  have  heightened  their 

Lord  Indra’s  strength. 

One,  Bharati,  hath  touched  the  sky,  Sarasvati  the  sacrifice 
with  Rudras,  and,  enriched  with  wealth,  Ida  the  home- 
steads of  the  folk.  For  gain  of  wealth  let  them  enjoy 
Pay  sacrifice. 

19  The  radiant  Indra,  Praise  of  Men,  thrice-shielding,  borne  on 

three  car-seats,  hath  heightened  radiant  Indra’s  strength, 
Set  on  a hundred  white-lacked  cows,  yea,  on  a thousanl 
foith  he  goes.  Mitra  and  Vanina  alone  deserve  to  be  lib 
Hotar-PrTests,  Brihaspati  his  Chonter,  and  the  Asvins  hb 
Adhvaryavas.  For  gain  of  wealth  let  him  enjoy.  P;i} 
sacrifice. 

20  V.maspati,  a God  with  Gods,  with  golden  loaves,  swert 

boughs,  fair  fruiChath  lieightened  radiant  liulra’s  strenglli 
Sky  with  his  summit  hath  he  touched,  and  firmament,  and 
stablished  earth.  For  gain  of  wealth  let  him  enjoy.  Pny 
sacrifice. 

15  Two  Goddesses:  Heaven  an<l  Earth,  or  Day  and  Night 

It)  Instructed:  knowing  n-ality  or  the  true  nature  of  things. 

19  Indra,  equal  to  Indra;  endowed  with  sovereign  power.  Praise '' 
Men  ’ Narasamsa  Agni.  Three  car-seats  ■ the  Si.das  or  Priests’  shed  th' 
Havirdluiita  or  store  of  sacrificial  elements,  and  the  Agnldhra  or  hearth  whei 
s .cred  fire  is  kindled  ; or,  according  to  Mahklhara,  the  three  Vedas 

as  the  sources  of  the  milk  and  butter  recpiired  for  oblations  Chanto 
singer  of  hymns  of  praise.  Adhvaryams:  or  Adhvaryus  ; the  Asvius  bem 
invested  with  the  fnnrtion.s  of  these  priests  among  the  Gods. 

20  Firmament:  with  his  waist.  Earth:  with  his  foot. 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA, 


243 


verse  28.] 


2 1 The  grassy  rohe  of  water-plants,  divine,  hath  heightened 

India’s  strength. 

This,  the  fair  seat  where  Indra  sits,  hath  topped  all  other 
sacred  grass.  For  gain  of  wealth  let  it  enjoy.  l*ay  sacrifice. 

22  Agni,  Fair-offering -maker,  bright,  hath  heightened  radiant 

Indra’s  strength. 

To-day  may  Svishtakrit,  Fair-offe ring-maker,  paying  good 
sacrifice,  for  us  perform  it.  For  gam  of  wealth  lot  him 
enjoy.  Pay  sacrifice. 

23  To-day  the  Sacrificer  hath  elected— dressing  messes  of  cooked 

food  and  a rice-cake,  .binding  a goat  for  Indra— Agni  as 
his  Hotar. 

To-day  divine  Vanaspati  hath  with  a goat  served  Indra  well. 
He  hath  eaten  from  the  fat,  he  hath  accepted  the  cooked 
food,  he  hath  waxed  strong  with  the  rice-cake. 

Thee,  to-day,  0 llishi,  etc.,  as  in  XXI.  61. 

21  Let  the  Priest  worship  A'.mi,  Indra,  kindled,  sjdendidly 
kindled,  excellent  strength-giver. 

Lending  him  mighty  power,  Gayatri  metre,  a cow  aged 
eighteen  months,  and  vital  vigour.  Let  him  enjoy  the 
butter.  Hotar,  worship. 


25  Let  the  Priest  serve  with  sacrifice  him  who  breaks  forth, 

Taiiunapat,  the  germ  which  Aditi  conceived,  pure  Indra 
who  bestoweth  strength, 

Bringing  him  mighty  power,  the  Ushnih  metre,  an  ox  of  two 
years  old,  and  vital  vigour.  Let  him  enjoy,  etc. 

26  Let  the  Priest  saorifioe  to  Soma,  liulra,  adorable,  adorcil, 

best  Vritra-slayer,  streiigtli-giver,  miijlit,  to  bo  adored 

with  viands,  r 

Briiifrinir  him  mighty  power,  Aiiuahtap  metre,  a cow  ot 
thirty  months,  and  vital  vigour.  Let  him  enjoy,  etc. 

27  Let  the  Priest  worship  Indra,  strength-hostower, 

with  fair  graa^  allied  with  Pushan,  seated  on  sacred  grass, 

dear,  everlasting,  , . 

Bringing  him  mighty  power,  Brihati  metre,  a steer  ot  three 

years’  age  and  vital  vigour.  Let  him  enjoy,  c c. 

28  Let  the  Priest  worship  tlie  wide-opening  ,1’. 

pass,  divine,  Law-strengtheiimg,  golden,  ludra,  tlie  Br 
man  Priest,  the  strength-bestower,  


21  Water -xtlants  : see  XXL  57. 

22  Fair-offermj-malev : SvLhtakrIt.  Sec  XXI.  47. 

23  Cf.  XXI.  59. 


244 


THE  TEXTS  OF  TEE 


[BOOK  XXVlIl 


Bringing  him  mighty  power,  the  Pankti  metre,  a bullock 
four  years  old,  and  vital  vigour.  Let  them  enjoy  the 
butter.  Hotar,  worship. 

29  Let  the  Priest  worship  lofty  Night  and  Morning,  well- 

decked, of  varied  hue,  lovely  to  look  on,  Indra  the  Uni- 
versal, strength-bestower. 

Bringing  him  mighty  power,  the  Trishtup  metre,  a bullock 
four  years  old,  and  vital  vigour.  Let  them  enjoy  the 
butter.  Hotar,  worship. 

30  Let  the  Priest  worship  both  celestial  Hotars,  the  Gods'  best 

glory,  sages  fumed  for  wisdom,^the  two  companions,  Indra 
strength-bestower, 

Bringing  him  mighty  power,  Jagati  metre,  an  ox  that  draws 
the  wain,  and  vital  vigour.  Let  them  enjoy  the  butter. 
Hotar,  worship. 

31  Let  the  Priest  sacrifice  to  three  well-decorated  Goddesses, 

gold-decked,  great,  lofty,  Bharatis,  Indra  their  Lord  who 
giveth  strength, 

Bringing  him  mighty  power,  Viraj  the  metre,  and  a cow  in 
milk.  Let  him  enjoy  the  butter.  Hotar,  worship. 

32  Let  the  Priest  worship  Tvashtar  the  prolific,  strengthener 

of  growth,  maintaining  varied  growth  and  form,  Indra 
who  giveth  vital  force. 

Bringing  him  Dvipad  metre,  mighty  power,  and  an  ox  full- 
grown.  Let  him  enjoy  the  butter.  Hotar,  sacrifice. 

33  Let  the  Priest  serve  with  sacrifice  the  Forest  Lord  Vanaspati, 

the  Immolator,  hundred-powered,  praise-worthy,  golden- 
leafed,  who  wears  the  girdle,  loved,  the  gracious  Lord, 
Indra  who  gives  the  strength  of  life, 

Giving  him  Kakup  metre,  mighty  power,  a barren,  a calf- 
sUpping  cow,  and  vital  vigour.  Let  him  enjoy  the  butter. 
Hotar,  sacrifice. 

34  Let  the  Priest  offer  worship  to  the  Svahakriti  Goddesses,  to 

Agni  Household  Lord  apart,  to  Varuna  the  Leech  and 
Sage,  might,  Indra  who  bestow eth  strength. 

Bringing  him  Atichhandas  metre,  great  and  mighty  power, 
a strong  bull,  in  his  prime,  and  vital  vigour.  Let  them 
enjoy  the  butter.  Hotar,  sacrifice. 


31  Bhdratts : that  is.  BhAratt  and  her  two  constant  companions,  Saras 
vat!  and  Ida. 

33  The  girdle  • the  cord  with  which  the  victim  is  attached. 

34  SvdhdJcriti  Goddesses : the  deities  of  the  Praydjas  or  Fore-offerings 
Introductory  Oblatijus  deified. 


terse  43.] 


warn  YiJVRVEDA. 


245 


35  The  Grass  divine  hath  added  might  to  radiant  liidra  strength- 

giver, 

Laying  in  Indra  wondrous  power  and  sight  and  strength  by 
Gayatri.  For  gain  of  wealth  let  him  enjoy  tlie  butter. 
Oifer  sacrifice. 

36  The  Doors  diviue  have  magnified  bright  Indra,  who  bestowcth 

strength. 

With  Ushnih  laying  mighty  power  in  Indra,  vital  breath 
and  force.  For  gain  of  wealth  let  them  enjoy  the  butter. 
Offer  sacrifice. 

37  Morning  and  Night,  divine  Ones,  have  strengthened  bright 

Indra,  strength-giver,  the  Godde.sses  advanced  the  God, 
With  the  Anushtup  laying  power  m Indra,  str^ength  and 
vital  force.  For  gain  of  wealth  lot  thorn  enjoy.  Fay 
sacrifice. 

38  Kind,  bounteous,  and  divine,  they  have  strengthened  bright 

Indra,  force-giver,  the  Goddesses  advanced  the  God, 
Laying  in  Indra  power  and  force  and  hearing  with  the 
Brihati.  For  gain  of  wealth  lot  them  enjoy.  Pay  sacrifice. 


39  Bringers  of  strengthening  sacrifice,  the  Goddesses,  two  teem- 

ing cows,  liave  heightened  Indra's  power  with  milk, 
Laying  bright  power  in  Indra  with  Paukti,  and  vital  energy. 
For  gain  of  wealth  let  them  enjoy.  Pay  sacrifice. 

40  The  Gods,  two  heavenly  Hotars,  have  strengthened  bright 

Indra,  force-giver,  those  Gods  have  magnified  the  God, 
With  Trishtup  giving  Indra  power,  impetuous  might,  and 
vital  strength.  For  gain  of  wealth  let  them  enjoy.  1 ay 
sacrifice. 


41  Goddesses  three,  three  Goddesses  have  heightened  their 

Lord  Indra’s  strength,  hia  who  bestowcth  vital  force. 
Laying  in  Indra  power  and  might  and  vital  strength  with 
Jagati.  For  gain  of  wealth  let  them  enjoy.  Pay  sacrifice. 

42  The  God,  the  Praise  of  all  men,  hath  strengthened  bright 

Indra  force-giver,  the  God  hath  magnified  the  God, 
Laying  in  Indra  with  Viraj  beauty  and  power  and  vital  force. 
For  gain  of  wealth  let  him  enjoy.  Pay  sacrifice. 

43  The  God  the  Forest  Sovran  hath  strengthened  bright  Indra, 

force-giver,  the  God  hath  magnified  the  God, 

With  Dvipad  storing  Indra  with  fortune  and  power  and  vital 
strength.  For  gain  of  wealth  let  him  enjoy.  Pay  saenhee. 

38  They : the  deities  of  the  Anuyajas  or  Post-offerings. 

42  YirAj:  the  metre  of  that  name,  four  POdas  of  ten  syllables  each. 


246  WHITE  YAJURVEDA.  [BOOK  XXVlll 

44  The  Grass  divine  of  water-plants  hath  helped  bright  Indra 

force-giver,  the  God  hath  magnified  the  God, 

Laying  in  Indra  mighty  power  with  Kakup,  fame  and  vital 
strength.  For  gain  of  wealth  let  it  enjoy.  Pay  sacrifice. 

45  Agni,  the  God  who  makes  fair  rites,  hath  strengthened 

Indra  force-giver,  the  God  hath  magnified  the  God, 
Laying  with  Atichhandas  power  in  Indra,  sway,  and  vital 
strength.  For  gain  of  wealth  let  him  enjoy.  Pay  sacrifice. 

46  To-day  the  Sacrificer  hath  elected,  etc.,  as  in  verse  23. 

To-day  divine  Vanaspati,  etc.  

Thee,  to-day,  0 Rishi,  etc.  

44  Kcikupu'  a metre  of  three  Padas,  8 + 12  + 8 syllables. 

45  Atichhandas:  hypermeter;  any  metre  of  more  than  forty-eight  syl- 


BOOK  THE  TWENTY-NINTH. 


Decking  the  treasure-house  of  prayers,  0 Agni,  ciikiiKllcd, 
pouring  forth  sweet-tasted  hutter, 

Swift-moving,  bearing  curd,  0 Jatavedas,  bear  what  tlu'y 
love  to  the  Oods’  habitation. 


2 Balming  the  paths  that  lead  to  heaven  with  fatness,  let  the 

Steed  go  unto  the  Gods  well  knowing. 

Courser,  the  Quarters  of  the  sky  attend  thee!  Bestow  thou 
food  upon  this  Sacrifieer. 

3 Thou,  Steed,  art  meet  for  laud  and  veneration;  swift,  fit  fur 

sacrifice  art  thou,  0 Courser. 

In  concert  with  the  Gods  aud  Vasus  Agni  Omniscient  waft 
thee  a contented  bearer ! 


4 Pleased  with  much  Sacred  Grass  which  w’c  have  scattoied 

wide  spread  upon  the  earth,  a pleasant  earp<!t, 

Joined  with  the  Gods  may  Aditi,  accordant,  bestowing  bliss 
aw^ard  it  happy  foitune. 

5 May  these  your  Doors  divine  that  wear  all  colours,  auspi- 

cious, witli  uplifted  leaves  unfolding, 

Lofty  and  closely  fitted  and  sonorous,  rich  in  adornment, 
offer  easy  passage. 

6 Your  two  Dawns  rich  in  gold  and  varied  colour,  truvellmg 

on  Twixt  Vaiuna  and  Mitra, 

Acquainted  with  the  face  of  sacrifices,  I settle  here  within 
the  home  of  Older. 

7 Your  two  chief  Hotars  liave  I pleased,  linKht  cohiiircd,  honio 

on  one  car,  Gods  wlio  heliold  all  creatures, 

Those  who  prepare  your  rules  and  ordinances  and  make  y<ui 
see  the  light  by  their  direction. 

8 Bharatl  with  Adityas  love  our  worship!  Saiasvati  vMlli 

Budras  be  our  helfier,  . ^ . i 

And  Ida  in  accord,  invoked  with  Vasus!  Goducsscs,  place 
our  rite  among  the  Immortals.  


XXII.— XXV.  which  tieatof  the 
svarnedha  or  Horee-Saciitice.  ^ . u r. 

1 This  and  the  ten  follow  ing  verses  form  an  Apr!  or  Piopitia  ory  yin  . 


This  Book  is  supplementary  to  Book 
A-svarnedha  or  Horee-Saci  itice. 


See  XX.  37,  note.  ^ 

G leaves  : sides  of  the  double  door  of  the  Hacrificial  hall. 

6 Tm  Dawns;  Morning  ami  closely  connected  Night. 
Mitra:  repiesenting,  respectively,  sky  and  earm. 

7 The  light:  according  to  MahMIuia,  the  Ahavanlya  fue. 

commanding  them  to  otter  sacrifice. 


Varuna  and 
Direction : 


248  THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  XXJl 

9  The  God-devoted  son  Tvashtar  produces:  from  Tvashtar 
springs  to  life  your  fleet-foot  Courser. 

Tvashtar  gave  being  to  this  All  about  us.  Priest,  worship 
here  the  mighty  work's  achiever. 

10  Let  the  Steed  seek  his  home,  and  balmed  with  butter  go  of 

himself  onto  the  Gods  in  season. 

To  the  Gods’  world  Vanaspati,  well-knowing,  bear  our  obla- 
. tions  which  the  fire  has  tasted  ! 

11  Thou,  waxing  by  Prajapati’s  strong  fervour,  born  quickly, 

guardest  sacrifice,  0 Agni. 

With  consecrated  offering  go,  preceding,  and  let  the  Sadhyas, 
Gods,  eat  our  oblation. 

12  What  time,  first  sprinyjing  into  life,  thou  neighedst,  proceed' 

ing  from  the  sea  or  cloudy  vapour. 

Limbs  of  the  deer  hadst  thou,  and  eagle  pinions.  0 Steed, 
thy  birth  is  high  and  must  be  lauded. 

13  This  Steed,  bestowed  by  Yama,  Trita  harnessed,  and  India 

was  the  first  to  mount  and  ride  him, 

His  bridle  the  Gandharva  grasped.  0 Vasus,  from  out  the 
Sun  ye  fashioned  forth  the  Courser. 

14  Yama  art  thou,  0 Horse ; thou  art  Aditya ; Trita  art  thou 

by  secret  operation. 

From  Soma  thou  art  thoroughly  divided.  They  say  there 
are  three  bonds  in  heaven  that  hold  thee. 

15  Three  bonds,  they  say,  thou  hast  in  heaven  to  bind  thee, 

three  in  the  waters,  three  within  the  ocean. 

11  Sm^as;  Boe  XXIV.  27,  and  R.  V.  I.  164.  50 ; X.  90.  7,  16. 

12  This  and  the  twelve  following  verses  are  taken  fiom  U.  V.  1 163. 
From  the  sea  : the  Sacrilicial  Horse  identified  with  the  Sun  who  rises  in  tDe 
ocenn  of  air, 

13  Fama:  according  to  S/lya^a,  meaning  the  Controller.  Agni  ‘ 

as  a Solar  deity,  God  of  the  distant  birthplace  of  the  Sun.  The  (Javah^^rva 
Vi.''VilvaHU,  a celestial  being  connected  with  the  Sun  and  regarded  as  t ^ 
chief  of  that  class  of  senn-deities. 

14  Tama.-  Agni,  according  to  Sayana.  the  Sun.  Secret  ope^ 

ation  • the  mysterions  effect  of  sacrifice  From  Soma,  etc,:  the  meaiuiJJ 
is  obscure.  According  to  S.lyana  and  Mahidhara,  the  translation  shonl 
be  ‘ With  Soma  thou  art  thoroughly  united’,  that  is,  identified  with  tn 
Moon.  This  would  certainly  be  preferable  if  viprikti  h,  excluded  separatee 
could  possibly  mean  ‘united/  Three  bonds:  According  to  bayana,  w 
‘ media  of  origin,’  the  Vasus,  Aditya,  and  Heaven. 

15  The 'mien:  meaning  here,  says  SAyana,  the  habitable  world,  tk 
bonds  being  seed,  rain,  and  tillage.  Ocean : of  air,  in  which  the  bonds  an 
cloud,  lightning,  and  thunder.  Varuna : on  account  of  the  three  bonuj 
with  which  Varuna  binds  the  sinner,  R.  Y.  I.  24.  15. 


VERSE  -22  ] 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


249 


To  me  thou  seemest  Vanina,  0 Courser,  there  where  they 
say  is  thy  sublimest  birthplace. 

16  Here,  Courser,  are  the  places  where  they  groomed  thee; 

here  are  the  traces  of  thy  hooves  as  winner. 

Here  have  1 seen  the  auspicious  reins  that  guide  thee,  which 
those  who  guard  the  holy  Law  keep  safely. 

17  Thyself  from  far  I recognized  iu  spirit,  a Bird  that  from  be- 

low flew  through  the  heaven. 

I saw  thy  head  still  soaring,  striving  upward  by  paths  un- 
soiled by  dust,  pleasant  to  travel. 

18  Here  I beheld  thy  form  matchless  in  beauty,  eager  to  win 

thee  food  ar  the  Cow’s  station. 

Whene’er  a man  brings  thee  to  thine  enjoyment,  thou 
swallowGst  the  herbs,  most  greedy  eater. 

19  After  thee,  Courser,  come  the  car,  the  bridegroom,  the  kino 

come  after,  and  the  charm  of  maidens. 

Full  companies  have  followed  for  thy  friendship:  the  pattern 
of  thy  vigour  Gods  have  followed. 

20  His  horns  are  golden  and  his  feet  arc  iron.  Less  fleet  than 

he,  though  swiff  as  thought,  was  Indra. 

The  Gods  came  only  to  the  oblation-bampiet  of  him  who 
mounted  tirst  of  all  the  Courser. 

21  Symmetrical  in  flank,  with  rounded  haunches,  mettled  like 

heroes,  the  celestial  Coursers 

Put  forth  their  strength  like  swans  in  lengthened  order  when 
they,  the  Steeds,  have  reached  the  heavenly  causeway. 

22  A body  formed  for  fliabt  hast  thou,  0 (;hiirt'er ; swift  as  the 

wind  in  motion  is  thy  spirit. 

Thy  hoi  PS  are  spread  abroad  in  all  directions;  they  move 
with  reatless  beat  in  wildernesses. 


16  Who  guard  the  holy  Law  the  God.  who  tnaintoin  ‘he  order  of  the 
universe.  Here  the  reference  is  to  the  course  of  the  Sun, 

Horae  is  identified. 

17  A Bird:  the  swiftly-moving  Sun. 

18  Food  mthe«h»peotoblat,one. 

of  eerth,  the  Cow  being  the  alur.  Mahidlura  t a he  of 

the  Bull,  that  ie,  the  dUo  of  the  S.m  : • I beheld  hy  forta  m the  diec  of 
the  Sun.’  Most  greedy  eater : regarded  as  an  earthly  horee. 

20  Bi,  horns:  according  to  hi*  ““r 

he  a reference  also  to  the  rays  of  the  Sun.  Bsm  a • > 

is  said  in  verse  13.  , . , . ^ 

21  The  horses  of  the  Snn  are  spoken  of.  The  exact  meaning  of  two  of 
the  epithets  is  uncertain. 

22  Thy  hortu:  here,  perhaps,  meaning  hoofs. 


250  THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  XXIX. 

23  The  strong  Steed  hath  come  forward  to  the  slaughter,  poiider> 
ing  with  a mind  directed  God-ward. 

The  goat  who  is  his  kin  is  led  before  him  : the  sages  and  the 
singers  follow  after. 

2i  The  Steed  is  come  unto  the  noblest  mansion,  is  come  unto 
his  Father  and  his  Mother. 

This  day  shall  he  approach  the  Gods,  most  welcome  : then 
he  declares  good  gifts  to  him  v/ho  worships. 

25  Thou  in  the  house  of  man  this  day  enkindled  worshippest 
Gods,  a God,  0 Jatavedas. 

Wealthy  in  friends ! observant,  bring  them  hither.  Ihoii 
art  a sapient  envoy,  full  of  wisdom. 

2G  Tanunapat,  fair-tongued,  with  sweet  mead  balming  the 
paths  and  w'ays  of  Order,  make  them  pleasant. 

Convey  our  sacrifice  to  heaven,  exalting  with  holy  thoughts 
our  hymns  of  praise  and  worship. 

27  With  sacrifice  to  these  we  with  laudations  will  honour  holy 

Narasainsa’s  greatness — 

To  these  the  pure,  most  wise,  the  thought-inspirers,  Gods 
who  enjoy  both  sorts  of  our  oblations. 

28  Invoked,  deserving  laud  and  adoration,  0 Agni,  come  accor- 

dant with  the  Vasus. 

Thou  art,  0 vigorous  One,  the  Gods’  Invoker,  so,  best  of 
Sucrificers,  biing  them  quickly. 

29  By  rule  the  Sacred  Grass  is  scattered  eastward,  a robe  to 

clothe  the  earth  when  dawns  arc  breaking. 

Widely  it  spreads  around  and  far  extended,  fair  for  the  Gods 
and  bringing  peace  and  freedom. 

30  Let  the  expansive  Doors  be  widely  opened,  like  wives  who 

deck  their  beauty  for  their  husbands. 

Lofty,  celestial,  all-impelling  Portals,  admit  the  Gods  and 
give  them  easy  access. 


23  The  goat : te  be  attached  to  the  Horse  at  the  sacrificial  stake. 

24  Nohlext  mamion:  heaven,  to  which  he  goes  by  saciifice.  Hii  Father 
and  his  Mother : Heaven  and  Earth. 

25  This  and  the  following  verse  are  taken  from  R.  V.  X.  110.  1,  2. 

26  Order:  sacrifice. 

27  Both  sorts:  libations  of  Soma  juice  and  ofiferings  of  clarified  butb‘r, 
rice-cakes,  etc. 

28  This  and  the  eight  following  verses  are  taken  from  R.  V.  X.  110- 
3 — 11,  forming,  with  verses  25  and  26,  a complete  Aprt  or  Propitiatory 
Hymn. 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDj. 


251 


^ERSE  39.] 


}1  Pouring  sweet  dews,  let  holy  Night  and  Morning,  each 
close  to  each,  he  seated  at  their  station — 

Lofty,  celestial  Dames,  with  gold  to  dick  them,  assuming 
all  their  fair  and  radiant  beauty. 

32  Come  the  two  chief  celestial  swect-voi:cd  Hotars,  arranging 

sacrifice  for  man  to  worship, 

As  singers  who  in8})ire  us  in  assemblies,  showing  the  east- 
ward light  with  their  direction  ! 

33  Let  Bharati  come  quickly  to  our  worship,  and  Ida  showing 

like  a human  being. 

So  let  Sarasvati  and  both  her  fellows,  deft  Goddesses,  on 
this  fair  grass  be  seated. 

31  Hotar  more  skilled  in  sacrifice,  briufj  hither  with  speed  to- 
day God  Tvashtar,  thou  who  knoaeat, 

Even  him  who  framed  these  two,  tie  Earth  and  Heaven, 
the  Parents,  with  their  forms,  a»d  eveiy  creature. 

35  Send  to  our  offerings  which  thyself  thou  balmest  tho  Com- 

panies of  Gods  in  ordered  season. 

Agni,  Vanaspati,  the  Immolator  sweeten  our  offered  gift 
with  mead  and  butter, 

36  Agni  as  soon  as  be  was  born  made  ready  the  sacrifice  and 

was  tho  Gods’  preceder. 

May  the  Gods  e.at  our  offering  consecrated  according  to  the 
true  Priest’s  voice  and  guidance. 

37  Thou,  making  light  wheio  no  light  was,  and  form,  0 men  ! 

where  form  was  not, 

Wast  born  together  with  the  Dawns. 
i8  Tho  warrior’s  look  is  liko  a thunderous  rain-cloud’s  wlicn, 
armed  with  inaii,  ho  seeks  the  lap  of  battle. 

Be  thou  victorious  with  uuwounded  body : so  let  the  thick- 
ness of  thine  armour  save  thee. 

!9  With  Bow  lot  us  win  kino,  with  Bow  the  battle,  with  Bow 
be  victors  in  our  hot  oucounters. 

The  Bow  brings  grief  and  sorrow  to  the  foomaii:  armed  with 
the  Bow  may  we  subdue  all  regions. 


32  Eastern  light:  the  Ahavanlya  fire  : cf.  verse  7.  , vr  t 

37  Taken  from  R V.  L 0.  3,  which  is  addre8.sed  to.Indra 

"hm:  the  Sun,  with  whom  Agni  is  identified  Omen  j 

n GKclamation  expressive  of  admiration,  Jjy 

^«rd«  thm,  making  wad  born  imy  apply  to  these  Gods  ^ P'  "y-  ■ 

38  In  connexion  witli  the  Horse,  who  plays 

^ids  and  battles,  the  bow  and  various  implements  o „ 26—31 

>urteen  verses  taken  from  K.  V.  Yl.  75  and  su  fioin  K.  V.  VI.  it.  20 


252  VIE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  XXIX, 


40  Close  to  his  ear,  is  fain  to  speak,  She  presses,  holding  her 

well-loved  Fnaid  in  her  embraces. 

Strained  on  the  how,  She  whispers  like  a woman— this  Bow. 
string  that  preserves  us  in  the  combat. 

41  These,  meeting  Ike  a woman  and  her  lover,  bear,  mother- 

like,  their  child  upon  their  bosom. 

May  the  two  Bow-ends,  starting  swift  asunder  scatter,  ia 
unison,  the  foes  who  hate  us. 

42  With  many  a son,  father  of  many  daughters,  He  clangs  and 

clashes  as  he  goes  to  battle. 

Slung  on  the  back,  oouring  his  brood,  the  Quiver  vanquishes 
all  opposing  bands  and  armies. 

43  Upstanding  in  the  Car  the  skilful  Charioteer  guides  his 

strong  Horses  on  whithcrso’er  he  will. 

See  and  admire  the  strength  of  those  controlling  Reins  whicli 
from  behind  declan  the  will  of  him  who  drives. 


44  Horses  whose  hoofs  rain  dust  are  neighing  loudly,  yoked  to 

the  Chariots,  showing  forth  their  vigour. 

With  their  forefeet  de-cendiiig  on  the  foemen,  they,  never 
flinching,  trample  and  destroy  them. 

45  Car-bearer  is  the  name  of  his  oblation,  whereon  are  laid  his 

Weapons  and  his  Armour. 

So  let  US  here,  each  day  that  passes,  honour  the  helpful  Car 
with  hearts  exceeding  joyful. 

46  In  sweet  association  lived  the  fathers  who  gave  us  life,  pro 


found  and  strong  in  trouble. 

Unwearied,  armed  with  shafts  and  wondrous  weapons,  free, 
real  heroes,  conquerors  of  armies.  ^ 


40  She : the  bowstring,  well-loved  friend : the  arrow.  Whiepert  hlc^  “ 

woman ; ‘ twangs  like  tbe  scream  of  a woman  ’—Muir.  ^ But  the  faint  sounc 
made  by  tbe  string  while  it  is  being  drawn  to  the  ear  is  intended,  ncme 
likens  the  sound  to  the  voice  of  a swallow.  , , , 

41  These:  the  two  ends  of  the  bow.  Like  a woman  and  her  lover:  or 
‘drawing  close  like  two  women  to  their  lovers.’  Their  child:  the 

42  With  many  a son : the  quiver  is  called  the  father  of  sons  and  daugnte 
it  is  said,  because  the  words  signifying  arrow  are  both  masculine  and  «mimn 

45  Car-hearer:  rathavdhanam : a platform,  stand,  or  truck  on  wnicn 

chariot  is  placed  when  not  in  use.  The  word  seems  in  this  place  to  mea 
also  the  oblation  offered  by  the  warrior  to  the  ideal  war-chanot  personin 
or  to  a tutelaiy  deity  of  chaiiots.  , ^ 

46  There  is  no  verb  in  this  stanza,  and  the  only  substantive,  pi  . 

fathers,  is  explained  by  both  Commentators  as  guards,  deie 

ders,  that  is,  apparently,  those  who  attend  the  chariot  of  the  chief, 
fessor  Wilson,  following  SAyana,  translates : ‘ The  guards  (of  the  chano 
revelling  in  the  savoury  (spoil),  distributors  of  food,  piotectors  in  calam 
armed  with  spears,  resolute,  beautifully  arranged,  strong  in  arrows,  invii 
cible,  of  heroic  valour,  robust,  and  conquerors  of  numerous  hosts. 


WRITE  YAJURVBDi. 


253 


YEESE  65.] 

47  Tho  Brahmans,  and  the  Fathers  meet  hr  Soma  draughts, 

and,  graciously  inclined,  unequalled  Hciwoii  and  Earth. 
Guard  us  from  evil,  Pilshan  ! guard  ui  strengtheners  of 
Law  ! let  not  the  evil-wisher  master  ra. 

48  Her  tooth  a deer,  dressed  in  an  eagle’s  ftathers,  bound  with 

cow-hide,  launched  forth.  She  flieth  onward. 

There  where  the  heroes  speed  hither  aui  thither,  there  may 
tho  arrows  shelter  and  protect  us. 

49  Avoid  us  thou  whose  flight  is  straight,  tnd  let  our  bodies 

be  as  stone.  * 

May  Soma  kindly  speak  to  us,  and  Adici  protect  us  well. 

50  He  lays  his  blows  upon  their  backs,  He  deals  his  strokes 

upon  their  thighs. 

Thou  Whip  who  urgest  horses,  drive  sagacious  chargers  in 
tho  fray. 

'51  It  compasses  tho  arm  with  serpent  windings,  fending  away 
the  friction  of  the  bowstring  : 

So  may  the  Brace,  well  skilled  in  all  its  duties,  guard  man- 
fully the  man  from  every  quarter. 

52  Lord  of  the  Wood,  be  firm  and  strong  in  body : be,  bearing 

us,  a brave  victorious  hero. 

Show  forth  thy  strength,  compact  with  straps  of  leather, 
and  let  thy  rider  win  all  spoils  of  battle. 

53  Its  mighty  strength  was  borrowed  from  the  heaven  and  earth : 

its  conquering  force  was  brought  from  sovrans  of  the  wood. 
Honour  with  holy  gifts  the  Car  like  Indra’s  bolt,  the  Car 
bound  round  with  straps,  the  vigour  of  tho  floods. 

54  Thou  bolt  of  Indra,  Vanguard  of  the  Maruts,  close  knit  to 

Vanina  and  Child  of  Mitra, — 

As  such,  accepting  gifts  which  here  wo  offer,  receive,  0 God- 
like Chariot,  these  oblations. 

>5  Send  forth  thy  voice  aloud  through  earth  and  heaven,  and 
let  the  world  in  all  its  breadth  regard  tiiec ; 

0 Drum,  accordant  with  the  Gods  and  Indra,  drive  thou 
afar,  yea,  very  fur,  our  foemen. 

47  The  Brdhmam  and  ike  Fatkcn:  or,  perhai)8,  the  sacerflotal  Fathera. 
I^he  stanza,  which  is  grammatically  difficult,  Heonis  out  of  place.  ^ 

48  Her  tooth  a deer : the  point  of  tlie  arrow  is  made  of  a piece  <>f  <loer  s horn 
ttached  to  the  shaft  with  leather  strings.  The  butt  of  tho  arrow  is  feathered. 

60  He : the  whip.  , , , . , , ^ 

51  It:  the  brace  or  guard  worn  on  tho  archers'  left  arm,  fastened  on 

dth  leather  straps.  , . nu  • i. 

52  Here  follow  six  verses  from  R.  V.  VI.  47  20-31  in  praise  of  the  Chanot 
■nd  the  Drum.  Lordofthe  Wood  tall  tree,  the  timber  of  winch  the  Car  is  made. 

55  0 Drum:  the  dundubki  here  addressed  and  glonliod  was  a sort  ot 
Jud  kettle-drum  like  those  which  are  still  used. 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA, 


[BOOK  XXIX, 


56  Thunder  otit  strength  and  fill  us  full  of  vigour:  yea,  thun. 
der  foith  auc  drive  away  all  dangers.  . 

Drive  hence,  0 War-drum,  drive  away  misfortune  : thou  art 
the  Fist  of  Iidra  : show  thy  firmness.  , 

67  Drive  hither  tbse,  and  these  again  bring  hither  : the  War- 

drum  speaks  aloud  as  battle’s  aignah 
Our  heroes,  winded  with  horses,  come  together.  Let  our  car- 
warriors,  Ind’a,  be  triumphant.  ...  , c, 

68  The  black-neckod  victim  belongs  to  Agin;  the  ewe  to  Saras- 

vati;  tlie  brovn  victim  is  Soma’s;  the  dusky  Pfishaiis; 
the  white-backed  is  Brihaspati’s;  the  dappled  belongs  to 
the  All-Gods;  die  red  toindra;  the  spotted  to  the  Maruts; 
the  strong-bodied  to  Indra-Agui;  one  with  white  marks  be 
low  to  Savitar ; to  Varuna  a black  ram  with  one  white  foot 
59  To  Agni  Anikavan  is  sacrificed  a red-marked  ox  ; two  with 
white  spots  below  are  for  Savitar ; two  with  sd^ejy  naveh 
for  Pushan;  two  yellow  hornless  he-goats  for  the  All-Gods; 
a spotted  one  for  the  Manits ; the  black-faced  he-goat  is 
Agni’s;  the  ewe  is  Sarasvati’s;  the  ram  is  Varuna  s. 

CO  To  Agni  of  the  Gayatri,  of  the  Trivrit  hymn  and  of  the 
Kathautara  Saman  is  to  be  offered  a rice-cake  on  eight 
potsherds ; to  Indra  of  the  Trishtup,  the  Panchadasi 
hymn  and  the  Brihat  Saman  one  on  eleven  potsherds ; to 
the  All-Gods  of  the  Jagati,  the  Seventeenfuld  hymn  and 
the  Vairupa  Saman,  one  on  twelve  potsherds ; to  Mitia 
Varuna  of  the  Aiiushtup,  the  Ekaviinsa  hymn,  and  t 
Vairaja  Saman,  a mess  of  curdled  milk ; to  ^ 

the  Pahkti  metre,  the  Trinava  hymn,  aud  the  Sakvai 
saman,  an  oblation  of  rice  boiled  in  milk  ; to  j^avitar  ol 
the  Ushnih,  the  Thirty-threefold  hymn,  and  the  Raiv. 
saman,  a rice-cake  on  eight  potsherds  ; a ^ 

riceistobemadeforPrajapati;  the  same 

Consort  Aditi;  to  Agni  Vaisvauara  is  to  be  a ncc 

cake  on  twelve  potsherds,  and  to  A^mati  one  on  eight. 

ts-S  ^:“upp— ry  to  the  liat  of  sacrificial  aoi» 

‘%®;tSLhari„gafaceorauarmy(of^ 
thefrontorvanof  thearmy.  SrfSacrrf^oksof  theE^XU.^ 

60  Of  the  GiuM  etc.:  nTli Grace oTKlvourTown  iu  tfie  Oor 
named  in  the  verse.^  T n A fpmale  deity.  Vi^Ms 

acceptance  of  oblations,  persomhed  ^ Taittirtya-Samhitii 

T^'^tt:itorvisfin:r  \rtrEVcana%u4r»ytu 

U of  Kasyapa  aud  the  mother  uf  Vishnu  in  his  Dwarf  Incarnat.cn 


BOOK  THE  THIRTIETH. 


Our  sacrifice,  God  Savitar!  speed  onward:  speed  to  his  sliare 
the  sacrifice’s  patron. 

May  the  Celestial  Gandharva,  cleanser  of  thought  and  will, 
make  clean  our  thouf*hts  and  wishes. 

The  Lord  of  Speech  sweeten  the  words  we  utter ! 

2 May  we  attain  that  excellent  glory  of  Savitar  the  God : 

So  may  he  stimulate  our  prayers. 

3 Savitar,  God,  send  far  away  all  troubles  amf  calamities, 

And  send  us  only  what  is  good. 

4 We  call  on  him  distributer  of  wondrous  bounty  and  of  wealth, 
On  Savitar  who  looks  on  men. 

5 For  Brahman  ( Priesthood ) he  binds  a Brahman  to  the 

stake  ; for  Kshatra  ( Royalty  ) a Rajanya;  for  the  Maruls 
a Vaisya;  for  Penance  a Sudra ; for  Darkness  a robher; 
for  Hell  a homicide  or  a man  who  has  lust  his  consecrated 
firej  for  Misfortune  a eunuch;  for  Venality  an  Ayogu ; 
for  Kama  a harlot ; for  Excessive  Noise  a Mugudha , 

Books  XXX.  and  XXXI.  treat  of  the  Purunhamedlia  or  Huinan  Sacrilire, 
an  old-es<tablished  custom  among  alino.st  all  nations  of  aiitnjuily  The  ene- 
tnony  was  to  be  performed  by  a Br.lhman  or  a Jiftjauya,  ami  whh  ted 
to  obtain  for  the  Sacrificer  univniKal  preeminence  and  every  blessing  wliidi 
the  Horse-sacrifice  might  have  failed  to  seem e.  The  iiiual  lesoml  le-in 
many  respects  that  of  the  Asvamedha;  man,  the  noblist  victim,  being  :u  ■ 
tually  or  symbolically  sacrificed  instead  of  the  Horse,  and  men  and  vonu  n 
of  vaiious  tribes,  figuies.  complexions,  characters,  and  profe-sHions  being  ,U- 
tached  to  the  sacriricial  stakes  in  j)lato  of  the  tame  and  wild  animals  enu- 
merated in  Book  XXIV.  These  immin.d  victiniK  weie  afterwards  rtliCMd 
miinjured,  and,  so  far  as  the  text  of  the  White  Yajurveda  goes,  the  whole 
oertmony  was  merely  emblematical,  a type  of  the  allegorical  sell  inimol.i- 
tion  of  Purusha,  Embodied  Spirit  or  the  Cosmic  Man.  See  ('(jlt  liiooke, 
Miscellaneous  Essays,  II.;  Weber,  Indiselie  Stieifeii,  I.  54  hi‘'j  , \\  iNon, 
Selected  Works,  11.  247  seq  ; Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  I\.  rioh* ; 
Oldenberg,  Religion  de.s  Veda,  p.  3G5  ; Romesli  Chundcr  Unit,  Civili/.itnni 
in  Ancient  India,  I.  274,  275  (first  edition) ; Max  Muller,  Ancient  S.inskrit 
hiterature,  419  seq.  ; Vedic  India  (Story  of  tlm  Nations  Series),  p{».  4tJ(i  -- 
413  ; A.  Hillebrandt,  Ritual -Litteratur,  p.  163. 

1 The  verse  Is  repeated  from  XI  7. 

2 Repeated  from  III.  35  and  XXII.  9, 

3 Takeu  from  R.  V.  V.  82,  5. 

4 Taken  from  R.  V.  I,  22.  7. 

^ Lost:  that  is,  allowed  to  go  out.  the.  meaning  is  nnceit.iin  ; 

P<*i’hap8  ‘ a gambler,’  or  ‘ an  unchaste  woman,’  as  IVof.  Welier  translates  in 
Indisehe  Streifen,  I.  76,  where,  and  in  the  following  pages,  I'rof.  W.  has 
1?iven  a version,  with  explanatory  notes,  of  the  whole  Inst  of  victims  ami 
nbjects  to  which  they  aie  dedicated  Mdqadha:  the  word  meaning  original- 
ly ‘ belonging  to  the  Magadha  cuntry  (South  Bahar)’  means  a pn^fessioual 
bard,  minstrel,  or  panegyrist,  the  sou  of  a Vaisja  and  a K-shatiiya. 


256 


THE  TEXTS  OP  THE 


[BOOK  XXX 

6 For  Dance  a stable-master;  for  Song  a public  dancer;  for 

Duty  one  who  attends  court;  for  Pastime  a timid  man; 
for  Sport  a chatterer;  for  Laughter  an  artist ; for  Pleasure 
a woman-lover;  for  Desire  a damsel’s  son;  for  Dexterity 
a car-builder ; for  Firmness  a carpenter ; 

7 For  Trouble  a potter’s  son;  for  Device  an  artificer;  for 

Beauty  a jeweller;  for  Welfare  a sower;  for  the  Arrow- 
deity  a maker  of  shafts ; for  Injury  a bowyer;  for  Action 
a bowstring-maker;  for  Fate  a rope-maker;  for  Death  a 
hunter ; ^or  the  Finisher  a dog-leader ; 

8 For  Rivera  a fisherman ; for  Rikshikas  a Nish^da’s  son ; for 

the  Man-tiger  a madman ; for  the  Gandharvas  and  Ap- 
sarasesa  Vratya;  for  Motives  one  demented ; for  Serpents 
and  Genii  an  untrustworthy  man;  for  Dice  a gambler; 
for  Excitement  a non-gambler ; for  Piskhas  a woman  who 
splits  cane ; for  Yatudhauas  a woman  who  works  in  thorns; 

9 For  Rendezvous  a lover;  for  Homestead  a paramour;  for 

Trouble  an  unmarried  elder  brother ; for  Nirriti  a younger 
brother  who  has  married  before  his  elder ; for  Misfortune 
the  husband  of  a younger  sister  whose  elder  sister  has 
not  been  married ; for  Representation  a woman  who  em- 
broiders; for  Agreement  a woman  who  deals  in  love- 
charms  ; for  Garrulity  a by-sitter ; for  Colour  an  obstinate 
man ; for  Strength  a yielding  man ; 

10  For  Interruptions  a hunch-back ; for  Delight  a dwarf ; Pr 

Doors  a blear-eyed  nian ; for  Sleep  a blind  man ; for  Un- 
righteousness a deaf  man ; for  Purifying  Medium  a physi- 
cian ; for  Insight  an  astrologer ; for  Craving  for  Knowledge 
an  inquisitive  man ; for  Desire  of  extra  Knowledge  an 
extra-inquisitive  man  ; for  Moral  Law  a question-solver; 

11  For  Eye-diseases  an  elephant-keeper;  for  Speed  a horse 

keeper;  for  Nourishment  a cowherd;  for  Manliness  a 
shepherd;  for  Keenness  a goatheid;  for  Refreshment  a 
ploughman ; for  Sweet  Beverage  a preparer  of  Sura;  for 
Weafa  house-guard ; for  Well-being  a possessor  of  wealth, 
for  Supervision  a doorkeeper’s  attendant ; ^ 

7 The  Finisher:  Antaka,  another  name  of  Death. 

8 RiksMMs:  a class  of  evil  spirits,  mentioned  in  A.  V.  XII.  1.  49  m con 
nexioh  with  lions,  tigers,  hyenas,  and  wolves.  Vrdtya : the  chief  of  a ban 
of  nomad  Nonconformists  of  Aryan  extraction,  but  absolutely  mdependcB 
and  not  following  the  Aryan  or  Brahmanist  way  of  life.  See  A.  V.  A 
Pi^dchas : a class  of  fierce  and  malignant  imps  or  goblins.  1 dtudhunai 
fiendish  sorcerers. 

9 iVtmii  ■ or  Destniction. 

11  Sweet  Beverage:  kil&la  ; see  II.  31  ; III.  43  ; XX.  6o, 


VEnSE  16.] 


WHITE  YAJURYEDA. 


2.17 


12  For  Light  a wood-bringer ; for  Brightness  a fire-kindler  ; fur 

the  Sun’s  Station  a besprinkler;  fur  Higliost  Heaven  a 
high  steward;  for  the  Woild  of  (Jods  a carver ; for  the 
World  of  Men  a distributer;  for  All- Worlds  a poiirei-out ; 
for  Poverty,  Affliction  a stirrer-up  of  strife  ; fur  Saeritiee 
a washerwoman;  for  Delight  a female  dyer; 

13  For  Assault  a thievish-hearted  man  ; bn-  Homicide  a sl.uider- 

er;  for  Discrimination  a door-keeper;  for  Inspection  .i 
door-keeper’s  attendant;  for  Strength  a serv.int  ; lui 
Plenty  a running  footman  ; for  the  Beloved  a sweet  spe.ik 
er ; for  Safety  the  rider  of  a hor^e  , for  the  Woi  ld  nl 
Svarga  a dealer  out  of  portions;  fur  Highest  Heaven  ,i 
high  steward ; 

U Fur  Passion  an  iron-smelter  ; for  Anger  a icinover , for  ^ uk- 
ing  a yoker  ; for  Pain  an  assailant , fur  (^uiet  an  uiiyuker  • 
for  Up-hill  and  DoAn-hill  one  who  stamU  on  three  leus 
for  Form  a conceited  man  ; for  Virtue  a fein.ile  umrment- 
maker ; fur  Nirriti  a female  scabbard-. nawur ; lur  \ciina 
a b.iiren  woman  ; 

lu  ForYama  a mother  of  twins;  for  the  Atharv.ans  a woman 
who  has  miscarried  ; for  the  First  \ ear  a ga  l-ahoiil  , ioi 
the  Parivat^ara  one  who  h.is  imt  home  a child  ; for  the 
Idavatsara  one  who  exceeds;  fur  the  Idvatsaia  one  who 
transgresses;  foi  the  V.itsara  one  who  is  worn  out  , toi 
the  Suruvatsara  one  with  grey  hair ; for  the  Kibhiis  a hide 
dresser;  for  the  Sadhyas  n currier; 

IG  Fur  Lakes  a H.sherm!in;  for  Standing  Waters  a fisher;  foi 
Tank-waters  a Nishada;  for  Reed-beds  a n.di-veiidei'  , f.n 
the  Opposite  Bank  one  who  gropes  fur  hsh  ; tor  1 hi^  1.  juk 
a fish-catcher;  fur  Fords  an  Anda;  fur  shallows  a Mamal... 

~ 12  Eesprinkler:  a priest  who  consecrates  a king  by  aspersion  //i;//' 

mrd . chief  aiteiiJant  at  me, .Is.  PMutcr : 

U-Removev:  the  meaningis  uncertain:  ’ 

kei-out  ’ Threelcfjs.  withastaHUiinake hisfootm^m  ^ 

d 


vnns . sp^lla  and  chaiins,  such  as  are  c 
Year  : of  the  Five-year  Cycle.  Paiiv-itHaia  Id.ivathara 
aie  names  of  the  other  years.  See  XXVH.  4o  himniUa 


peihapsasoi  tof ‘cliucker-out  ’ 

15  Tmns  . the  woid  Yaiiia  meaning  oi igm.d  y one 'd  tw  . 
contmied  m the  Athai  va-\e(l.i.  / 

ld\a»saia,  Vot^aia 
the  lii>t  vein  ot 

the  cycle  mentioned  .igain.  RMm:  thiee  amTiceiH’, 
their  merits  A hide-dresser,  alluding  to  the  re-ammat  o o If  tl.e  1.  hed 
f.ldn  by  the  llibhus,  that  is,  the  refreehment  ^ ^ y j ]io.  s 

eaith  by  the  Rains,  the  R.bhu.s  being  beasonal  deRies.  bee  IW 
ISddhy^s;  see  XXIV.  27  ; XXIX  11.  damming  up  water 

16  Anda  - said  to 

anetter  of  h.b.  u.eei-  you  l.« 


hairier.  He  cairies  bows  aivi  .ircne.s  yi  ui«  ^ ^ ^ Ibi'-el.’ 

shoots  you  and  throws  your  bud)  ui  a dR^’h  y j ^ p puuUng. 
- Indian  Examinee's  Answer-paper.  Ku  dta.  a savage  wuu  ; 

17 


258 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  XXX. 


for  Sounds  a Bhilla ; for  Caverns  a Kirata ; for  Mountain- 
heights  a destructive  savage ; for  Mountains  a wild  man ; 

17  For  Abhorrence  a Paulkasa;  for  Colour  a goldsmith;  for 

Balance  a merchant ; for  Repentance  a sluggard ; for  All 
Spirits  a leper;  for  Prosperity  a watchful  man ; for  Failure 
a sleepy  man  ; for  Mischief  a chatterer ; for  Misfortune 
a shameless  man ; for  Undoing  one  who  cuts  up  into  small 
pieces ; 

18  For  the  Dice-king  a gambler  ; for  the  die  Krita  one  who  con- 

templates his  adversary’s  ill  luck  ; for  the  Treta  a gamble- 
manager  ; for  the  Dvapara  a chief  manager ; for  Askanda 
one  who  will  not  leave  the  gambling-hall ; for  Mrityu  one 
who  approaches  cows  ; for  Antaka  a Cow-killer ; for 
Hunger  one  who  goes  begging  to  a man  who  is  cutting 
up  a cow ; for  Misdeed  a leader  of  the  Charakas ; for 
Misery  a robber ; 

19  For  Echo  areviler;  for  Noise  a snarler;  for  End  a very 

talkative  man  ; for  Endless  a mute ; for  Sound  a drum- 
mer ; for  Might  a lute-player ; for  Cry  a flute-blower ; for 
Confused  Tone  a Conch-blower ; for  the  Wood  a wood- 
ranger  ; for  Partly-wooded  Land  a forest  fire  guard ; 

20  For  Pastime  a harlot ; for  Laughter  a jester  ; for  Lust  a 

woman  with  spotty  skin ; for  Might  these,  the  head-man 
of  a village,  an  astrologer,  and  a watchman;  a lute-player, 
a hand-clapper,  a flutist,  these  for  Dance ; for  Pleasure  a 
musician ; 

21  For  Fire  a fat  man  ; for  Earth  a cripple ; for  Wind  a Chan- 

dala;  for  Mid-Air  a pole-dancer;  for  Sky  a bald-head; 
for  the  Sun  a green-eyed  man ; for  Stars  a spotty  man  ; 
for  the  Moon  a leper ; for  Day  a white  yellow-eyed  man  ; 
for  Night  a black  man  with  yellow  eyes. 


17  Paulkasa:  a man  of  very  low  birth,  eon  of  a Nish&da  and  a Kehatriyi. 

18  Dice-king : the  ace,  the  die  called  Kali  ; Krita,  Tretft,  DvApara,  As- 

kanda being  the  names  of  the  other  four  in  g-*neral  use.  Who  will  not  leave 
etc.:  sabhAsthAnum : literally  a gambling-saloon  pillar  or  post.  Mritga 
Death.  ; the  Finisher.  Death.  Who  approaches  coios : a cow-knacker 

(Kuhschinder)  : — Weber.  Charakas:  followers  of  one  of  the  principal 
scliools  of  the  Black  YajurlWa,  regarded  as  opponents. 

19  /J’omi/repward:  forest  conflagrations,  caused  by  the  inter-friction 
of  dry  branches  and  other  accidents,  are  not  uncommon  in  the  hot  weather. 

20  Lust : an  aquatic  monster,  according  to  S^yana. 

21  ChAndAla:  a man  of  an  impure  or  degraded  tribe,  an  outc.-iat.  Pole 
dancer:  au  acrobat.  See  The  Hymns  of  the  lligveda,  I.  10,  1,  note. 


VERSE  22.] 


WHITE  YAJURYEDA. 


259 


22  Now  he  ties  up  the  eight  following  variform  men : one  too 
tall,  one  too  short,  one  too  stout,  one  too  thin,  one  too 
white,  one  too  black,  one  too  bald,  one  too  hairy.  These 
must  be  neither  Sudras  nor  Br&hmans,  and  must  be  dedi- 
cated to  Prajapati. 

A minstrel,  a harlot,  a gambler,  and  a eunuch — neither  of 
Sudra  nor  Brahman  caste — are  to  be  dedicated  to  Praja 
pati. 


22  Uinitnl : Migadha  ; see  verae  5. 


BOOK  THE  THIRTY-FIRST. 


Bunusni  hath  a thousand  heads,  a thousand  eyes,  a thou- 

Pervading  earth  on  every  side  he  fills  a space  ten  fingers 
broad.  , , 

2 Purusha  is  in  truth  this  All,  what  hath  been  and  what  yet 

Lojto^  of  immortality  which  waves  greater  still  by  fool. 

3 So  mightj  in  his  grandeur;  yea,  greater  than  this  is  I ui  us  la. 
All  creatiLs  are  one  fourth  of  him,  three  lourtlis  cteriul 

life  ill  heavoii. 


“Tlio\eren,oay  is  contiauea  aaU  couola.le,!  The  Br.,h.n,,„  priest  reeit-.s 
asLiahlll  human  victims  the  fan, m.,  S 

taken  witli  tianspositions  and  variation^,  fiom  H.  V . ( / n „ ’ 

whW  ’c^cbr.  to,  the  mystical  imnv.Ution  of  Purnsh.a  the  origm  o al  . ca- 
non  of  which  the  Puroshameaha  or  Human  Sac.-, hce  .s  an  emblematical 

Person,  embe.lied  spirit,  or  Man  personified  and  rcgant 

‘ : U,dversa,  s,.ui.  P^-^^  ^ 

^The  Imr^vlmnaareK  the  .«ean,.  and  this  sm.dl  diop  of  water,  lee. 

Bince  by  food  he  expands  Accor  K transcemle' 

Mna,  the  meaning  of  . c ^ber  die  unsterblid 

iii3#B==si|ira5 

immortality,  he  was  all  that  grows  by  food.  --Peteison. 

3 Srriiaf  life  amrUum:  immortality,  or  the  immortal  Gods. 


VERSE  10.1  KlflTE  YAJrRVEDA.  2.;t 


4 With  three  foiirLhs  Piirubha  rose  up:  one  fourth  of  luiu 

again  was  here. 

Thence  he  moved  forth  to  every  side  over  what  eats  not 
and  what  eats. 

5 From  him  Viraj  was  born ; again  Purusha  from  Vir.ij  w:i^ 

horn. 

When  born,  lie  spread  to  west  and  east  beyond  the  bound 
aries  of  earth. 

G From  that  great  (leneral  Sacrifice  the  dripping  fat  was 
gatlicred  up. 

He  formed  the  creatures  of  the  air  and  animals  both  will 
and  tame. 

7 Ph*om  that  great  General  Sacrifice  Richas  and  Saina  hymns 

were  born  : 

'J'herefiorn  were  spells  and  charms  produced  ; the  Vaju^ 
had  its  birth  from  it. 

8 From  it  were  horses  born,  from  it  all  cattle  with  two  rows 

of  teeth : 

From  it  were  generated  kine,  from  it  were  goats  and  Hhee[' 
produced. 

9 They  balmcd  as  victim  on  the  grass  Purusha  born  in  cailiost 

time.  . , 

With  him  the  Deities  and  all  Sadhyas  and  Kislus  siici  ilurU. 

10  When  they  divided  Purusha  how  many  portions  did  they 
make  ? 


4 Over  whit  cats  not  and  what  tats  ■ over  animate  ami  inanimaU*  .■rer.lmm 
According  to  Siyan.i  and  Mabtdhara,  over  both  cl-w.ses  ol  cio.itid  thing., 
those  cai.able  (d  enjoyment,  that  is,  who  can  ta.te  tlm  lew.ud  and  punidi^ 

meut  of  good  and  evil  actions,  such  as  Gods  men,  and  hove  ^ 

thu.e  who  are  incapahle  theieof,  such  as  rn  mnUms  and  nvci.s  duUnani, 
or  conscious,  achetumin,  or  unconscious,  creation. 

5 From  him:  or,  from  that,  tlie  ‘ oiie-fonrth  ’ mentioned  in  sian/as  and 

4.  Virdj,  or,  in  the  nominative  form.  \ mil,  is  said  t;  ‘"‘J"  , 

form  of  the  mundane  egg,  from  Adi-Purusha,  the  ^ ^ ’ 

presidiug  Male  or  Sni.it.  ‘ wliu  then  entered  into  this  egg,  which 

uiatcs  as  its  vital  .soul  or  divme  principle,  tlr  Viuij  may^  c , 

counterpart  of  Pui  nsha  as  Aditi  of  Dakdia  m X /-.  , •>.  . c i ' 
luuati.e  Note  tliii,  . W 

Oosmology  of  the  JiigVeda,  p.  87. 


— WiNon  He 
butter. 


6 Dripping  fat  • ‘ the  mixture  of  ourds  and  butter  ’ 

It ; the  .sacrificial  victim  Puiusha,  or  thesacred  clarihcd 

7 Ricluu  ■ ve.eee  ..f  prei^e  aud  prayer  for  recitafon 

for  chanting.  Spells  and  charms,  magical  ’ihu  ('olkcLiou  uf 

of  the  late,  collection  of  the  Atharva-veda.  The  lajm  the  Ulkc 


Sacrificial  formulas. 

9 Sidhyas:  see  XXIV.  27  j XXIX.  H » XXX.  15. 


262 


TUB  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  XXXI, 


What  was  his  mouth?  what  were  his  arms?  what  are  the 
names  of  thighs  and  feet  ? 

11  The  Brahman  was  his  mouth,  of  both  his  arms  was  the 

Raj  anya  made. 

His  thighs  became  the  Vaisya,  from  his  feet  the  Sudra  was 
produced. 

12  The  Moon  was  gendered  from  his  mind,  and  from  his  eye 

the  Sun  had  birth ; . a • 

Vayu  and  Prana  from  his  ear,  and  from  his  mouth  was  Agni 

born. 

13  Forth  from  his  navel  came  mid-air ; the  sky  was  fashioned 

from  his  head ; , 

Earth  from  his  feet,  and  from  his  ear  the  Quarters,  inus 
they  formed  the  worlds. 

14  When  Gods  performed  the  sacrifice  with  Purusha  as  offering 
Spring  was  the  butter.  Autumn  the  oblation,  Summer  was 

the  wood. 

15  Then  seven  were  his  enclosing-sticks,  his  kindling-brands 

were  three  times  seven. 

When  Gods,  performing  sacrifice,  bound  as  their  victim 
Purusha. 

16  Gods,  sacrificing,  sacrificed  the  victim ; these  were  the  earli- 

est holy  ordinances.  , « , 

The  Mighty  Ones  attained  the  height  of  heaven,  there  where 
the  Sa  lhyas,  Gods  of  old,  ate  dwelling. 


n The  Brthraan  is  called  the  mouth  of 

HU  thigh.,  the  .trongeal  part  of  h«  tody,  b^me  the 

industry  all  prosperity  ultimately  rests.  This  is  the  only  passage 
Kigveda  which  enumerates  the  four  castes. 

.S'treu- 

plains  paridkayah  here  a.  the  seven  sacred  metres,  or  m ji„g 

com^ratirsly  information  regarding  ih 

two  ideas  ofsaonBoe  and  J „ 368-377.  Prof.  Max  MUller,  Anci- 


WHITE  YAJVUVEDA. 


263 


XEKSE  22.] 


17  In  the  beginning  he  was  formed,  collected  from  waters,  earth, 

and  Visvakarman’s  essence. 

Fixing  the  form  thereof  Tvashtar  proceedeth.  This  was  at 
first  the  mortal’s  birth  and  godliead. 

18  I know  this  mighty  Purnsha  whose  colour  is  like  the  Sun, 

beyond  the  reach  of  darkness. 

He  only  who  knows  him  leaves  Death  behind  him.  There  is 
no  path  save  this  alone  to  travel. 

19  In  the  womb  moves  Prajapati : he,  never  becoming  born,  is 

born  in  sundry  figures. 

The  wise  discern  the  womb  fiom  which  he  springeth.  In 
him  alone  stand  all  existing  creatures. 

20  He  w'ho  gives  light  and  heat  to  Gods,  first,  foremost  Agent 

of  the  Gods, 

Born  ere  the  Gods — to  him  the  bright,  the  holy  One,  he 


1C  VCL  Viiuc  • 

21  Thus  spake  the  Gods  at  first,  as  they  begat  the  bright  and 

holy  One : „ , i i 

The  Brahman  who  may  know  thee  thus  shall  have  the  Goi.s 

in  his  control. 

22  Beauty  and  Fortune  are  thy  wives : each  side  of  thee  are 

Day  and  Night.  , . 

The  constellations  are  thy  form  : the  Asvins  are  llin.e  ni.en 

Wishing,  wish  yonder  world  for  me,  wish  that  the  Universe 
be  mine.  


.0.  der  Rig-and  Ath.r;«.vsdr.s"anl.it»  pp  H-W-  V"'" ''.'g” 

leva  transUted  by  Coiebrouke,  Miscellaneoui  hsaay.,  1^'- 

Wallis,  Ciieoiology  of  tlie  Rigveda,  pp.  87,  ^ Purjlia  ^’re- 

from  the  Rigvoda,  pp.  28«,  280  ; also  by  Buruouf,  BMgavaia  ' " 

tee  to  Vol.  I.,  and  by  Webeu  teUsche  ?^Vran»latio„  and  C..,,,. 

Iranslation  in  hiH  Appendix  to  voi  u.,  aim  Athaivu  veda, 

raentary  ahould  be  consulted  See  transpositions  and 

XIX  6,  which  is  a repioductioii  of  this  h}mn  witn  ir  pv; 

“e  earliest  performer  of  the  Purushamedl.a.  who  thj-by  ti.e 

formoftheSun,  is  gloiified.  \ J . the  Sun.  ErcKcedttli : m. 

supplies  yo  rasah,  the  essence  which.  ^ • 

his  daily  course,  Godhead : gained  hy  ^cn  V X 8 13  Sundry 

19  The  hrst  line  is  taken,  mth  a yar.at.on  ronn  A-  »•  , 

place. ; every  birth  that  occurs  being  m reality  a re-b.rtn 

Power  Prajapati.  f a.,n  Foremost  Agent  purohituh. 

20  m.  P,.,jH«.tl  in  the  form  "f  i.  «iarrsse.l. 

22  HmiUy  and  Fortune : 

CmaUUatum:  or  store  in  ,,J  4'.  h,  wishes  for  liberation 

dhara.  moaning  Heaven  and  Earth.  The  Uiuv^K . ne 
from  the  bontU  of  this  world  and  absorption  into  Brahma,  tne 


BOOK  THE  THIUTY  SECOND. 


Aon'i  is  That ; the  Siii)  is  That ; Vayu  and  Cliandrannis  at\- 
That. 

The  Bright  is  That;  Brahma  is  That,  those  Waters,  tliat 
Prajapati. 

All  twinklings  of  the  eyelid  sprang  from  Pnrusha,  respleml 

ent  One.  . , 

No  one  hath  comprehended  him  above,  across,  or  in  the 

iniilst. 

;i  There  is  no  counterpart  of  him  whose  glory  verily  is  great, 
In  the  lieginning  rose  Hiranyagai  bha,  etc.  Let  not  him 
harm  me,  etc.  Than  wlmm  there  is  no  other  horn,  etc. 
t This  vety  God  pervadeth  all  tl.e  regions;  yea,  born  afoic- 
time,  in  the  woml)  he  dwelleth. 

He  verily  horn  and  to  be  born  hereafter  meeteth  his  otl- 
spring,  facing  all  directions. 

o Before  whom  naught  wliatever  sprang  to  being ; who  witli 
his  presence  aids  all  living  creatures, 

Prajapati,  rejoicing  in  hk  offsp.ing,  he,  Shodasi,  maintains 
tiie  Three  great  Lustres. 

6 Bv  whom  the  heavens  are  strong  and  earth  stands  fniiilv, 
by  wboin  light’s  realm  and  sky-vault  are  supported; 

By  whom  the  regions  in  mid-air  were  measuied.  What 
God  shall  we  adore  with  our  oblation  1 


" T!,;'  -nia  the  two  ft.llowing  Buolcs  contain  texts  and  fonnuUs  to  bo 

.t  the  ntlnnanre  of  a Sarvt.nedha  Sac.il, ce  for 

I’losperity  a ten-day  ceieiivniy  that  r.niks  higher  and  Is  ..onsu  •- 

more  important  than  even  the  Put ushaniedha  Afte.'  perfm  ^ 

iimny  the  S.icrificer  has  to  leave  his  h.nne  and  lefcire  to  the 

the  n'st  of  Ids  life.  This  Book  is  con-jidcred  to  be  an  Up.onaln.d,  cut 

T.uleva  from  the  first  two  words.  ’ , „ the 

1 That,  tad;  the  Supreme  Self  CliandramU:  the  Moon.  Those 

momenta  and  meaBurca  of  ti,ne.  Cov.p»h«,ied : »b  a« 
obicct  of  perception. 

:5  the  Wx^riM'"vnr30>lVcoleW 

inirred,  respectively,  ni  XXV.  10--1.3  , All.  loo  , 
the  greatness  of  Piajlpati  or  Purusha. 

4 or,  the  first.  Cf.  XXXI.  19. 

5 tL  aecond  line  ia  repoatad  from  Vflt  36  thra  tmlm:  Ag- 

VaMi.  Sinya.  ortheSun,  theMoon.andAgni. 

(5  Ta\en  f.om  K.  V.  X 121.  6.  What  God,  etc, : or,  orsbip  we  Ka 
Uod.  See  Xlll.  4. 


WIfTE  YAJVRVEDA. 


XER^E  11  ] WIETE  YAJVRVEDA.  2i;.> 

7 To  wliom,  sapportedl)Y  his  help,  two  armies  cml-nttled  look 

while  trembling  intheir 

Where  over  them  thorisen  Sun  is  shining.  What  Ib.d  hhall 
we  adore  with  our  oblation  1 

hat  time  the  mighiy  waters,  etc.  He  in  his  might  sur 
vcyed,  etc. 

8 The  Sage  beholdetli  That  mysterious  lleing  wherein  this 

All  hath  found  one  only  dwelling. 

Therein  unites  the  Wb>le,  and  thence  it  issues:  far  spreail  it 
is  the  warp  and  woT  m creatures. 

9 Knowing  Eternity,  nuy  the  (buidharva  declare  that  station, 

parted,  kept  in  seerjt. 

Three  steps  tliereof  inmystcry  are  hidden:  he  who  knows 
these  shall  be  the  Other’s  faiher. 

10  Re  is  our  kin,  our  Fallier  and  Begetter;  he  knows  all  be* 

ings  and  all  Ordiiiames, 

In  whom  the  Gods  obtaiiing  life  eternal  have  risen  iipwiud 
to  the  third  high  staton. 

11  Having  encompassed  rdiind  existing  creatures,  the  woiMs 

and  all  the  Quarters  and  Mid  qnarters, 

Having  aproached  the  fiist-born  Child  of  Order  ho  with  his 
Self  into  Tlic  Self  hath  entered.  _ 

7 Tiro  armirs  emhattlrd  look,  or  »('rhaps  • xl*’,/.'',.**' v’b 'IT. 

by  his  f.ivour,  Heaven  anJ  ivuth  lo)k  up.  See  . g '.‘/i  ’ or  y/^ 

1‘crtl  pp  2 9 Whattiuu’.  rtc^  lefeatcl  from  \\\  U 2a.  Jlc  m 
viiqht  rrpeatecl  fioni  XXV  H.  2b  f at,  I he 

8 Mi/itn-iom  fkinq:  lhahtna.  the  \l)soluto  Endc^.i  . ^ 

pe.i.uUcal  deso  action  of  the  uni.erv.  .t  the  end 

IhahnuVaneonof  fourli.indred  and  lhirty*two  million  years  of 

at  the  time  of  anew  ceation  fheOnvdharvn-  meming 

9 Taken,  with  a variation,  fnm  A.  V 11  1 

hoie.  atn’orduig  to  Mahldh.ira,  Colehrooke  am  . i . (],o 

ed  tlieolngiau  ; or,  may  he  the  S,m.  l i^d  ' 

recieate.n  of  the  universe  J he  A.  V reading  / c.m.luioi.s,  am 

drps  according  to  Mahidliata,  the  tho'e  /a  " ^ (Hr.dinu),  the 
C’-eation,  continuance,  and  di ‘•appearance  or  _ c * • j tli.it 

Demiurgus  or  Creator,  and  the  >mhvi.lual  Self  1 < A-  , father 

the  reference  is  to  the  Pnrusha  SiUU,  3,  4,  of  Book  XXX 1.  ; 

wiser  than  and  able  to  teach,  his  emers.  _ immoitnl  Aeni  alone  who 

10  Ik  the  Almighty  Creator.  ' ‘nortai  and  the  other 

is  here  identified  with  the  Creator  wiis  ^ y fitalion  highest 

Gods  obt  lined  immorUhty  through  him  ,2./. 

heaven.  The  first  line  is  taken  fiom  . ■ ' . ■/•f  ^ fiotu  the  bonds 

11  The  pe,  former  of  tlie  Universal  S-p^he  ela  ^ his  enlightened 



formed  therewith.  Ik:  the  pcrloimer  of  the  bmve 


266 


WHITE  YAJURVB)A,  [BOOK  XXXII, 


12  Having  gone  swiftly  round  the  eirth  and  heaven,  around 

the  worlds,  around  the  sky,  the  ^uarteis, 

Having  spread  out  the  lengtiieued  iliread  of  Order,  he  views, 
and  he  beconfies  and  is  That  Beiig. 

13  To  the  Assembly’s  wondrous  Lord,  to  Indras  lovely  Fiiend 

who  gives 

Wisdom,  have  I drawn  near  in  prayer. 

14  That  wisdom  which  the  Companies  of  Gods,  and  Fathers, 


recognize,  • x i 

Even  with  that  intelligence,  0 Agii,  make  me  wise  to-day. 

All-hail! 

15  Vanma  grant  me  wisdom  1 grant  it  Agni  and  Prajapati  I 
Wisdom  may  Indra,  Vayu  grant.  May  the  Creator  grant  it 

me.  All-hail ! 

16  Let  these  the  Priests  and  NobleJ  both  enjoy  the  splendour 

that  is  mine.  m xi  n f 

Best  splendour  may  the  Gods  bistow  on  me.  To  thee,  that 

splendour,  hail ! 


12  Thread  of  Order : sacrifice,  which  if  a line  reaching  down  from  an- 
cient times  and  uniting  men  and  Gods. 

13  TheAmmhly'swondroui  Lord:  igni,  called 
Guardian  of  the  congregation  of  priests  snd  worshippers.  The 
from  B.  V.  I.  18.  6. 


^4 — 


BOOK  THE  THIRTY-THIRD. 


His  be  the  fires,  eternal,  purifying,  protectors  of  our  liomes, 
whose  smoke  is  shining, 

White,  waxing  in  their  strength,  for  ever  stirring,  and  seat- 
ed in  the  wood  : like  winds  are  Somas. 

2 Gold-coloured)  bannered  with  the  smoke,  urged  by  the  wind, 

aloft  to  heaven 

Rise,  lightly  borne,  the  flames  of  fire. 

3 Bring  to  us  Mitra-Varuna,  bring  the  Gods  to  the  great 

sacrifice ; 

Bring  them,  0 Agni,  to  thine  home. 

{ Yoke,  Agni,  as  a charioteer,  thy  steeds  who  best  invoke  the 
Gods : 


As  ancient  Hotar  take  thy  seat. 

5 To  fair  goals  travel  Two  unlike  in  semblance ; each  in  suc- 
cession nourishes  an  infant. 

One  bears  a Godlike  Babe  of  golden  colour  : bright  and  fair- 


shining  is  be  With  the  other. 

6 Here  by  ordainers  was  this  God  appointed  first  Invoker, 

best  at  worship,  to  be  praised  at  rites,  i • i » 

Whom  Apnavana  and  the  Bhrigus  caused  to  shine,  bright- 
coloured  in  the  wood,  spreading  to  every  house. 

7 Three  times  a hundred  Gods,  and  thrice  a thousand,  and 

three  times  ten,  and  nine  have  worshipped  Agm, 

For  him  spread  sacred  grass,  balmed  him  with  buttei,  ami 
stablished  him  as  Priest  and  Sacrificer.  


The  formulas  for  the  Universal  Sacrihee  are  continued. 

1 The  first  seventeen  verses  constitute  a htany 
IS  taken  from  R.  V.  X.  46.  7.  Protec^r>:  this  is 

of  aritrd,  as  though  the  word  came  from  an,  us 

from.  The  literal  meaning  is  oars,  rudde.s.  oi  ’ j 

winds  fan  flame,  so  Soma  libations  increase  the  might  ot  Agui, 

2 Taken  from  R.  V.  VIII.  43.  4. 

3 R.  V.  I.  75.  5. 

4 Repeated  from  XIII.  37,  . . C3  l>v  dar 

5 R.  V.  I 95. 1.  Two:  Day  and  Night.  Infant:  Agni  as  the  Sun  by  day, 

and  Fire,  or  the  Moon,  by  night. 

« Repeated  from  III.  15  ; taken  from  R.  V.  IV.  7. 1. 

7 R V in.  9 9.  In  the  Vaieradeva  Nivid  or  Formula  o 
the  Ali.Gode,  the  number  of  the  Gods  i»  said  to  be  3 times  11  th  • . 

303,  then  3003.  By  aiding  together  33  + 803  + 3000  the  number  3339  .. 
t&iudd.  See  Hang’s  Aitareya  Briflimanam,  IL  p.  note. 


2Q3  THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [FOOK  XXXJIt, 

8 Hiin,  mG'^senjj;cr  of  earth  }ind  head  of  heaven,  Agni  Vai8\a 

iiara,  born  in  holy  Order, 

The  Sago,  the  King,  the  Guest  of  men,  a vessel  fit  for  tbcir 
mouths,  the  Gods  have  generated. 

9 May  Agiii  slay  the  foemen,- fain  for  riches,  thiough  the 

love  of  song 

Kindled,  bright,  served  with  sacrifice. 

10  With  the  All-Gods,  with  Indra  and  with  Vayu  drink  the 

Soma  mead, 

0 Agui,  after  Mitra’s  laws. 

1 1 When  splendour  reached  the  Lord  of  men  to  speed  him, 

down  from  the  heaven  was  shed  the  brilliant  moistuic. 
Agni  biongia  foith  to  light  and  filled  with  spirit  the  youth- 
ful ho^t  henevolent  and  blameless. 

12  Show  th\ self  strong  for  mighty  bliss,  0 Agni;  most  excel- 

lent be  thine  efftilgent  splendours. 

Make  eas}^  to  maintain  our  lujiisehold  lordship  and  ti ample 
down  the  might  of  those  who  hate  us. 

13  We  have  elected  thee  as  most  delightful  for  thy  bcanib’ 

glow  ; hear  our  great  laud,  0 Agni. 

The  best  men  praise  thee  as  the  peer  of  Indra  in  strength, 
mid  Gods,  like  Vayu  in  thy  bounty. 

14  0 Agni  who  art  worshipped  well,  dear  let  our  princes  be  to 

thee, 

Onr  wealthy  patrons  who  are  governors  of  men,  who  part  in 
gifts  their  stalls  of  kine. 


8 Ropeate.l  from  VII  24;  taken  from  R.  V.  VI,  7.  1.  A vessel : through 
whom  they  leceive  .sacriticial  offerings. 

9 R.  V.  VI.  16  34. 


10  After  Mitra's  latos:  mhrasya  dhdniuhhih ; according  to  Mahldhara. 
(piaiscd)  by  the  names  of  Mitia.  ^ 

n R V I 71  3 The  Lord  nf  men  ■ the  protector  of  the  sacriricer,  ac 
cordiog  to'M.->hi<ihara,  that  ie,  Agni.  Prom  the  heaven  : tl.e  t.;.rt  h.ia 
rvlnch,  Mahidhara  say.,  in  n-ed  in  tlieaeneeof  the  genitive  <f,/»h  ‘"te  w nl. 
pi.il.anly,  itmaybecori-ccted.  See  Oldembeig,  Vedic  Hyuiiis,  Pait  II  I 
b,  note  M,ful  Imt . probaUy  the  Maruts,  tlie  vei»e  being  here  a Nivu 
foi’ninl  ny  need  on  drawing  the  Marutvatiyagraha  or  enp  for  India  attended 
by  tlie  Mai  uts. 

1 2  R V.  V.  28.  3 easy  to  maintain  : or,  to  follow  S4ya;a  and  Ma 

hidlura:  Perfect  the  well-knit  bond  of  wife  and  husband. 


13  R V.  VI.  4.  7. 

14  R.  V.  VII.  16.  7.  Gifts : saorificial  offerings  of  milk,  curds,  and  dan' 
tied  butter  aa  well  as  honoiaria  to  the  priests, 


WHITE  YAJURYEVA. 


mSE  21.] 


2(3y 


[j  Hear,  Agni  who  Imt  ears  to  hear,  with  all  thy  tvaiu  of 
escort  Gods. 

Let  Mitra,  Aryaman,  seeking  betimes  our  rite,  seat  thorn 
upon  the  sacred  grass. 

[G  The  Freedom  of  all  Gods  who  merit  worship,  freely  received 
as  Guest  in  all  men’s  houses, 

Agni  who  hath  secured  the  God?j’  high  favour,  may  he  he 
gracious  to  us,  Jat.ivedas. 

17  In  groat  enkindled  Agni’s  keeping  and,  for  bliss,  free  from 

all  sin  before  Mitra  and  Varuna, 

May  we  share  S.ivitar’s  host  animating  help.  \Ye  crave  this 
gracious  favour  of  the  Gods  to-day. 

18  Like  b.irren  cows,  moreover,  swelled  the  w.itors:  smuo'is 

approched  thy  holy  cult,  O Indra 
Come  thou  to  us  as  to  hl^  team  comes  Vayu.  Ihou  through 
our  solemn  hymns  bestowest  bounty. 

19  Ye  Cows,  protect  the  fount,  'lire  two  imghty  Ones  bless  the 

sacrifice. 

The  handles  twain  are  wrought  of  gold, 

20  Now  Wl,(jn  the  Sun  Iwth  i-Hcn  to  day  may  sinlcsa  Mitra. 


Aryaman, 

• Hhaga,  and  Sivitar  speed  us  fnth.  , ,,  ,i 

21  l\)n.  on  thejnieethe  ornament  which  reaches  b nJ.  the 

heaven  and  earth  : ^ 

H ^1.  44  13.  Let  d/iO'a.  Aryaumu  • and  V.uu  a,  impliftl  .'md  un- 

1(3  U V IV.  1 20  .*  or,  .\diti.  tiK^aning  dc"  tif'cst,  inn'll  ind* 

pendent.  There  i.  a play  on  tha  wo.da  -d  n.d/o  jn- 

17  R V aY.  30  li  Thever.eis.lNlvldtormnUu^e(l^^Uentln  >aMna 

fi'raliH,  or  cup  for  Savitar,  in  diavvn  h,  Irwin  Yfr^e 

18  Verses  18 -29  coiirttitut'*  a sei  VICO  •>  prai'>  ■ ' i . | <• 

18  is  taken  from  R V VII.  23  < Ts  . 'lim 

ne  waten  : n-od  ha  -wellinj?  tlie  stall,,  d h 
ID R. V. vni. 61 12  nrf.,»ni  [ "j™ 

n which  libations  of  milk  ate  In-ated.  ^ coW't'  vie  to  ap- 

ril,.  „r  pit  (see  VII  26  ; VIll.  2») .»  n,t«..l,-.l,  w • , 

pro.cU.Wtw  One.'  H.'a»aa  au.l  I» 'h 

translated,  the  meaning  of  heing  imu  • ' . iccordiiiL'  to 

ladk  iu  tl.;  sacrilloc  are  plentifu  aud  1,,I  I m 

, Siva-, a ne  Knndla  «f  the  caldr.... ; h"  o,„,l,asah 

20  R V vn  66  4 Sinks'i  aod>rl}  taken  ny  oi;ya.<i,  j . 

^tioiillbe:  The  river  iiomnshesthH  Bull  .n  lesoectivc- 

6.  ra««.-  Sc  . thebe?,nnmg.  af  twa  N.v.d  f«r.nuU.  up, .Red,  .esptU.va 
I b)  from  VII.  12  and  16. 


270 


TBE  TEXTS  OP  THE 


[BOOK  XXXIII. 


Supply  the  liquid  to  the  Bull. 

Thou  in  the  first  old  time.  See,  Vena. 

22  As  he  was  rising  up  they  all  revered  him : self-luminous  he 

travels,  clothed  in  splendour. 

That  is  the  Bull’s,  the  Asura’s  lofty  nature ; he,  Omniform, 
hath  reached  the  eternal  waters. 

23  I laud  your  Mighty  One  who  joyeth  in  the  juice,  him  who 

is  good  to  all  men,  who  pervadeth  all ; 

Indra  whose  conquering  strength  is  powerful  in  war,  whose 
fame  and  manly  vigour  Heaven  and  Earth  revere, 

24  Great  is  their  fuel,  strong  their  laud,  wide  is  their  sacrificial 


post 

Whose  Friend  is  Indra,  ever  young. 

25  Come,  Indra,  and  delight  thee  with  the  juice  at  all  the 

Soma  feasts, 

Conqueror,  mighty  in  thy  strength. 

26  Leading  his  hand,  Indra  encompassed  Vritra ; weak  grew 

the  wily  leader  of  enchanters. 

He  who  burns  fierce  in  forests  slaughtered  Vyamsa,  and 
made  the  milch-kine  of  the  nights  apparent. 

27  Whence  comest  thou  alone,  thou  who  art  mighty,  Indra, 

Lord  of  the  Brave  ? What  is  thy  purpose  ? 

Thou  greetest  us,  encountering  us  the  Bright  Ones.  Lord  of 
Bay  Steeds,  say  what  thou  hast  against  us. 

Indra,  great  iu  his  power  and  might.  Ne’er  art  thou  fruit- 
less. Never  art  thou  neglectful. 


22  R.  V.  III.  3S.  4.  He:  Indra  at  the  Suo  Eternal  waters:  antritdni, 
joUdni,  waters,  being  understood  •,  ‘ the  forces  of  eternity,’  according  to  voii 
Roth.  Nature:  or,  title,  such  as  Vritra-slayer,  etc. 

23  R.  V.  X 50.  1.  . 

24  R.  V.  VIII.  45.  2.  Well  provided  with  the  materials  of  sacrifice,  tno 
consequently  successful,  are  those  whom  Indra  favours. 

25  R.  V.  I.  9.  1.  . ^ . 

26  R.  V.  III.  34.  3.  Hi$  hand:  the  Maruts.  Encompassed  Vntra:  in* 
ramavrinot ; a play  upou  the  words,  both  from  vri,  to  eucompass  ; Vritra  the 
drought”  demon  being  the  encompasser  or  obstructer  of  the  seasonalraina. 
He  who  hums  fierce:  perhaps  the- thunderbolt.  Yyasfssa:  the  nawe  vf 

of  the  demons  of  drought  See  R.  V.  1. 101.  2 ; 103.  2.  Milch-Je^neof  t 
nights : according  to  Siyana,  the  (stolen)  cows  (that  had  been  hidden)  m 
the  night  ; that  is,  he  recovered  the  vanished  rays  of  light.  Mahldharai 
interpretation,  ‘ and  made  the  lauds  of  devotees  apparent,’  seems  very  far- 
fetched 

27  R.  V.  I.  165.  3.  The  Maruts  address  Indra  whom  they  meet  alone, 

unattended  by  them  as  usual,  in  consequence  of  some  ill-feeling  ^^t  “a* 

arisen  See  M.  Muller.  Vedic  Hymns,  Part  1.  (Sacred  Books  of  the 
XXXII.  pp.  179-^208).  The  verse  ends  with  * against  us.’  Then  follow 
the  beginnings  of  three  Nivid  formulas  repeated  respectively,  from  VII.  4^* 
VIII.  2 and  3. 


VERSE  34.1 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


271 


28  Those  men  extolled  thut  deed  of  thine,  0 Indi  a,  those  who 

would  fain  burst  through  the  stall  of  cattle, 

Fain  to  milk  her  who  bare  but  once,  great,  lofty,  whose  sons 
are  many  and  her  streams  a thousand. 

29  To  thee  the  Mighty  One  I bring  this  mighty  hymn,  for  thy 

desire  hath  been  gratified  by  my  laud. 

In  Indra,  yea,  in  him  victorious  through  his  might,  the 
Gods  have  joyed  at  feast  and  when  the  Soma  flowed. 

30  May  the  Bright  God  drink  glorious  Soma-mingled  mead, 

giving  the  sacrifice’s  lord  uninjured  life; 

He  who,  wind-urged,  in  person  guards  our  offspring  well, 
hath  nourished  them  with  food  and  shone  o’er  many  a 
land. 

31  His  bright  rays  bear  him  up  aloft,  the  God  who  kuoweth  all 

that  lives, 

Surya,  that  all  may  look  on  him. 

32  Pure  Varuna,  with  that  same  eye  wherewith  thou  lookest 

upon  one 

Actively  stirring  mid  the  folk — 

33  Ye  two  divine  Adhvaryus,  come  hither  upon  a sun-bright  car ; 
Bedew  our  sacrifice  with  mead. 

Thou  in  the  first  old  time.  See,  Vena.  The  brilliant  presence. 

34  Loved  of  all  men,  may  Savi tar  through  praises  ofibred  as 

sacred  food  come  to  our  synod, 

That  ye  too,  through  our  hymns,  ye  ever  youthful,  may 
gladden  at  your  visit  all  our  people. 


28  R.  V.  X.  74.  4-  Those  men:  the  AngiraHei,  Jinrst  throuf/h  the  stall  of 
eatth  ; to  recover  the  stolen  cows,  the  rays  of  li/<ht  that  had  been  earned 
away  by  the  demons  of  dark neas.  Her  who  hare  but  once  - eaven,  accor( 
iugto^yana;  Earth,  according  to  Mahidhara  PriMU  the  mother  of  the 

Maruts,  must  be  meant. — Ludwig.  See  R.  V.  \ 1.  48.  22. 


29  R V I 102.  1, 

30  R.  V.  X 170,  1.  Verses  30—43  are  formulas  in  praise  of  S6rya,  ac- 
companying libations  to  that  deity  on  the  third  dj<y  of  the  ceiemony 
Wind-urged  • tlie  disc  of  the  San  deriving  its  motion  troin  the  wind. 

■ 32  R.  V 1.  50.  6.  Varuna  • the  word  is,  A«  S.4yana  points  out,  used  as  an 
appellative  (encompasser)  and  applied  to  Surya  li^yana 
nnihtaniviraka,  averter  of  evils  Aettrely  sHrmng . in  * P;  Xwing 
*'icrifice  Tn  the  oriirinal  hymn  the  sense  is  completed  m the  foil,  wing 

M^hldhara  supplies,  ‘look 

iipon  us  who  are  similarly  busted  here,  „ fi.p  finda  the 

33  Two  divine  Adhvaryus  ■ A?vins,  the  Adhvaryus  of  the  O^s.  t^^ 

heralds  of  the  Sun’s  approach,  aie  addressed, 

34  r’  V.  I 186.  1.  Saritar  : the  Sun,  csiiecially  regarded  as  the  vivifier 
and  generator.  Ye  too : the  Visvedevas  or  All  (iuds. 


272  THE  TEXTS  OF  fHE  [BOOK  XXXllI. 

35  Whatever,  Vritra-slayer  ! thou  Suiya  hast  risen  on  to-day, 
That,  Iiidra,  all  is  in  thy  power. 

36  Swift,  visible  to  all  art  thou,  0 Sirya,  maker  of  the  light, 
Illuming  all  the  radiant  realm. 

,37  This  is  the  Godhead,  this  the  might  of  Surya : he  hath 
withdrawn  what  spread  o’er  work  nnfiuished. 

When  he  hath  loosed  his  horses  from  their  station,  straight 
over  all  Night  spre.ideth  out  her  garment. 

3S  In  the  sky’s  lap  the  Sun  this  form  assumeth  that  Vanina 
and  Mitra  may  behold  it. 

His  Bay  Steeds  well  maintain  their  power  eternal,  at  oiio 
time  bright,  and  darksome  at  another. 

39  Verilv,  Surya,  thou  art  great ; truly,  Addya,  thou  art  groat. 
As  thou  art  great  indeed  thy  greatness  is  admired  : ye.i, 

verily  thou,  God,  art  great. 

40  Yea,  Surya,  thou  art  great  in  fame  : thou,  evermore,  0 Goil, 

art  gieat, 

Thou  by  thy  greatness  art  the  Gods’  Homc-l‘riost,  divine, 
far-spread,  unconquerable  liglit. 

41  Turning,  as ’twere,  to  meet  the  Sun,  enjoy  from  Indra  all 

good  things. 

When  he  who  will  bo  born  is  born  with  power  we  look  to 
treasures  as  our  heritage. 

42  To-day,  ye  Gods,  when  S'lrya  hath  ascended,  deliver  in 

from  trouble  and  dishonour 

This  boon  may  Vanina  and  Mitra  grant  us,  and  AJiti  and 
Sindhu,  Earth  and  Heaven. 


35  R,  V.  VIII.  82  4.  Indra  • aa  identified  with  Surya. 

36  K V.  1.  50.  4.  . , 

37  R.  V.  I 115.  L He  hath  withdrawn : ‘The  cultivator  or  aitisan 

sists  fiom  his  labour,  althuugh  unfinished,  upon  the  setting  of  th*}  yin  , 
•when  the  sun  ‘has  withdrawn  (into  himself)  the  diffused  (light  wmch  ly 
been  shed)  upon  the  unfinished  task  ’ . — Wilson.  The  stanza  is  dimcu  , 
and  no  thoioughly  satisfaetury  exfdanation  of  it  has  yet  been  otfeied.'  bt-e 
Ludwig,  Der  Kigveda,  IV.  131,  132.  , 

38  R V.  I.  115.  5.  This  form  of  might  and  Godhead.  Vuruna  as  'uit 
uf  tlie  N’ght  Mitra : as  God  of  the  Day. 

39  R V.  Vlll  90  11. 


40  R V.  Vlll,  90.  12  ^ ^ xcvnivV, 

41  R.  V.  VIII.  88.  3 This  stanza  is  difficult  and  obscure  Mahldhaia 

explanation  is  : The  gathering  (rays)  proceeding  to  the  ,suii  distiibute  a 
Indra’s  treasuies  (to  living  beings,  as  rain,  corn,  etc  ) : may  we  too  by 
power  leave  those  treasures  as  an  iiiheiitauce  to  him  who  has  been  oi 

be  born  ’-See  Prof.  Cowell’s  note  in  Wilson’s  Translatiou. 

42  The  second  liue  is  the  sback  conclusion  of  many  Rigveda  hymii^ 
SIndhn  : is  the  deity  presiding  over,  or  identified  with,  watei,  and  it  ml 
mean  the  Sea,  or  the  Indu^. 


TEiCaJS  5U.J  WHITE  YAJURVBDA.  27'} 

43  Throughout  the  dusky  firmament  advancing,  lavinsr  to  rost 

the  imniortal  and  the  mortal,  ^ ^ 

Borne  on  his  golden  chariot  he  cometh,  Savitar,  God 
beholding  living  creatures.  ’ 

44  Soft  to  the  tread  the  sacred  grass  is  scattered : these  uo 

like  Kings  amid  the  band  around  them, 

At  the  folk’s  early  call  on  Night  and  Morning,— Vayu  and 
Piibban  with  his  team  to  bless  us. 

45  fjidra,  Vayu,  Brihaspati,  Mitra,  Agni,  Pdshan,  Bha^^a, 
Adityas,  and  the  Mariit  host. 

46  Be  Varuna  our  chief  defence,  let  Mitra  guard  us  with  all  aids : 
Both  make  us  lich  exceedingly! 

47  Regard  us,  Indra,  Vishnu,  here,  ye  Asvins,  and  the  Mariit 

host,  us  who  are  kith  and  km  to  you. 

Thou  in  the  first  old  time.  Sec,  Vena.  0 ye  eleven  (mds. 
Loved  of  all  men,  may  Savitar.  With  the  All-Gods.  Ye 
Visvedovas  who  protect. 

48  0 Agni,  Indra,  Varuna,  and  Mitra,  give,  0 ye  Gods,  and 

Marut  host,  and  Vishnu 

May  both  Nasatyas,  Rudra,  heavenly  Matrons,  Pushan, 
Sarasvati,  Bhaga  accept  us. 

49  Indra,  Agni,  Mitra,  Varuna,  Aditi,  the  Waters,  Mountains, 

Maruts,  Sky,  and  Earth  and  Heaven, 

Vishnu  I call,  Pushan  and  Brahmanaspati,aiid  Bhaga,  Sainsa, 
Savitar  that  they  may  help. 

50  With  ns  are  raining  Rudra.s,  cloud.s  accordant  in  call  to 

battle  at  the  death  of  Vritra, 

The  strong,  assigned  to  him  who  sings  and  praises.  May 
Gods  with  Indra  as  their  chief  protect  us. 


43  R.  V.  I.  35  2. 

44 — 54  celebiate  the  Visvedevas  or  All-0od8.  Verse  44  is  taken  from 
R V.  VIT.  39.  2. 

45  R,  V.  I.  14.  3. 

46  R V.  I.  23.  6. 

47  The  GAyatii  verse  is  taken  from  VIII  72.  7.  Kith  and  kin  as  com- 
mon children  of  Aditi  the  General  Mother  of  all  living  beings.  The  six  iin- 
^^onnected  Pratikas  or  Verse-beginniugs  are  repeated  from  il,2)  XXXIII 
21  ; (3)  VII.  19  ; (4)  XXXIII.  34  ; (5)  XXXIII.  10  (6;  VII.  33. 

48  R V.  V.  46.  2. 

49  R.  V.  V,  46.  3.  Emsa : Praise  or  Prayer,  personified.  According  to 
M.ihidhaia,  praiseworthy,  qualifying  Savitai. 

50  R.  V,  VIII.  52.  12,  Raining:  pouring  down  riches;  bounteous.  The 
itrong  perhaps  the  thunderbolt,  with  which  Indra  aids  the  worshipper. 

18 


271 


THE  TEXTS  OP  THE  [BOOK  XXXIII. 


51  Turn  yourselves  hitherward  this  day,  ye  Holy,  that  fearing 

in  my  heart  I may  approach  you. 

Protect  us,  Gods,  let  not  the  wolf  destroy  us.  Save  us,  yo 
Holy,  from  the  pit  and  falling. 

52  This  day  come  all  the  Maruts,  etc.,  as  in  XVllI.  31. 

.53  Listen,  All-Gods,  to  this  mine  invocation,  ye  who  inhabit 
heaven  and  air’s  rnid-region. 

All  ye,  0 Holy  Ones,  whose  tongue  is  Agni,  seated  upon 
this  sacred  grass  be  joyful. 

54  For  thou  at  first  producest  for  the  holy  Gods  the  noblest  of 

all  portions,  immortality. 

Thereafter  as  a gift  to  men,  0 Savitar,  thou  openest  existence, 
life  succeeding  life. 

55  I with  a lofty  song  call  hither  Vayu  all-bounteous,  filler  ot 

his  car,  most  wealthy. 

Thou,  Sage,  with  bright  path,  Lord  of  harnessed  horses,  im- 
petuous, promptly  honourcst  the  prudent. 

5G  'Phese,  Indra-V%u,  have  been  shed,  etc.,  as  in  VIL  8. 

57  Mitra  of  holy  strength  I call,  and  foe-destroying  Varuna, 
Who  make  the  oil-fed  rite  complete. 

58  Nasatyas,  Wonder-workers,  yours  are  these  libations  with 

dipt  grass. 

Come  ye  whose  paths  are  bright  with  glow. 

59  When  Sarania  had  found  the  mountain’s  fissure,  that  vast 

and  ancient  place  she  plundered  throughly. 

In  tlic  floods’  van  she  led  them  forth,  light-footed  : she  who 
well  knew  came  first  unto  their  lowing. 


.^i  R.  V.  II.  29.  6. 

.52  Repeated  from  XVIII.  31. 

53  R.  V.  VI.  52.  13.  Wkm  tongw  u Agni : who  enjoy  oblations  offereil 
ni  the  saciificial  fire. 

54  R V.  IV.  54.  2,  . . ’ . 

.55-69  Heie  follows  a complattoD  of  unconnected  verses  in  praise  >>t 

various  deities.  Verse  55  is  taken  from  R.  V.  VI.  49.  4.  Pilkr  of  lus 
w itli  wealth  to  reward  his  servants.  The  ■prudent:  the  wise  worshipp<-r- 

57  R.  V.  I.  2.  7.  Oil-fed:  performed  with  grAritom,  gh\,  or  clarified  butter. 
Complete:  by  granting  the  worshipper’s  prayer. 

58  R V.  I.  3.  3^.  Ndsatgas  : Asvins;  see  XIX.  83,  note. 

59  R.  V.  Ill  31.  6.  Saramd:  the  messenger  and  scout  of  Indra,  various- 
ly explained  as  Dawn,  Stormclond,  Wind,  etc.  See  R.  V.  X.  108;  and  ^me. 
Zonairle  Ragozin,  Vedic  India  (Story  of  the  Nations  Series),  pp.  256  -200. 
In  lacer  Vedic  literature  Saram.l  is  regarded  as  the  hound  of  the  Gods.  » 

tkefloodi'  van:  hastening  out  of  the  mountain  cavei n,  that  is,  the  massive 

cloud,  in  advance  of  the  liberated  waters.  Them : the  cows,  the  waters. 


VERSE  69.]  WHITE  YAJURVEDA,  275 

60  For  nowhere  did  they  find  another  envoy  to  lead  the  way 

than  this  Vaisvanara  Agni. 

The  Gods  immortal  strengthened  the  immortal  Vaisvanara 
to  win  the  land  in  battle. 

61  The  strong,  dispellers  of  the  foe,  Indra  and  Agni,  we  invoke  ■ 
May  they  be  kind  to  one  like  me. 

62  Sing  forth  to  Indu,  0 ye  men,  to  him  as  he  is  purified. 

Fain  to  pay  worship  to  the  Gods. 

63  Drink  Soma,  India,  banded  with  the  Marnts  who.  Boon 

Lord  ! strengthened  thee  at  Ahi’s  slaughter, 

’Gainst  Sambara,  Lord  of  B.vys  ! in  winning  cattle,  and  now 
rejoice  in  thee,  the  holy  singers. 

64  Thou  wast  born  mighty  for  victorious  valour,  exulting, 

strongest,  full  of  pride  and  courage. 

There,  even  there  tlie  Marnts  strengthened  Indra  when  his 
most  rapid  Mother  stirred  the  Hero. 

65  0 thou  who  .slowest  Vritra,  come,  0 Indra,  hither  to  our  suh*, 
Mighty  One  with  thy  mighty  aids. 

66  Thou  in  thy  battles,  Indra,  art  subduer  of  nil  hostile  bauds. 
Father  art  thou,  all-coiujuering,  cancelling  the  cnr.se : viui- 

quish  the  men  who  fight  with  us. 

67  Heaven  and  Earth  cling  close  to  thy  victorious  might 
As  sire  and  mother  to  their  child. 

68  The  sacrifice  obtains  the  Gods’  acceptance,  etc.,  as  in  VIII  4. 

69  Protect  our  habitation,  Savitnr,  this  day  with  guardian 

aids  around,  [)ropitiou8,  ne’er  beguiled. 

God  of  the  golden  tongue,  keep  us  for  newest  bliss ; let  not 
the  evil-wisher  have  us  in  his  power. 


60  They:  the  Goda.  2'o  win  the  land  : fiom  tbe  original  inhabitants  fa' 
the  new  Aryan  settlers. 

G1  R.  V.  VI  60.  5. 

62  R.  V.  IX.  n.  I.  //n/M.'  Soma. 

63  R.  V.  III.  47.  4.  Ahi:  tlie  Serpent;  a demon  of  drought  ^mbara 
another  drought-fiend.  In  winnivy  cattle : in  recovering  the  stdleii  kine, 
tlie  rays  of  light  carried  olf  l>y  the  demons  of  darkueso,  or,  geuer.illy,  in  b.ii- 
tle  with  the  demons  who  withhe  ld  the  rain. 

64  R.  V,  X.  73.  1.  Thoa  ■ Indra.  Mother:  Aditi.  Stirred  the  Hero 
incited  him  to  action  by  telling  him  of  his  future  opponents.  See  R V.  VIII. 
45.  5,  and  66.  2. 

65  R.  V.  IV.  32.  1. 

66,  67  R.  V.  VIII  88.  5,  6. 

69  R V.  VI.  71.  3.  0/  the  golden  tongue  • ever-truthful  (Solem  qius 
dicere  falsum  Audeat^) ; or,  having  tongues  or  lays  of  golden  light. 


276 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


[BOOK  XXXIIL 


70  For  you  have  flowed,  through  noble  ministration,  pressed 

by  Adhvaryns,  bright  sweet-flavoured  juiees. 

Drive  on  thy  team  and  come  thou  hither,  Vayu  ; drink  for 
thy  rapture  of  the  sap  of  Soma. 

71  Ye  Cows,  protect,  etc.,  as  in  verse  14. 

72  Come  ye  foe-slayers  to  the  place  of  meeting,  to  the  birth- 

places of  the  two  great  Sages, 

With  force  of  intellect  unto  the  dwelling. 

73  Ye  two  divine  Adhvaryus,  etc.,  as  in  verse  33.  Thou  in 

the  time  of  old.  See,  Vena. 

74  Transversely  was  the  severing  line  extended  : was  it  above, 

or  was  it,  haply,  under  1 

There  were  begetteis,  there  were  mighty  forces,  free  action 
here  and  energy  up  yonder. 

75  He  hath  filled  heaven  and  earth  and  the  great  realm  of  light, 

when  at  his  birth  the  skilful  held  him  in  their  hold. 

He  like  a steed  is  led  forth  to  the  sacrifice.  Sage,  graciously 
inclined,  that  he  may  win  us  wealth. 

76  Call  hither  with  the  song  and  lauds  the  two  best  slayers  of 


the  foe. 

Delighting  even  in  our  hymn. 

77  All  Sons  of  Immortality  shall  listen  to  the  songs  we  sing, 
And  be  exceeding  good  to  us. 

78  Mine  are  devotions,  hymns,  sweet  are  libations.  Strength 

stirs,  and  hurled  forth  is  my  rocky  weapon. 

They  call  for  me,  for  me  their  lauds  are  longing.  To  their 
libations  these  my  Bay  Steeds  bear  me. 


70  VAyu  is  the  deity  addressed.  For  you  ■ the  Sacrificer  and  his  wife. 

72  Com^  ye : Mitra  and  Vanina  are  addressed.  Tico  yreat  Sages : the 
Gods  who  are  addressed.  The  stanza  is  <littioult  and  obscure. 

73  The  two  Prattkas  are  repeated  from  VII.  12  and  16. 

74  R.  V.  X.  129.  5.  Line:  drawn  by  the  anoinut  creative  Rishis  or  DtMiu 

urci  to  make  a division  between  the  upper  world  and  the  lower,  and  to 

bring  duality  out  of  unity.  Begetters:  the  Fathers  may  be  meant.  Pu 
action  : the  happiness  of  the  Fathers.  The  verse  is  one  of  the  obscurest  of  .i 
very  obscure  hymn  on  Creation. 

75  R.  V.  III.  2.  7.  He:  Agni  Vaisv&nara.  The  skilful:  the  priests  who 

kindle  the  fire.  _ . , • • v 

76  R.  V.  VII.  94.  11.  Call  hither:  I follow  Prof  Ludwig  in  rending  dn 

instead  of  dnviisafak  which  involves  a harsh  construction.  The 

deities  invoked  are  Indra  and  Agni  , x i i rin., 

77  R V.  VI.  52.  9.  Of  I mmm  tul tty : or,  of  the  Immortal  One,  I raja 

cati.  the  nroeenitor  of  gods  and  men.  , . • 

^ 78  R.  V.  I.  165.  4,  Indra  addresses  the  Maruts  in  reply  to  their  ques- 
tion in  verse  27. 


VEnS^  86.] 


WHITE  YAJtinVEDA. 


277 


79  Nothin",  0 Bounteous  Lord,  stands  firm  before  thee:  among 

the  (iods  not  one  is  found  thine  equal. 

None  bovn  or  springing  into  life  comes  near  thee.  Do  what 
thou  hatit  to  do,  exceeding  mighty  1 

80  In  all  the  worlds  That  was  the  Best  and  Highest  whence 

sprang  the  mighty  (lod  of  splendid  vahuir. 

Quickly  when  hoin  he  overcomes  his  foemen,  he  in  whom 
all  wdio  lend  him  aid  are  joyful. 

81  May  these  my  songs  of  praise  exalt  thee,  Lord,  wlio  hast 

abundant  wealth. 

Men  skilled  in  holy  hymns,  pure,  with  the  hues  of  fire,  have 
sung  them  with  their  lauds  to  thee. 

82  Good  Lord  of  wealth  is  he  to  whom  all  Aryas,  Dasas  heic 


belong. 

E’eti  over  unto  thee,  the  pious  Rusima  Paviru,  is  that 
wealth  brought  nigh, 

83  He,  with  his  might  advanced  by  Bisliis  thousandfold,  liath 

like  an  ocean  aprt'ad  himself. 

His  majesty  is  prated  as  tiuc  at  solemn  rites,  his  power 
where  holy  biugers  lule.  ' 

84  Protect  our  habitation,  vSivitar,  etc  , as  in  ver.se  hO 

85  Como,  Vayii,  drawn  by  fair  hymn.s,  to  our  sacrihcc  that 

reaches  he<t vein  , . , 

Poured  on  the  m d.llo  ..f  the  Hiroimin  cintli  nnd  dre-ned, 
thia  hright  .linik  hitli  l>een  oir.-red  ll..-e 


KB  [tidri  ■riid  Viivn,  feir  t"  »ee  a'ld  tu  lie.ii,  ne  cull  t,n  nu, 
That  in  asuoinhly  all.  yc.i,  all  the  folk  may  he  henevnient  t.. 
us  and  free  from  malady. 


79^.  V.  1 165  9 Tlie  Maiotn  a,MreHH  Imlra  .n  ont.nuunm.  ..f  tlio 

^'sO^R^'v  X 120,1  That  Bndima,  the  ongmal  Cau«e  of  tlie  uiiiv.rM- 

The  Miih*v  God  Iii'lra 

81  R.V%III  3 3 In<ira.sa.hlreH«ea.  W dh  the  huis  of  jirt  or.  ratli-.u. 

It  -I  a a 9 lU  the  prin«  n™'--' 

82  Vilukh.lya  3 9 //  the,.™,.l..cullr,i  Itu.a.n...  are  n.cn 

Wm  aV  V M Tar  aame  of  I'aviru,  ap,,a,eutlj  then  [..me, 

dues  uot  occur  agiiiii 

83  R.  V.  VIII  3 4.  He  - Indra. 

85  R.  V.  VIII.  90.  9.  „ V Y 111  i 

86  Taken,  with  variationfl  and  additions,  from  11 


2^3  tuE  texts  of  THE  [BOOK  XXXI II 

87  Yen,  specially  that  mortal  man  hath  toiled  for  service  of 

Who^uiokl’y  hath  brought  near  Mitra  and  Varuna  to  share  i 
his  sacrificiHl  gifts. 

88  Approach  yo,  and  be  near  to  us.  Drink,  0 ye  Asvins,  o 

Draw  forth  the  milk,  ye  mighty,  rich  in  genuine  wealth  ! 
Injure  us  not,  and  come  to  us. 

89  May  Brahmanaspati  draw  nigh,  may  Sunvitft  the  Goddess 

And  Gods  bring  to  our  rite  which  gives  the  fivefold  gift  the 
Hero,  lover  of  mankind. 

90  Within  the  Waters  runs  the  Moon,  he  with  the  beauteous 

To7etIow'lled''abundant  wealth,  object  of  many  a man’s 
desire,  loud-neighing  goes  the  tawny  Steed. 

91  Singing  their  praise  with  godlike  hymn  let  us  invoke  each 

Ea?h  God  wCng  yon  help,  each  God  to  strengthen  you. 

92  Agui  Vaisvaiiara,  set  in  heaven,  with  mighty  splendour 

In^olsi^Tn  topwer  on  earth,  benevolent,  he  quells  the 
darkness  with  ins  light. 

93  First,  India. Agui  1 hath  this  Maid  come  footless  unto  those 

St.3.5  te  head  and  speaking  loudly  with  her  tongue, 
she  hath  gone  downward  thirty  steps.  ^ 


87  K.  V.  VIII.  90. 1. 

ir;tn\iue  is  taken  from  ^ 

,ir  llcmththebetmteam  The  tamv  Steed:  Soma 

92  Attributed  to  a Rmhi 

93  R.  V.  VI.  69.  6.  Thu  .moving  unsupported  lO 

ttough  whieu  Dawu  passes  before  she  reappears. 


verse  97.] 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


27!' 


94  For  of  one  spirit  are  the  Gods  with  mortal  man,  co-sliaivrs 

all  of  gracious  gifts. 

May  they  increase  our  strength  hereafter  and  to-day, 
ing  ease  and  ample  room. 

95  ludra  who  quells  the  curse  blew  curses  far  away,  and  tlum 

in  splendour  came  to  us. 

ludra,  refulgent  with  the  Marut  host ! the  Gods  eagerly 
strove  to  win  thy  love. 

96  To  ludra,  to  your  mighty  Chief,  Maruts,  sing  forth  a mighty 

prayer. 

Let  Satakratu,  Yritra-slayer,  kill  the  fiend  with  hundred 
knotted  thunderbolt. 

97  Indra  increased  his  manly  strength  at  sacrifice,  in  the  wild 

rapture  of  this  juice  ; 

And  living  men  to-day,  even  as  of  old,  sing  forth  then 
praises  to  his  majesty. 

May  those.  Good  Lord  of  wealth.  He  with  his  niigtit. 
IStand  up  erect. 


94  R.  V.  VIII.  27.  14. 

95  R.  V.  VIII.  78.  2. 

96  R.  V.  VIII.  78.  3.  Satakratu:  Lord  of  a Hundred  rowers  , Indri 
The  fiend:  Vritra. 

97  R.  V.  VIII.  3.  8.  The  four  Pr.-ittka^  May  these,  etc.,  arc  re])eatcd 
Irom  verses  81 — 83  of  this  Book  and  Xl.  42. 


BOOK  THE  THIRTY-FOURTH. 


That  which,  divine,  mounts  far  when  man  is  waking,  that 
which  returns  to  him  when  he  is  sleeping. 

The  lights’  one  light  that  goeth  to  a distance,  may  that, 
my  mind,  be  moved  by  right  intention. 

2 Whereby  the  wise  and  thoughtful  in  assemblies,  active  in 

sacrifice,  perform  their  duties. 

The  peerless  spirit  stored  in  living  creatures,  may  that,  my 
mind,  be  moved  by  right  intention. 

3 That  which  is  wisdom,  intellect,  and  Hrmness,  immortal  light 

which  creatures  have  within  them, 

That  without  which  men  do  no  single  action,  may  that,  my 
mind,  be  moved  by  right  intention. 

4 Whereby,  immortal,  all  is  comprehended,  the  world  which  is, 

and  what  shall  be  hereafter, 

Whereby  spreads  sacrifice  with  seven  Hotars,  may  that,  my 
mind,  be  moved  by  right  intention. 

5 Wherein  the  Richas,  Siimana,  Yajur-verses,  like  spokes  with- 

in a car’s  nave,  are  included, 

And  all  the  thought  of  creatures  is  inwoven,  may  that,  my 
mind,  be  moved  by  right  intention. 

6 Controlling  men,  aa,  witli  the  reina  that  guide  them,  a skil- 

fill  charioteer  drives  fleet-foot  horses, 

Which  dwells  within  the  heart,  agile,  most  rapid,  may  that, 
my  mind,  be  moved  by  right  intention. 

7 Now  will  I gloiify  great  atrength’a  uphohier  Food, 

By  whoae  invigorating  mightTrita  rentVritra  Innb  frmjimb. 


Tlie  firat  six  verses  of  this  supplementary  Book  constitute  a hymn  re- 

eau  dafa,  Upanishadaed  called  the  Sivasankalpa.  R.ght-.nteut.on.  , 
from  the  concluding  words  in  each  stan».  The  rest  rs  a 

miscellaneoni  texts  which  may  be  used  in  the  performance  of  the 

Moved  hv  right  intention  : or,  having  an  ^ 

kolpam  The  lights'  one  light : the  illuminator  of 

( Seven  Hotars : the  chief  Hotar  and  six  assistant  priests,  the  Man 

tot  ve“«f  th.  Praise  of  F.»h 

(in  tL  h“  IfsLi"  Ma:  (s«  I-  2%  note^ 
requently  Lutioned  in  the  Rigveda,  p,  >“  gefven 

Vlvu  and  the  Marnts.  His  home  is  in  the  remotest  part  of  heaven,  a 
he  (a  c.illed  Aptya,  the  Watery,  that  is.  sprung  from,  or  dwelling  in  t ^ 

Yiitia.  See  ilacdonell,  Vedic  Mythology,  pp.  o7  os. 


nnsE  16.] 


WUITE  YAJVRVET)A. 


281 


8 Do  thou,  ill  trotli,  Anuniati,  assent  and  grant  us  happiness. 
Urge  us  to  stiengtli  and  energy  : prolong  the  days  we  have 

to  live. 

9 Anumati  this  day  approve  our  sacrifice  among  the  Gods  ! 
Oblation-bearing  Agm  be,  and  thou,  bliss  to  the  worshipper! 

10  0 broad-tressed  Suiivali,  thou  who  art  the  sister  of  the  Gods, 
Accept  the  ofFered  sacrifice,  and,  Goddess,  grant  us  progeny. 

11  Five  rivers  fiowing  on  their  way  speed  onward  to  Sarasvati, 
But  then  became  Satasvati  a fivefold  river  in  the  land. 


12  0 Agni,  tbou  tlie  eirliest  Angiras,  tlie  Seer,  hast,  God  tiiy- 

self,  iiecomc  the  Gods’  auspicious  Friend. 

After  thy  holy  oidinaiicc  flic  Maruts,  sage,  active  through 
wisdom,  with  their  glittering  spears,  were  born. 

13  Worthy  to  be  reveied,  0 Agni,  God,  preserve  our  wealthy 

patrons  with  thy  succoiiis,  and  ourselves. 

Guard  art  thou  of  our  sce«l  and  progeny  and  cows,  incessantly 
protecting  in  thy  holy  law. 

14  Lay  this  with  care  on  her  who  lies  extended : straight,  when 

impregned,  hath  she  broiiglit  forth  the  Herih 
With  his  liright  pillir— radiant  is  his  lustie— in  our  skilled 
task  is  b<'rn  the  Son  of  Ida. 

15  In  Ida’s  place,  the  centre  of  the  earth,  will  we  deposit  thee, 
That,  Agiii  Jatavedas,  thou  mayst  bear  our  olFermgs  to  the 

16  Like  Angiras  a gladdening  land  we  ponder  to  him  who  loveth 

song,  exceeding  mighty.  , 

Let  us  sing  glory  to  the  tar-famed  Hero  who  must  be  praise 

with  fair  hymns  by  the  singer.  _ 

8 -liown  tlw  acceptance  nt  .aerf 

fice,  pensonified.  See  XXIX  60 

10  R.  V,  II.  32  6.  Siidvdlt:  a Lunar  Goddess,  associated  wi  c 

birth.  See  XI.  55.  ,,  a \t  in.iio 

11  Sarasvati  ■ here,  apparently,  * 

(Stoiy  of  the  Nations  Series)  pp  267,  268. 

12  R V.  1.31.1  Gliiteriny  spears:  the  lightning  flashes  that  accoin- 
pany  the  Storm-Gods. 

13RVI31  12 

•14  H R V 111  29  3,  4 The  two  texta  accompany  the  production  of 
.acrt!imt,“-rJh  " cans ’of  the  hre-dri..,  -J  ^ ' L'e’Tf^ 

stick,  »hich  is  to  be  turned  ' « a"  r pf-r.-  the 

fiends  of  daikness. 


282 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  XXXIV. 

17  Unto  the  Great  One  bring  great  adoration,  a chant  of  praise 

to  him  the  very  potent,  ^ ^ 

Through  whom  our  sires,  Xngirases,  singing  praises,  and 
knowing  well  the  places,  found  the  cattle. 

18  The  friends  who  offer  Soma  long  to  find  thee : they  pour 

forth  Soma  and  present  their  viands. 

They  bear,  unmoved,  the  cursing  of  the  people,  for  a 
wisdom  comes  from  thee,  0 Indra. 

19  Not  far  for  thee  are  mid-air’s  loftiest  regions  ; start  hither, 

Lord  of  Bays,  with  both  B.y  Horses. 

Pressed  for  the  Firm  and  Strong  are  these  libations, 
pressing-stones  are  set,  the  fire  is  kindle  . 

20  Invincible  in  figlit,  saviour  in  battles,  guard  of  our  camp, 

winner  of  light  and  water,  , . 

Born  amid  hymns,  well-honsed,  exceeding  famous,  victor, 
thee  may  we  rejoice,  0 Soma. 

21  To  him  who  worships  Soma  gives  a milch-cow,  a fleet  steed, 

and  a man  of  active  knowledge. 

Skilled  in  home  duties,  eorapetent  m council,  mec 
court,  the  glory  of  his  father. 

22  These  herbs,  these  milch-kine,  and  these  running  waters,  a 

these,  0 Soma,  thou  hast  generated. 

The  spacious  firmament  hast  thou  expanded,  a 
light  thou  hast  dispelled  the  darkness. 

23  Do  thou,  God  Soma,  with  thy  Goddike  spirit,  victorious, 

win  for  us  a share  of  riches.  Provide 

Let  none  prevent  thee  : thou  art  Lord  of  valoui. 
for  these  and  those  in  fight  for  cattle. 

24  The  earth’s  eight  points  his  brightness  hath  illumined,  t ree 

desert  regions,  and  the  Seven  Rivers.  _ 

is  addressed. 

II  ^;r«;AZlVaHugtothemilkwMol.istobe  mingled  witl 

only  «6k<.!/e%«k,  fot  both  j for  our  g»in  of  both  worm*, 

V T os  «_11  Three  deiert  region,:  the  meaning  U m 
dear  | heaven,  M^MUfler,  tKa^lhe  hve‘ rive 

nrSeveniiweM  - acooidingto^f.  Maxmu  , Saraaval 

Altindischw  Leben,  FP-  3 


VERSE  32.] 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


283 


God  Siivitar  the  gold-eyed  hath  come  hither,  giving  choice 
treasures  to  the  man  who  worships. 

25  Savi'ar,  golden-handed,  swiftly  moving,  goes  on  his  way 

between  the  earth  and  heaven, 

Drives  away  sickness,  bids  the  Sun  approach  us,  and  spreads 
the  bright  sky  through  the  darksome  region. 

26  May  he,  gold-handed  Asura,  kind  leader,  come  hitherward 

to  us  with  help  and  favour. 

Driving  off  Rakshasas  and  Yatudh^nas,  the  God  is  present, 
praised  in  hymns  at  evening. 

27  0 Savitar,  thine  ancient  dustless  pathways  are  well  estab- 

lished in  the  air’s  mid-region. 

0 God,  come  by  th.^se  paths  so  fair  to  travel : preserve  thou 
us  from  harm  this  day  and  bless  us. 

28  Drink  our  libations,  Asvins  twain,  grant  us  protection,  both 


of  you. 

With  aids  which  none  may  interrupt. 

29  Make  ye  our  speech  effectual,  0 Asvins,  and  this  our  hymn, 

ye  mighty  Wonder-workers. 

In  luckless  game  1 call  on  you  for  succour  : strengthen  us 
also  on  the  field  of  battle. 

30  With  undiminished  blessings,  0 ye  Asvins,  through  days  and 

nights  oil  every  side  protect  us. 

This  prayer  of  ours  may  Varuna  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Adkt 
and  Sindhu,  Earth  and  Heaven. 

31  Throughout  the  dusky  firmament,  etc.,  as  in  XXXIII. 

32  Night ! the  terrestrial  realm  hath  been  filled  wit  t lo 

Father’s  power  and  might. 

Thou  spreadest  thee  on  high  unto  the  seats  of  heaven  . 
fic  darkness  conieth  nigh.  

26  Hid„  Ike  Sm  approach  n.  ■ "l*  ‘ 

who  observes  that  slthouiih  Sav.ter  an.!  he  So  i (Shrya  art 
regards  their  divinity,  yet  they  are  two  different  toros,  and  tberelo 

demons,  sorcerers  or 

goblins. 

tfil  V.t  n2  24,26. 

borrowed  from  dicing:  that  is,  . derivation  of  the  word,  eJ- 

dawn,  when  the  Asvins  are  especially  to  be  worshipp  • • 

32  A,  V.  XIX.  47  1 


284 


THE  TEXTS  OP  TBE  [BOOK  IXXtV, 


that 


33  0 Dawn  enriched  with  ample  wealth,  bestow  ou 

wondrous  gift  ■,  imj  > 

Wherewith  we  may  support  children  and  children  s sons. 

34  Agni  at  dawn,  and  Indra  we  invoke  at  dawn,  and  Varuna 

and  Mitra  and  the  Asvins  twain, 

Bhaga  at  daWn,  Puslian  and  Brahinanaspati,  Soma  at  dawn, 
Kudra  may  we  invoke  at  dawn. 

35  May  we  mv„ke  strong  early-conquering  Bhaga,  the  Sou  o 

Aditi,  the  un-eat  Arranger,  , , 

Thinking  of  whom  the  poor,  yea,  even  the  migh  y, 

King  says.  Let  me  share  in  Bhaga. 

3G  Bhaga  our  gui.le,  Bhaga  whose  gifts  are  faithful,  favour  this 

jiraier  and  give  us  wealth,  0 Bhaga.  may 

Bh^u',  increase  our  store  of  kiue  and  horses : Bhaga  may 
we  he  I ich  in  men  and  heroes. 

37  .<0  may  felicitv  he  ours  at  present,  and  when  the  day  ap- 

pro.iches,  and  at  noontide  ; Ucnnv  in 

Aud  may  we  still,  0 Bounteous  One,  at  sunset  be  happy 

the  Deities’  loving-kindness.  u v 'm 

33  May  Bhaga  verily  be  Blias-hestower,  and  through  u , 

Gods  ! may  happiness  attend  us.  „„  o„rli  be 

As  such,  0 Bhaga  all  with  might  invoke  thee  i as  sueh  be 
tbou  our  Champion  here,  0 Bhaga. 

39  To  this  our  wo, ship  may  the  Dawns  incline  them,  and  come 

to  the  uure  place  like  Padhikiavan. 

As  strmig^teeds  draw  a chariot  may  they  bring  us  hither- 
ward  Bhaga  who  discovers  treasnrd. 

40  May  friendly  Mornings  dawn  on  us  for  ^ver,  with  wea  t 

kiue,  of  horses,  and  of  heroes,  r Preserve 

Streaming  witli  all  ahiindance,  pouring  fatnes  . 

us  evermore,  ye  Gods,  with  blessings. _ 

■^‘1  R V I 92  13.  Wondrom  gift;  of  riches, 
slto^t  V.  VII.  41..  The  h%n  l-c.are,«.l  chiejly.to 
B'  untiful,  whose  name,  slightly  coirnpted,  suivives 

the  n.tme  of  the  God  of  monotheistic  Christiauity.  overpowering 

:j.)  Earhf  conquering : in  his  chaiactei  of  Let  me  shave  tn 

ITshas  or  D.ivvn  who  in  Rigved.i  I.  23  5 is  called  h _ ^ 

Bluiqa : 01,  Give  me  my  portion.  Ihe  j aUotted  fortune, 

wea  , stioiig  and  mighty,  looks  to  Bhaga  as  the  giver 

38  BUss-bestower:  bhagavdn  ; originally , 
blessed,  atlorable  ; now  generally  meaning  Almig  > 

39  The  Dawns  • the  lights  of  morning,  ' ^iftness  of  the  famoui 

saciifice  is  performed.  note, 

mythical  horse,  the  type  and  model  of  racers.  See 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


285 


VERSE  4S] 

41  Secure  it  thy  protecting  care,  0 I’llKhan,  never  may  we  fail: 
We  l.eieare  singers  of  thy  piaise. 

42  I praise  vith  eloquence  him  who  guards  all  pathways.  He, 

when  tils  love  impelled  him,  went  to  Arka. 

May  he  vouchsafe  us  gear  with  gold  to  grace  it:  may  Pushan 
mal>3  each  prayer  of  ours  effective. 

43  Vishm  the  undoceivable  Protector  strode  three  steps,  thcrco- 

forh 

Estatlishing  his  high  decrees. 

44  This  Vishriu’s  st.ition  most  sublime,  the  singers  ever  vigilant, 
Lo\ers  of  holy  song,  light  np. 

45  Filed  full  of  fatness,  compassing  all  things  that  be,  wide, 

spacious,  dropping  meath,  beautiful  in  their  form, 

^he  Heaven  and  the  Eailh  by  Vanina’s  decree,  uiiwasting, 
rich  in  seed,  stand  parted  each  from  each. 

4G  Let  those  who  are  our  foenien  stand  afar  from  us : with 
Indiii  nnd  with  Aluh  w'e  will  drive  them  nil, 

Vasus,  A liryas,  Uudras  have  exalted  me,  made  mo  preemi- 
nent, mighty,  thinker,  sovran  lord. 

47  Come,  0 Nasatyas,  with  the  thrice  eleven  (iods . come, 

0 ye  Asvins,  to  the  drinking  of  the  rnciith. 

Prolong  our  days  of  life,  and  wipe  out  all  our  sins  : ward  oil 
(jur  enemies  ; be  w'lth  us  evermore. 

48  May  this  vour  praise,  may  this  your  song,  0 Mariits,  snug 

hy  the  poet,  Mana’s  sou,  Maudarya, 


41  R.  V VI  41  9.  . , • , 

42  R V \1  19  8 Who  gmr<l$  all  pathways  Pll^hRn  the  Rp♦'t'lalplo■ 

lector  of  travellers  and  guardian  of  roads  and  jiaihs  f ‘ 

Wlioni  Pilshiu.  appears  to  liavegtne,  both  as  an  envoy  on  " 

Hods  when  Suiyd  or  Sunhijlit  wa.  to  he  given  in  in.nii,rge,  and  a» 

on  Ills  own  account. 

43  44  R V I 22  18,21  Three  steps-  as  the  Snn,  over  oaith  and 

through  firmament  and  heaven  See  X.  19.  : g.onfy  with  piaiae. 

4.5  R V VI  70  1.  Pm  led  each  from  each  ■ lieaicn  and  earth  weic  it  i» 

said,  originaily  in  eloae  jualapoaltion,  and  were  siihaeipien  iy  I 

held  apart  by  Indra,  Agnl,  Soma,  or,  as  in  thia  place,  4 ariina. 

46  R V X 128.  Have  exalted  . . . tnade  ■ that  la,  may  they  i o so. 

47  R v'l  34  11.  Thrice  eleven  the  number  of  the  «.»1«  i»  «aid  to  have 

life,  tht^Self  and  hi.a  naine^a  That.  See  Max  .Mnllei,  Thiee  hecturea  on  the 

Vedanta  Philosophy,  p.  26,  n f m.w 

48  R.  V.  I.  165  15.  I borrow  three-fourths  of  thi.  verse  from  Prof.  Max 
Muller,  Vedic  Hymns,  Part  1. 


286 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE 


.^OOK 


XXXIV. 


Bring  ofFdpring  for  ourselves  with  food  to  feed  us.  May  we 
find  strengthening  food  in  full  abundance. 

49  They  who  were  versed  in  ritual  and  metre,  ii  hymns  and 
rules,  were  the  Seven  godlike  Kishis. 

Viewing  the  path  of  those  of  old,  the  sages  hare  taken  up 
the  reins  like  chariot-drivers. 

60  Beatowing  splendour,  length  of  life,  increase  of  health,  and 

ThirbrigM?  sCfng  gold  shall  be  attached  to  me  hr  victory. 

61  This  gold  no  demons  injure,  no  Pisachas;  fur  tliuis  might 

of  (jods,  their  primal  offspring.  , , ip 

Whoever  wears  the  gold  of  Daksha’s  children  lives  a^ong  life 
among  the  Gods,  lives  a long  life  among  m-mkind. 

62  This  ornament  of  gold  which  Daksha’s  children  bouna  with 

benevolent  thoughts,  on  Satanika, 

I bind  on  me  for  life  through  hundred  autumns,  that  1 nay 
live  till  ripe  old  age  o’ei  takes  me. 

53  Let  Ahibudlmya  also  hear  our  calling,  and  Aja-Ekapad  and 
Earth  and  Ocean.  

\ 130  7.  Seven  godlike  Biihie;  Bhaiailvaj..,  Kasya])®,  Gotaina 
AU  VaLfha  V avtoVand  Jaiaadagni.  ‘ Tba  knowl.dgo  of  tte  r.  u 
ia^Ue  ffrim  the  divine  prieata ; the  sage,  or  R.alna  have  ‘oHf  [ 

In  sacrificing,  and  modern  priests  are  only  imitators  of  those  aha  piuuU 
Ibem.’— Ludwig. 

50  Qold  : worn  as  an  amulet. 

51  52  Taken,  with  variations,  from  A.  V.  I,  35.  2. 

Tinksha  is  in  the  Veda  a Creative  Power  associated  with  Aditi  (Inhm  > 
“y  , he  n^Iher  of  the  Adityas.  In  ytost-Vedic  ht-ture  he  is  pn  • 
flW  Sded  as  the  son  of  BrahuiS,  and  placed  at  the  head  of  ‘be  mja 
Sa  0?  Lords  of  Created  Beings.  The  »5ksMyanas,  or 
Dakslia,  are  mentioned  also  iu  the  Satapatha-Brdhmana,  ... 

“The^LtitiireofSahtato  must  be  an  ““dS  s' 

which  no  particulars  have  been  preserved 

the  natural  duration  of  human  We  ; an  eapression  20 

the  Rigveda,  alternating  with  ‘ hundred  winters.  Ct. 

There  shall  be  no  more  thence  an  infant  of  days,  nor  an  oUl  ma 
Smi  “is  days  ■.  for  the  child  ah.ll  die  a hundred  years  old. 

R V VI  50  14.  Ahibudknya:  the  Serpent  or  Dragon  of  I 


VERSE  5ft] 


WHITE  YAJERVEDA. 


287 


All  Gods  Law-strengtheners,  invoked  and  lauded,  and  Texts 
recited  by  the  sages,  help  us  ! 

54  These  hymns  that  drop  down  fatness,  with  the  ladle  I ever 

offer  to  the  Kings  Adityas. 

May  Mitra,  Aryaman,  and  Bhagahear  us,  the  mighty  Vanina, 
Daksha,  and  Am  a. 

55  Seven  Rishis  are  established  in  the  body : seven  guard  it 

evermore  with  care  unceasing. 

Seven  waters  seek  the  world  of  him  who  lies  asleep  : two 
sleepless  Gods  are  feast-fellows  of  him  who  wakes. 

56  0 Brahmannspati,  arise.  God-fearing  men,  we  pray  to  thee. 
May  tliey  who  give  good  gifts,  the  Marnts,  come  to  us.  Indra, 

be  thou  most  swift  with  them. 

57  Now  Brahinanaspati  speaks  forth  aloud  the  solemn  hymn 

of  piaiso,  .nil 

Wherein  Indra  and  Vanma,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  tlie  Gwls  have 

made  their  dwelling-place. 

58  0 Brahmanaspati,  be  thou  controller  of  this  our  hymn,  and 

prosper  thou  our  children. 

All  that  the  Gods  regard  with  love  is  blessed.  Loud  may 
we  speak,  with  brave  sons,  in  assembly. 

He  who  sate  down.  Mighty  in  mind,  lather  who  m.ide  n. 

A share  of  good,  0 Lord  of  Food.  

54  R.  V.  II.  27.  1.  Amt : the  Distributer  ; one  of  the  Aility.is. 

55  Seven  mu : here  meanini; 

touch,  sight,  liearing,  taste,  smell,  ‘ . ,Ue  » ul  or  self 

lecordiiig  to  Mohi<ltiar.i ; lueaun.g  the  vita  uus.  wmM 
Two  sleepless  Gods  ■ IiibreatU  aud  Outbreath. 

56.  57  R.  V.  I.  40  1,  5. 

58  R.  V.  II.  23. 19.  With  Acroca;  with  brave  fn.ui 

H.  contidence.  The  four  PratikaH  that  follow  are  taken,  respectively, 
XVII.  17,  26,  27,  and  XI.  83. 


book  the  thirty-fifth. 


BBaoN®  the  Panis,  hence  away,  rebellious,  soomers  of  the 

Gods ! j r • • 

The  place  is  his  who  poured  the  juice. 

2 Let  Savitar  approve  a spot  upon  the  earth  for  thy  remains . 

And  let  the  bulls  be  yoked  for  it. 

3 Let  Viyu  purify.  Let  Savitar  purify  With  Agm  s ghtter. 

With  Savitar's  lustre.  Let  the  bulls  be  unyoked. 

4 The  Holy  Fig  Tree  is  your  home,  your  mansion  is  the  Parna 

Wilnem  of  cattle  shall  ye  be  if  ye  regain  for  me  this  man. 

5 Let  Savitar  lay  down  thy  bones  committed  to  the  Mothers 

Be' pleasant  to  this  man,  0 Earth. 

6 Here  in  the  God  PrajApati,  near  water,  Man,  I lay  thee  dow  . 

May  his  light  drive  mishap  from  us. 

7  Go  hence,  0 Death,  pursue  thy  special  pathway  apart  fiom 
that  which  Gods  are  wont  to  our 

To  thee  I say  it  who  hast  eyes  and  heares  . 

offspring,  injure  not  our  heroes. 

^ UK  ti.r.  PJtriviifiik  or  Saclifice  to  tiie  Fathers  or 

ThUBooki8C..nnecte.i  With  the  J , 1 

Ancestral  Manes  (11.29  f g . f Muir,  Oiigiaal  Sans- 

funeral  ceremonies,  bee  R.  V.  A.  , lo  , x , 

Pi^aehas  and  other  evlUplrltsth. 

ped  the  Gods  with  libations  of  Soma  juice.  i-ttheiulU 

2 BemiM.-  the  Uma  ^ with^which  furrows  are  driven  from 

t^"th  „Tnir”drA:&  to  keep  evi,  spirits  at  a distance. 

3 Four  furrows  are  drawn,  with  a formula  for  each. 

4 Addressed  to  the  va.ions  plants  79  Sa”  koiaTvmssels  am 

taken  from  R.V  ^ S^  .'v-XttbarF^"  R^igta  and  the  Parna 

bZ “ttoa.  which  are  therefore  said  to  be  the  /io».c  of  plant 

“tir— Cr^d  ashes  are  laid  down  in  the  middle  of  the  pre- 

offspring.  Our  heroes:  our  sons  and  grandsons. 


VERSE  16.]  WHITE  YAJVRYEDA.  2S9 

8 Pleasant  to  thee  be  wind  and  eun,  and  pleasant  be  the  bricks 

to  thee. 

Pleasant  to  thee  be  the  terrestrial  fires  : let  them  not  scorch 
thee  in  their  flames. 

9 Prosper  for  thee  the  regions  and  the  waters,  and  let  the  seas 

for  thee  be  most  propitious. 

Auspicious  unto  thee  be  Air.  Prosper  all  Quarters  well  for 
thee ! 

10  On  flows  the  stony  flood : hold  fast  each  other,  keep  your- 

selves up,  my  friends,  and  pass  the  river. 

Here  let  us  leave  the  powers  that  brought  no  profit,  aiid 
cross  the  flood  to  Powers  that  are  auspicious. 

11  Drive  away  evil,  drive  away  fault,  sorcery,  and  guiltiness. 
Do  thou,  0 Apamarga,  drive  the  evil  dream  away  from  us. 

12  To  us  let  waters  and  the  plants  be  friendly,  to  him  who 

hates  us,  whom  we  hate,  unfriendly. 

13  For  our  prosperity  we  touch  the  ox  the  son  of  Surnbhi. 

Be  bearer  and  deliverer  to  us  as  ludra  to  the  Oods, 

14  Looking  upon  the  loftiest  light,  etc.,  as  in  XX.  21. 

15  Here  I erect  this  rampsrt  for  the  living : let  none  of  these, 

none  other,  reach  this  limit. 

May  they  survive  a hundred  lengthened  autumns,  and  may 
they  bury  Death  beneath  this  mountain. 

16  Agni,  thou  poorest  life,  etc,  as  m XIX.  38. 


8 The  deceased  householder  i.  addrensed.  ThehricH:  tiuee  of  whi-h 
are  laid  down  towards  each  quarter  of  the  eky.  Let  them  not  iconh  the 

cf.  R V.  X.  16.  1 : Burn  him  not  up,  nor  quite  consume  him,  Agni . i*  t 

not  his  body  or  his  skin  be  .scattered. 

10  R V X 53  8 The  original  veise  contains  words  of  encouragement 

to  the  bearers  who  with  the  funeral  pioceesion  H';” 

the  natural  stream  is  represented  by  a ditch  cut  for  the  purp  se,  til  1 
with  water  and  covered  with  aquatic  plants  and  Ku^  grass,  into  which 
Stones  are  cast.  ^ , ,, 

11  Purificatory  and  benedictive  formulas  follow.  ATpimdrqa:  (from 
mri)  to  cleanse  or  wipe,  witli  apo-k-d)  Achyranthes  Aspera.  a biennial  plant 
frequently  used  in  medicine,  in  incantations  or  countercharms,  and  m sac- 
rifices. See  The  Hymns  of  the  Atharva-veda,  Index. 

12  Repeated  from  VI.  22  and  XX.  19.  , r n u • 

13  Silahhi:  the  Cow  of  Plenty,  regarded  »»  the  mother  of  all  ov.nc 

cattle.  See  The  RAmayana,  II.  74.  , 

15  Thi>  ra,npan:^  'Stm  Fire) 

enclosing-stiok  o' f/J  ^ a.  it  were,  the 

irrtt;^"nnUl'“n‘,n..l  time  for’hie  ...proaoh,  TkU 
tain : the  mound  or  lidge  so  laiseu. 

19 


290  vium  YAJirsvBDA.  [BOOK  xxxr. 

17  W«xing  with  sacrifice  live  long,  0 Agni,  with  butter  oa  thy 

face  and  homed  in  fatness.  „nard 

When  thou  hast  drunk  the  cows  fair  savoury  butter,  guar  , 
as  a father  guards  liis  son,  tliese  people. 

18  These  men  have  led  about  the  oi,  have  duly  earned  Agm 

AnTr'^s’ed  their  glory  to  the  Gods.  Who  will  attack  them 

with  success  1 i j i a.  i 

IS)  1 drive  Corpse-eating  Agni  to  a distance  : sm-laden  let  him 

go  to  Yama  8 kingdom.  npitiM 

Here  let  this  other,  Jatavedas,  carry  oblation  to  the  Deities, 

foreknowing.  . 

20  Carry  the  fat  to  Fathers,  JUavedas,  where,  far  away,  thou 

knowest  them  established.  fUpii* 

Lot  rivulets  of  marrow  flow  to  ™eet  them  and  let  then 
ti  uthful  wishes  be  accomplished.  All-iiaii . 

21  Pleasant  be  thou  to  us,  0 liaith,  without  a thorn,  our  rest- 

VouSfe  us  shelter  reaching  far.  May  thy  light  drive 

mishap  from  us  , , • ■ Uo  hnm 

22  Born  art  thou,  Agni,  from  this  man  i let  him  again  be  born 

from  thee, 

For  Svarga’s  world,  the  man  I name.  All-haiK ^ 


IS  Thrrtr  seeveme  1 3.  The  text,  taken  from  R V,  X.  15.  5,  is  a giving 

..It  J-ib 

1 fo/i  This  otkev : the  fiieudly  saciihciixl  fire. 

” m V.  1.  22. 15.  The  artditioual  concluding  line  ie  repeated  lom 


BOOK  THE  THIRTY  SIXTH. 


Refuge  I take  in  Speecli  as  Rich  ; refuge  in  Mind  as  Yajiia- 
text ; refuge  in  Breath  as  Saina-chant ; refuge  in  Hearing 
and  in  Sight. 

Speech-energy  endowed  with  strength,  inbreatli  and  out 
breath  are  in  rue. 

2 Whatever  deeply-sunk  defect  I have  of  eye.  or  mind,  or 

lie.irt,  that  may  Bribaspati  amend  1 
Gracious  to  us  l>e  he,  Piotector  of  the  world. 

3 Earth  ! Ether  ! Heaven  ! May  we  attain  that  excellent,  etc., 

as  in  111.  35. 

4 With  what  help  will  he  come  to  us  etc.,  as  in  XXVII.  39. 

6  What  genuine,  etc  , as  in  XXV ll.  40. 

6 Do  thou  who  ait,  etc,  as  in  XXVII.  41 

7 0 Hero,  with  what  aid  dost  thou  delight  us,  with  what 

succour  bring 

Riches  to  those  who  worship  thee  ? 

8 Indra  is-king  of  all  that  is  : may  weal  attend  our  bipeds  and 

our  quadru[)eds. 

9 Gracious  be  Mitra  unto  us,  and  Varuna  and  Aryaman  ; 
Indra,  Briliaspati  be  kind,  and  Vishnu  of  the  mighty  stiido 

10  Pleasantly  blow  the  wind  for  us,  may  Surya  waim  us  plea 

santly 

Pleasantly,  with  a ro  ir,  the  God  Parjanya  send  the  ram  on  us, 

11  May  days  pass  pleasantly  for  us,  may  nights  draw  nearde- 

. liglittully.  , , , , 

Befriend  us  with  their  aids  Indra  and  Agni,  Indra  and 
Varuna  who  taste  oblations. 

Indra  and  Pushau  be  our  help  in  battle,  Indra  and  borna 
give  healtli,  strength,  and  C(unfort. 

12  May  the  celestial  Wufcis,  our  helpeia,  be  sweet  for  ue  to  drink, 
Aud  flow  with  health  and  strength  to  ub. 


This  Book  fornmUs-ohiofly  prayers  for  l™g  lifs 

unimpaired  faculties,  health,  strength,  prosperity,  securily,  ti anqud  i y,  a 
L“;7n;:7nt-of  the  Pravargya  ceremony  which  is  » preps, ahoy  nU  of  the 

Soma  sacriBce.  See  Sacred  Books  of  the  Ea,st,  XII.  44  , XXVI  104. 

7 R.  V.  VIII  82  19.  0 Hero:  Indra  is  addressed. 

9 R.  V.  I 90.  9.  . , .t,  41  4 # 

10  The  first  line  is  taken  from  A.  V.  VII.  69.  I,  as  .s  also  the  first  hue  of 

the  following  verse. 

11  Befriend  us.  taken  fiom  R.  Y.  VII.  35.  1. 


WHITE  rAJVRVEDA.  l^OOK  XXXVl. 


292 

13  Pleasant  be  thou  to  us,  0 Earth,  etc.,  as  m XXXV.  ^1. 

14  Ye,  Waters,  are,  etc.,  as  in  XL  50. 

15  Give  us  a portion,  etc.,  as  in  XL  51. 

Ifi  To  YOU  we  gladly  come,  etc.,  as  in  XI.  52. 

17  Sy  allevirtion,  Air  alleviation,  Earth  alleviation,  Plants 

Treli'aUet’tion,  All-Gods  alleviation,  Brahma  alleviatmn 
uLe.se  alleviation,  just  Alleviation  allev.at.on-may 
that  alleviation  come  to  me  I 

wUh  '^eye  of  a friend  do  we  regard  one  another 

19  Do  thou,  0 Caldron,  strengthen  me.  Long  may  I live  to 

"look  on  thee.  Long  may  I Lve  to  look  on  thee 

20  Obeisance  to  thy  wr..th  and  glow,  etc.,  as  m XXIL  1 • 

21  Homage  to  thee  the  lightning  flash,  homage  to  thee  the 

Homager 0 'Bounteous  Lord,  to  thee  whereas  thou  fain 
wouldst  win  to  heaven  1 

00  wlntsoever  trouble  thou  desirest,  give  us  safety  thence. 

''  Er:  :..“tudren  happiness  a..d  ,o  onr  beasts  seonnty  _ 

23  To  us  let  Waters  and  let  Plants  be  friendly,  etc.,  as  m VI.  3 . 

24  Tlirotigh  hundred  autnmns  may  wo  see  that  baght  Eye,  God- 

appointed,  ri^e, 

L" —nrmr/we  bear ; through  hundred 
ilirongii  snealc-  through  hundred  autumns  live 

rir >»>--  * 

antuiuns  may  we  see. 

vira  (see  XIX  jy  jj  i SeeaUoMuir,  0.  S Texrs,  V 39J. 

the  universe,  the  San,  here  vnesning  ‘he  ^ onfied  _a  - 


BOOK  THE  THIKiy-SEViiiMn. 

By  impulse  of  (iod  Savitai*  I rake  thee,  etc.  Spa  le  art  thou. 
Woman  art  thoU)  etc.,  as  in  XL  8,  10^ 

^ The  priests  of  him  the  lofty  Priest,  etc.,  as  in  U. 

3 0 Heaven  and  Earth  divine,  may  I duly  prepare  for  y.m 
this  day  the  head  of  Makha  on  the  place  of  earth  Nvhere 


the  Gods  sacrificed. 

p(.r  Makha  thee,  thee  for  the  head  of  Maklia  1 
4 Ye  wlio  were  born  the  earliest  of  creation,  Ants  divine,  may 
1 duly  prepare  for  you  this  day  the  head  of  Makha  on 
tlie  place  of  earth  where  the  Gods  sacrificed. 

For  Makha  thee,  thee  for  the  head  of  Makha! 

^riiis  Book  and  the  two  th  d follow  c<fntein  the  foriimlas  to  be  used  at  the 
actual  peiformaiice  of  the  PriVargya  ceiem-ny,  when  the  neccBsary 
vessels,  and  implements  have  been  biought  to  the  Haciihcal  giound,  and  the 
propitiatory  texts  iBook  XXXVI)  have  been  rocit^  by  the  pneats 

1 / take  thee:  the  woo<len  Kacrifici.il  Kp.tde,  with  winch  earth  is  to  be  dug 
to  fo.  m two  square  beds  for  the  chief  Caldron,  called  Mah^vtra  and  Uharma, 
to  rent  on.  Woman  : nbkri,  spade,  being  femmine  : see  V ^2 

3 Heaven  and  tarth:  the  Adhvaryu  takes  up  a lump  of  cla>,  th(  moisture 

of  which  represents  the  vajiGury  heaven,  and  the  f ^.  ‘th^ 

The  head  of  Makha  : according  to  the  legend  related  m the  S '^patha 

Pahehavimsa  BrAhmanas,  Makha  (who  appears  as  a ^ ‘ 

11  V IX.ToL  13  and  perhaps  X,  171.  2)  was  attending  a sacrihti. 

with  Agni,  Indra  and  other  Gods  who  agteed  to  s^iare 

that  should  accrue  from  it.  The  glory  came  to  Makha 

«. due  to  depart,  but  the  Gods  surrounded  him  and  claimed 

H«  stood  lining  on  bis  bow  whon  tlie  rtring  ^ ' 

M.  ants,  according  to  tlic  S Biibm«0'»  ’ 

springing  upwariis,  cutoff  Ins  bed.  Tins  bc^, 

became  tbe  I’ravargya,  and  when  men  offer  ^2,  ^i»,i  Mald- 

‘t7n,?'m“l^g”etite,  (Hindtd(»ml-ordi«».i  oorrunted  ^ 

ci4,^anold“t;afof  or  ^paUm. 

ri'X 

dueing  water  wherever  they  dig  - white  anU’  nest  i«  uaed  in 

oT  this  Veda.  See  XI.  u,  n )te.  these  Corrodeutia  or 

earliest  of  creation,’  and  it  seems  to  a Carboniferous  ages,  while 

Bseudo-Neuroptera  have  been  a befoie  Tertiary  times. 

ants,  which  are  Mahidliara  explains  the  antiquity 

See  Chambers's  Encyclopedia,  Terroi^.  Maiimna  , 

of  ihdr  origin  by  their  close  eonneiioii  with  the  hist  uorn 

the  lump  of  earth. 


THE  TEXTS  OE  THE 


[BOOK  XXXVIl. 


294 

5 Only  sn  lnr2:e  was  it  at  first.  Duly  iiifiy  I prepare  for  you 

tliia  day  tl.e  head  of  Maklia  on  earth’s  place  where  the 
Gods  sacrificed. 

For  Makha  thee,  thee  for  the  head  of  Makha  ! 

6 liidra’9  effective  might  are  ye.  Duly  may  I prepare  for  you 

thin  day  the  head  of  -Makha  on  earth's  place  where  the 

Gods  sacrificed.  nr  i i 

For  Makhii  thee,  thee  for  the  head  of  Makha  ! For  Makha 
thee,  thee  for  the  head  of  Makha  ! For  Makha  thee,  thee 
for  the  head  of  Makha  ! 

7 May  Brahuianasputi  draw  nij^h,  etc.,  as  in  XXXIIT.  tS9. 

For  Makha  thee,  thee  for  the  head  of  Makha,  etc.,  as  m 

verse  6. 

8 Thou  nrt  the  head  of  Makha.  Thee  for  Makha,  thee  for 

Makha’s  head  ! Thou  art  the  head  of  Makha.  ‘ 

Makha,  thee  for  Makha’s  iiead  ! Thou  art  the  head  ot 
Makha,  thee  for  Makha,  thee  for  Makha  s head  ! 

For  Makha  thee,  thee  for  the  head  of  Makha,  etc.,  as  iii 
veise  (3. 

9 Thee  on  Gods’  sacrificial  ground  with  stallion’s  dung 

fumigate.  ^ . • 

For  Makha  thee,  thee  for  the  head  of  Makha  ! 

For  Maklia  thee,  thee  for  the  head  of  Mekha  ! For  Mskha 
thee,  thee  for  the  head  of  Makha  ! For  Makha  thee,  thee 
for  the  head  of  Makha  ! 

10  Thee  for  the  True.  Thee  tor  the  Good.  Thee  for  the  place 

of  happy  rest.  

"/TthTe^rth.  At  first : when  raised  up  by  Vishnu  in  his  Boar-incar- 

■ he  addi  esses  the  P Uikas,  plants  used  to  expedite  the  curdling  of 
the  sacrificial  milk,  and  as 

at  hand  ; a kind  of  grass,  according  to  Mahldhara.  l^ee  . me 

rj&tb:  Uigveda,  the  Adhvaryu  .nd  his  — 
v?i,  an  encl^^ished  or 

ficial  apparatus,  the  roost  important  of  w addresses 

caldron,  two  inferior  oaldrone  being  kept  in  reeerve.  Thet.  be  addres 

‘'rHe'toXe'a^d  addree-e.  esob  of  the  tbroe  osldrona. 

9 Hefnmigatee  each  cJdron  with  borse  dnng,  addresemg  each  in  turn 

J'  GoIT  th?8econd\o  please  V,iyu.  Thee  /oi*  the  place 

thud  W pleteZth.  L Makd.  eU.:  le  ..winkles  the  th.ee  Mshf 
viras  wirU  goat's  milk,  addressing  a formula  to  each. 


WRITE  YAJURVEDA, 


295 


terse  15.] 


For  Makha  thee,  thee  for  the  head  of  Makha  ! For  Makha 
thee,  thee  for  the  head  of  Makha ! For  Makha  thee,  tliee 
for  the  head  of  Makha  ! 

11  For  Yarna  thee.  For  Makha  thee.  For  Surya’s  fervent 

ardour  thee. 

May  Savitar  the  God  with  balm  anoint  thee.  Guard  tliou 
the  touches  of  the  earth 

Flame  art  thou;  thou  art  radiance  ; thou  art  heat. 

12  Unconquerable,  eastward,  in  Agni’s  overlordship,  j^nve  me  life. 
Rich  in  sons,  southward,  in  India’s  overlordship  give  me 

offspring.  , , , • 

Fair-seated,  westward,  in  God  S.ivitar.s  overlordship,  give 

me  sight.  , , , ■ 

Range  of  hearing,  northward,  in  Dhatar  s overlordslnp,  give 

me  inercfise  of  wealth.  ... 

Arrangement,  upward,  in  Brihaspati’s  overlordslnp,  give  me 


energy.  , 

From  all  destructive  spirits  guard  us.  Tliou  art  Mann's  mare. 

13  All-hail ! By  Maruts  be  thou  compassed  round. 

Guard  the  sky’s  touches.  Mead,  mead,  mead. 

14  Germ  of  the  Gods,  Father  of  hymns,  all  living  creatures’ 

guardian  Lord,  . . , r,  • i • 

Radiant,  with  radiant  Savitar  united,  with  the  Sun  he  shines. 

15  Agni  combined  with  flaming  fire,  combined  with  Savitar 

divine,  hath  shone  together  with  the  Sun. 

n Directed  by  the  Brahman  priest,  the  '.^varya  besprinkle,  the  eJiief 

also  been  covered  with  a plate  <>1  ^old.  fnllnwine  for- 

12  TheAdhvaryu  makes  th«Sacrificer  recite 

mulas  addressed  to  Earth.  Mdtar : e J human  nee, 

mare;  bep.rer  of  the  representative  man  and  father  of  the  hum 

here  repre.ente<l  by  the  Mablvtra.  ^ above  them 

13  He  aurrounrt.  the  Mahivira  with  aahea  " ,rtee,.  month., 

lay.  thirteen  piece,  of  Vikankata  wood  thr«  ^ 

;‘h:  S' - « 

‘“h  Tt::i!nt,e^t'wd^  reverentially  ronnd  the  Mahhvtra,  and  do 
fibeisance  to  it  a-s  the  representa^ve  of  the  Suu. 

15  Agni ; represented  by  the  Mahavtrfc. 


296  WfflfE  YAJtJRVEDA.  [BOOK  XXXVn. 

10  He  shines  on  earth  upholder  of  the  sky  and  heat,  the  Gods 
upholder,  God,  immortal,  born  of  heat.^ 

To  him  address  a speech  devoted  to  the  Gods. 

17  I saw  the  Herdsman,  him  wlio  never  stumbles^  approaching 

by  his  pathways  and  departing. 

He,  clothed  with  gathered  and  diffusive  splendour,  within 
the  worlds  continually  travels. 

18  Lord  of  all  earths.  Lord  of  all  mind,  Lord  of  all  speech, 

thou  Lord  of  speech  entire. 

Heard  by  the  Gods,  Caldron  divine,  do  thou,  a God,  protect 

the  Gods.  ^ t 

Here,  after,  let  it  speed  you  twain  on  to  the  banquet  ot  the 

Gods.  f 

Sweetness  for  both  the  sweetness-lovers!  Sweetness  tor 
those  the  twain  who  take  delight  in  sweetness  ! 

19  Thee  for  the  heart,  thee  for  the  mind,  thee  for  the  sky,  for 

Surya  thee.  . , ^ 4.^^ 

Standing  erect  lay  thou  the  sacrifice  m heaven  among  the 

Gods. 

20  Thou  art  our  Father,  father-like  regard  us.  Obeisance  be  to 

thee.  Do  not  thou  harm  us. 

May  we,  accompanied  by  I'vashtar.  win  thee,  one  sa  e me 
sons  and  cattle.  Grant  us  offspring.  Safe  may  I be  to- 
gether with  my  husband. 

21  May  Day  together  with  his  sheen,  fair-lighted  with  his  light, 

accept.  All-hail  I . i . j -au 

M.«y  Night  together  with  her  sheen,  fair  lighted  with  he 

light,  accept.  All-hail  1 

16  He:  the  Caldron  identified  with  and  sprung  from  the  Sun. 

17  R.  V.  I.  164  31.  The  Herdsman:  the  Sun  who  surveys  an  guar  s 

the  world ; here  represented  by  the  Mah.lvtra.  . 

18  You  twain’  the  Asvins.  .Sweetness:  according  to  . 

dhlra  \adhu  here  means  MadhuvidyA,  the  knowledge  ot 

that  i the  esoteric  lore  of  Soma  which  was  unlawfully  ^ 

riu,  by  Dadhyach  the  eon  of  Atharvan.  See  The  Hymns  of  the  Btgveda, 

I 116.  12;  V.  75.  1,  notes.  , 

jld®r«f:Sd:b«auseiif^^^^ 


BOOK  THE  THIRTY-EIGHTH. 


Bv  impulse  of  God  Savitar  I take  thee  with  arms  of  Asvins, 
with  the  hands  of  Pushan. 

A zone  for  Aditi  aft  thou. 

2 Ida,  come  hither.  Aditi,  come  hither.  Sarasvati,  come 

hither. 

Come  hither,  So-and-So.  Come  hither,  So-and-So.  Come 
hither,  So-aiid-So* 

3 Thou  art  a zone  for  Aditi,  a diadem  for  IndiaUi.  Piishan  art 

thou.  Spare  some  for  the  Gharma. 

4 Overflow  for  the  Alvins.  Overflow  for  Sarasvati.  Overflow 

for  Indra 

All-hail,  what  belongs  to  Indra ! All-hail,  wliat  belongs  to 
Indra  ! All-hail,  what  belongs  to  Indra  ! 

5 That  breast  of  thine,  exhaustless,  fount  of  pleasure,  wealth- 

giver,  treasure-finder,  free-bestower. 

Wherewith  thou  rearest  all  things  that  are  choicest,— bring 
that,  SarasvHti,  that  we  may  drain  it. 

Throughout  the  spacious  middle  air  I travel. 

6 Thou  art  Gayatra  metre.  Thou  art  Trishtup  metre.  With 

Heaven  and  Earth  I grasp  thee.  With  the  Firmament  1 
raise  thee  up. 

Indra  and  Asvins,  drinV  ye  the  hot  draught  of  sweet  honey, 
sacrifice,  ye  Vasus.  All-hail  to  the  ram  winning 

beam  of  the  Sun  ! 


The  Pravargya  formulas  are  continued. 

1 The  Adhvai  vu  takes  the  rope  that  is  to  tie  the  cow  for  milking  Ihee 
the  The  formula  h«e  beeu  ueed  iu  XI.  » .ud  el.ewhere  d . of. 
1. 30  ; XI.  59. 

2 In  the  6r,t  line  be  oalle  the  cow  by  her  three  % 

III  27  • VIII.  43,  note.  In  the  second  line  he  calls  her 

her  orfinarrnan.;.  White.  Dapple,  or  whatever  .t  may  be,  wh.oh  to  he 

4 He  milks  the  cow,  addressing  the  milk, 

that  dropa  on  the  ground,  regarded  ae  a eacrihcial  offe  i g_ 

5 Taken  from  K.  V.  1. 164.  49,  ’ 

to  the  cow  also.  Throughout,  rtc. . rep  ^ ..nhablv  like  a pair 

6 He  addressee  the  ParisJsa,  a .^"P  f oi' 

ing  the  Sun. 


the  texts  of  the  [BOOK  XXXTIII. 

Thee  with  Svaha  to  Vita 


298 

7 Thee  with  Sv&hSi  to  Vata  the  sea. 

to  vata  the  unconquerable.  Thee  w,th  , 

Sviha  to  vata  the  irresisuhle. 

Thee  aith  Svaha  to  Vata  ll.e  protection-seeker. 

Svaha  to  vata  the  lion-destructive. 

8 Thee  with  Svaha  to  In  ira  Lord  of  Vasus.  Thee  wit 

to  ludra  Lord  of  Rudras. 

« Gharma  ' The  Gharma  for  the  Father ! 

to  HiM  he  worshipped,  seated  south,  all  the  shy-re^ous, 

Dr^iik;  AsS'of  the  heated  draught,  the  Svaha-coiisecrated 

n IiXtu  lay  thou  this  sacrifice  ; lay  thou  this  sacrifice 

Torcnficial  Agni  hail  1 May  bliss  be  ours  from  YajusJexU. 
12  Drink,  Alvins,  with  your  daily  helps,  t le  lai 

T ""r...!,  tt.  »■•«>  >“  " 

Earth  have  they  agreed. 

Here  verily,  be  their  boons  bestowed. 

Here,  veruj,  p„pr"V  Overflow  for  th 

14  Overflow  tor  food  No^nity.  Ove.flow  fo 

People.  

7 Tft« : th.  *. ' ' Z'. 

15  note,  and  The  Hymns  of  the  Rigveds  Index. 

' 11  Laythoa:  the  Mabivira  is  addressed. 

12  HL.I<odr.«eCh«utiyihre«i:  or  web,  of  time,  the  Sun,  eceo.d 

eee;  here  the  Caldron  ie.plaoed  on  the  Ham  or  bed 
earth  prepared  to  receive  it. 


XERSE  !».] 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


299 


15  All-hail  to  Pu^shan,  to  the  milk’s  skin  ! All-hail  to  the  press- 

stones  ! 

All-hail  to  their  echoes!  AH  hail  to  the  Fathers  who  aie 
al)ove  the  grass,  who  drink  the  Gharina ! All-hail  to 
Heaven  and  Earth  I All-had  to  tlie  All-Gods  ! 

16  All-hail  to  lliidra  invc'ked  by  worshippers  ! All-hail  I Let 

liglit  combine  with  light. 

May  Day  together  with  his  sheen,  fair-lighted  with  his  light, 

accepL  All  liail ! 

May  Night  together  with  her  sheen,  fair-lighted  with  her 
light,  accept  All-had  ! 

May  we  enjoy  the  mead  offered  in  mo^t  Iiidra-like  Agni. 
Homage  to  thee,  divine  Gharma  I Do  not  thou  injure  mo. 

17  Thy  far-s[)read  majesty,  instinct  with  wisdom,  hath  surpas- 

sed this  heave*). 

And,  with  its  glorious  fame,  the  earth. 

Seat  thee,  for  thou  art  mighty  : shine,  best  entertainer  of 
the  Gods. 

Worthy  of  sacred  food,  praised  Agni ! loose  the  smoke  rmldy 
and  beautiful  to  see. 

18  Gharma,  that  heavenly  light  of  thine  in  Gayatri,  in  the 

Soma-store, — l i.  r w 

May  it  increase  and  be  confirmed  for  thee,  that  lig  i • 
Gharma,  that  light  of  thiue  m air,  m TridiHip,  in  the  sacred 


hearth, — . r 1 1. 

May  it  increase  and  be  confirmed  for  thee,  that  ligdit. 
Gharma,  that  light  of  thine  on  earth,  in  Jagati,  of  the  pries 


’a 


May  tliat  increase  and  be  confirmed  for  thee,  that  light. 

19  Thee  for  the  sure  protection  of  the  Nobles.  Guar  l lou 
from  injury  the  Brahman  s body. 

We  follow  thee  in  interest  of  the  People,  for  the  ren 
our  peace  and  comfort. 


2l  Moit  hdra-Uke  ■ etool  the  seat  of  which  ii» 

Sairifleer'a  wif.  is  biought  in  and  aUtioncd  m-front 


300 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA.  [BOOK  XKXVIII. 

=»  ;:rs 

WrtT.r!*  agS''tl!e’hate  and  guiles  of  him  who  keeps  an 
31  Tht  cirla ! Is  thy  liquid  store.  Swell  out  and  Wax  in 

„ T“E*ft“r.  ..a  !.•  -I" 

hates  us, 

r;rri»;::  s ti" » >»  -n-  ■■ 

EEt".;;;  «~p.p .» ..«.«■  ■* 

;:STr£E;:"s»EXi.. » >* 

Thn"™T.bta.  .Ibh  Wpl.  JjHl.  •»  I".™  Mg'" 

far  away,  with  holy  lore,  with  brillianoy. 

28  Brou-ht  hUher  is  the  seed  of  milk.  Through  each  succeed- 

aSA™.!  ““ 

th-iM  Yedic  observances.  Cf  K.  V.  v ^u.  . 

21  Repeated,  with  variation,  from  ll  ^gun,  ToqetUer  with 

22  The  tawny  Stallwn  • tl,e  Caldion  with  its  liquid  cod- 

equally  with  ; as  bnlhantly  a«.  I he  sea.  i>u 

tents  The  store ; of  blessmgs.  ablutions  at  the  ChatvMa  or 

23  The  priests  and  the  Sacnficer  perform  ablutions 

pit  The  formula  is  repeated  from  v i.  ^ ^,^^11- 

^l5'^L‘LSu;.‘aVi»dHng..ticVontbsW^ 
is  repeated  from  XX.  23.  PaniAb  the  Indus,  and  the  Saras 

2«  Seven  Sivn,:  *‘■1?’”*"",”/ ? "''ich  lb. 

vat!  or  the  KubhJ.  Tiy  ««?••  ^ according  to  Mahldb.ra. 

“1?  .s  ^ 

caldron, 


26 


27 


BOOK  THK  THIRTY-NINTW, 


SvAhA  to  the  Vital  Breathings  with  their  Controlling  Lord ! 
To  Earth  Svalia ! To  Agiii  Svaha ! 'I’o  Firmament  Svaha  ’ 
To  Wkyn  Svaha  ! To  Sky  Svaha  ! To  Surya  Svaha  ! 

2 To  the  Quarters  Svalia  ! To  the  Moon  Svaha ! To  the  Stars 

Svah&  ! To  the  Waters  Svaha  ! To  Vanina  Svaha  ! To 
the  Navel  Svaha  ! To  the  Purified  Svaha  ! 

3 To  Speech  Svaha  ! To  Breath  Svaha  ! To  Breath  Svaha  I 

To  Sight  Svaha  ! To  Sight  Svaha ! To  Hearing  Svaha  ! 
To  Hearing  Svaha  ! 

4 The  wish  an>l  purpose  of  the  mind  and  truth  of  speech  may 

I obraiu, 

Bestowed  on  me  be  cattle’s  form,  sweet  taste  of  mod,  and 
fiime  and  grace.  Svaha  1 

5 Prajapati  while  in  preparation  : Samraj  when  prepared  ; 

All-Cods’  when  seated;  Gbaima  when  heated  with  tire; 
Splendour  when  lifted  up;  the  Aavins’  while  milk  is 
poured  m ; Puslian’s  when  the  butter  trickles  douii  it ; 
the  Manits’  when  the  milk  is  clotting;  Mitia’s  when  the 
milk’s  skin  is  spreadmi^ ; Yayu’s  when  it  is  earned  ott ; 
Agm’s  while  ottered  as  oblatmu ; Vak  when  it  has  beui 


ottered. 

6  Savitar  on  the  first  day  ; Aaid  on  the  second  ; VSyn  on  t ii, 
third  ; Aditya  (the  Sun)  on  tl.e  fourth  : than.ir.unas  (the 
Moan)  on  the  fifth  ; Udu  on  the  sixth , tlje  Marute  n.. 
tl.e  seventh;  Hrd.aspti  on  the  eighth;  Mttra  on  h.. 
ninth;  Varui.is  on  tl.e  tei.tli  ; Indra  on  tl.e  eletei.th, 
tlie  All-Cods  on  the  twelfth-  


xxs  avit.. ..... ....... 


1 Svdkd!  the  eacrificial 

.io„bspr„perlyh...isl  »eo. 

2 Navel  • tha  pantial  point  ; the  H'g  i 

h,...„eo„ii..gtoMai,iai..ra 

3 Speech,  etc.  : pieapmg  ih  , • j guttle.  b.'J’s  Mahldhaia. 

beauty...  , ‘X:  neu.  deitl.  at  hiffeieu, 

5.6  The  Mabavira  1 ’ if  required,  ate  lu  be  offereil 

ilage.,.ftheeerem..uy.,a..dexp.»n..y.bUt™ 

‘ccurdingly.  Mice's  skin:  Cf.  XXXYiil- 
6 Ritu  • the  Se.isuD,  persouitied. 


02  THE  TEXTS  OF  TEE  [BOOK  XXXIX. 

7 Fierce;  Terrible;  The  Resonant ; The  Roarer;  Victorious^ 

Assailant ; and  Dispeller.  Svaha.  ^ 

8 Agni  with  the  heart;  Lightning  with  the  heart’s  point, 

Pasupati  with  the  whole  heart ; Bliava  with  the  liver. 
Sarva  with  the  two  cardiac  bones  ; Isana  with  Passion ; 
Mah^iieva  with  the  intercostal  flesh  ; the  Fierce  God  with 
the  rectum  ; Vasishtha-hanulji,  Siiigis  with  two  lumps  of 
flesh  near  the  heart. 

9 The  Fierce  with  blood ; Mitra  with  obedience,  Rudra  with 

disobedience ; Indra  with  pastime ; the  Maruts  with 
strength  ; the  Sadhyas  with  enjo}ment. 

Bhava’s  is  what  is  on  the  throat  ; Rudia's  what  is  between 
the  ribs;  Mahadeva’s  is  the  liver;  Sarva’s  the  rectum, 
Pasiipati’s  the  pericardium. 

10  To  the  hair  SvahsL ! To  the  hair  Svaha  ! To  the  skin  Svaha' 

To  the  skin  SvahU  ! To  the  blood  Svah^  ! To  the  blood 
Svglha  I To  the  fats  Svaha  ! To  the  fats  Svaha  ! To  the 
fleshy  parts  Svaha ! To  the  fleshy  parts  Svaha  ! To  the 
sinews  Svaha  ! To  the  sinews  Svaha ! Svaha  to  the  bones 
Svaha  to  the  bones!  To  the  marrows  Svaha!  To  the 
marrows  Svaha  ! To  the  seed  Svaha  ! To  the  anus  Svaiia, 


7 This  formula,  called  technically  arar\y(  Miyam,  si.- 

forest,  contains  the  names  of  seven  of  the  tiercest  Maruts.  8ee  A Y 11.  o 
85,  from  the  last  line  of  which  the  formula  is  repeated. 

8 WUk  the  kem-t:  I propitiate  or  gratify,  “nUerstood.  Wtxpaft- 
of  Beaeta  or  Cattle,  a title  of  Rudra  who  i.  called  also  Bhava 

See  XVI  28.  Gardiac  bones  : or,  according  to  some,  kidneys  See  aia  . 
XXV  8 ' Jsdna:  Lord;  Ruler;  also  one  of  the  older  namesof  Rudra^  hee 
A V’XV  5 Mahddeva:  the  Gi eat  God ; Rudra,  Va.sistha-hanuh, 
nothing  can  be  made  out  of  the  text  which  appears  to  be  corrupt. 

9 The  Fierce:  Rudra  in  his  teirible  inanifestations ; I propiti^e,  heiDg 
understood  Sddhyas : a class  of  ancient  deities  ; Blessed  Gods  : Eggelmg 

10  The  object  of  the  PraVargya,  which  is  a purificatory  and 
ceremony  like  Dtksha  or  Consecration  (IV.  2 ; V.  6j  is  the  bodily  rege 
ration  of  the  Sacrificer,  the  provision  of  a heav^enly  b^iy  '"^^h  which  alon 
he  is  permitted  to  enter  the  residence  of  the  Gods  (Hang,  ^ 

manam,  II.  42,  note)  At  the  conclusion  of  the  ceremony,  therefore, 
sacrificial  materials  aie  so  arranged  as  to  form  the  semblance  of 
figure.  The  Mah^viras  represent  the  head ; the  Prastara  or  s^rificial 
of  grass  the  hair  ; the  two  milk- vessels  a.  e his  ears  ; the  plates  of  gold 
silver  bis  eyes  ; the  Rauhina  cake  potsherds  represent  the  keels  the  c 
tents  of  the  caldron  are  the  blood,  and  so  on  (see 

teratur,  p.  1 85).  The  formulas  contained  In  this  verse  provide  the  Pravai  g) 
man  with  the  bodily  parts  eunmeiated,  and  the  regeneration  tlie  bac 
cer  is  thus  completed.  Faculties  and  feelings  are  imparted  by  the  formu 
which  follow. 


WHITE  YAJVRVEDA. 


VERSE  13.1 


303 


11  To  Effort  Svaha!  To  Exertion  Svaha!  To  Endeavour  Svalia' 

To  Viyasa  Svaha  ! To  Attempt  Svaha  ! 

12  To  Giief  Svaha  ! To  the  Grieving  Svaha  ! To  the  Sorrowing 

Svahii ! To  Sorrow  Svaha  ! 

To  Heat  Svdha  ! To  him  who  grows  hot  S\aha!  To  him 
who  is  being  heated  Svaha ! To  him  who  has  been  heated 
Svaha  ! To  Ghaimu  Svaha  ! 

To  Atonement  Svaha!  To  Expiation  Svaloi!  To  Remedy 
Svaha  1 

13  To  Yama  Svaha  ! To  the  Finisher  Svaha  ! To  Death  pjahiD 

To  the  Priestiiood  Svaha  1 To  Rrahnniniei<le  Svalia  ! To 
the  All-Gods  Svaha  I To  Heaven  and  Eaith  Svaha  ! 


11  Viydsa  th(^  meaning  of  the  word  not  clear,  and  Maliidhaia  ..tt'.  is 

no  explanation  ; ‘a  tormenting  ^plntof  Yarna’h_  world,  acooidiug  to  tlie 
ronimentators’ '-S,  P Lexicon.  Foimed  from  a«  the  other  words 

in  the  line  are  from  d,  pra^d,  mm,  and  ud  + yaa,  n might,  pci  haps,  be  leii 
deied  by  Di  ti  action  or  DietrAint. 

12  To  Crharma.  tlie  w.uvl  m™n.  (1)  l.oat  (2)  ttc  heated  cald.™  (3)  iu 

heated  contents  Atonemevt  Expiation  for  defects  in  the  saci  ihce.  See 
hrst  note.  Remedy  • the  putting  togethei  of  the  1 i.ivarg} a-niau  and  the 
bodily  regeneration  of  the  Sacrihoer. 

The  Pravargya,  w-hich  was  oiigirndly,  probably, 
and  hi8  heralds  the  Asvm.s,  is  alluded  to  in  the  V-  30.  la,  V I 

103.  8),  and  the  ritual'fwoth  formulas  different  from  thoseo  the  Yajurvt.la) 
18  described  in  the  Aitareya-Biahiuaoa  which  belongs  to  that  Veda  t* 
Hang,  Ai.  Br.  II.  41-51.  The  Caldron  is  also  gloi  died  in  A.  V IV  1 ^ • 

Mtrre  details  of  the  performance  of  the  rite  may  / V^Xl  V 

brandfs  Ritual-Litteratur.  and  in  Saced  BooU  of  the  Ka.st,  \ol.  XLV. 
8ee  also  Oldeuberg,  Die  Kchgiou  des  Veda,  under  liavaigya. 


BOOK  THE  FORTIETH. 


Enveloped  by  the  Lord  must  be  This  All — each  thing  that 
moves  on  earth. 

With  that  renounced  enjoy  thyself.  Covet  no  wealth  of 
any  man. 

3 One.  only  doing  Karma  here,  should  wish  to  live  a hundred 
years. 

No  way  is  there  for  thee  but  this.  So  Karma  cleaveth  not 
to  man. 

3 Aye,  to  the  Asuras  belong  those  worlds  enwrapt  in  blinding 
gloom. 

To  them,  when  life  on  earth  is  done,  depart  the  men  who 
kill  the  Self. 


This  the  Ust  AdhyAya  or  Book  of  the  White  Yajurveda  Saijihiti,  is  im 
Upanishad  or  religious  and  phi  lose  phioal  tieeti^,  not 
wir,h  any  Haorific'al  ceremonial.  It  professedly  designed , seyo  Profess 
Wpher  ‘to  fix  the  proper  mean  between  those  exclusively  engaged  in  aacii- 
ficiHl  acts  and  those  entirely  neglecting  them.  It  belongs  at  nil  events  to  a 
vc‘i*y  advanced  stage  of  speculation  as  it  assumes  a bord  ffsj  of  the  universe 
AcoM.rding  to  MahMhara’s  commentary,  its  polemic  is  directed  partially 
against  the  Bauddhas,  that  is.  probably,  against  the  doctrines  which  aftei- 
wards  were  called  Samkhya’.-Histo.y  of  ndian  Liieratuie,  p.  108. 

1 Enveloped:  or  coveted  The  lord:  Is,  the  Soul  of  All,  and  thy  in- 
most Self-lhe  only  Absohite  Reality.  This  All:  the  phenomenal  universe 
On  earth:  in  the  three  worlds;  m the  whole  imaginarv  Co«mos  H t A 
that  renounced  - after  absolute  rennnciation  of  the  world  and  all  tlie  vam 
Sres  ooreote.!  with  it,  H.joy  iLynlf:  delight  in  the  hi, s,  „ the  Beat., 
tic  Vision.  According  to  Sri  Sankara,  save  or  protect  the  SeR  toiet  no 
wealth : and  set  not  thy  heart  upon  wfiat  thou  callest  thine,  1 he  beeining 
existence  of  the  wot  Id  is  to  be  covered  by  the  all-embracing,  all-absorbing, 
all-satisfying  thought  of  the  Deity. 

2 Of  tlie  two  courses,  Sannyftsa  or  Rennnoiation  and  Kama  or  Religion b 
Action,  the  former,  consequent  on  right  knowledge  of  the  Self,  is  the  better 
wav  Only  doing  Karma:  he  who  desires  life  is  not  fitted  to  follow  the 
hiiier  path  and  in  order  to  avoid  sin  he  must  perforin  the  leligp'us  work 
such  as  Agnihotra  (HI.  9)  and  the  like,  ordained  by  the  S Isti  as.  1 hns  and 
thus  only ,^will  he  be  untainted  by  evil  action,  and  by  a gradual  P^^fication 

of  the  heart  be  will  attain  to  Renunciation  and  its  direct  goal  of  Mnkti, 
Libeiation,  or  Final  Be.ititude,  that  is,  the  reabsorptiou  of  the  individual 

Self  into  the  Supreme  Self  or  Soul  of  the  Univeise. 

3 This  text  condemns  thoee  who  perform  Karma  with  a view  to  future 

advantages  in  this  world  or  sensual  enjoyments  in  Svarga,  and  ^ 

Self  bv  Ignorance  of  its  eternal  nature.  To  the  A auras : as  compared  \ 
the  namre  of  the  Supreme  Spirit  who  is  witli-mt  a second,  even  the  Gods 
and  other  beings  are  8|>oken  of  as  Asuras  or  demons.  The  worlds  ot  Asuras 
include  Gods,  human  beings,  the  lower  animals,  and  even  plants  and  minerals. 


VERSE  7.] 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


305 


4 Motionless,  one,  swifter  than  Mind — the  Devas  failed  to 

o’ertake  it  speeding  on  before  them. 

It,  standing  still,  outstrips  the  others  running.  Herein  doth 
Matarisvan  stablish  Action. 

5 It  moveth  j it  is  motionless.  It  is  far  distant ; it  is  near. 

It  is  within  This  All ; and  it  surrounds  This  All  externally. 

6 The  man  who  in  his  Self  beholds  all  creatures  and  all  things 

that  be. 

And  in  all  beings  sees  his  Self,  thence  doubts  no  longer, 
ponders  not. 

7 When,  in  the  man  who  clearly  knows,  Self  hath  become  all 

things  that  are, 


4 As  ignorance  of  the  AtmA  or  Self  leads  to  repeated  mundane  transmi- 
grations, some  explanation  of  its  nature  ia  now  given.  Motionless:  in  its 
uncouditioued  stat*,  free  from  the  obatruetiona  of  the  body,  its  (organs  of 
perception,  conception,  etc  , and  of  the  objective  or  external  world.  One  ' 
all-pervading,  and  really  only  one,  although  appearing  to  the  ignorant  to  bo 
encased  separately  in  every  body.  Swifter  than  Mind:  seeming,  as  it  is 
all-pervading,  to  travel  faster  than  even  the  Mind  (Manas,  Mens,  ‘ the  stii’ 
W'ium  commune,  the  rallying-point  of  the  senses’ — Max  Muller).  The  Mind, 
says  Sri  Sankara,  by  its  power  of  imagination  is  known  to  travel  to  the 
world  of  Bralima  even  in  a second,  and  the  Self — Atmd  seems  to  arrive 
there  previously.  Because  Atmd  or  Brahma— Intelligence  Absolute— which 
is  the  basis  of  all  perceptiou,  imagination  and  thought,  and  as  such  reaects 
itself  in  ail  the  conscious  functions  of  the  senses  of  the  Mind,  cannot  but  be 
considBfBd  fts  b6for6j  oth6rwi86  how  can  th6  Mind  function  fit 
The  Devag:  here  meaning  tlie  organs  of  sen^e,  flight,  etc.  It : the  entity  of 
theAtmd.  The  others:  the  senses.  Herein:  or,  by  it,  the  entity  of  the 
Atma  which  pervades  all  existence.  Mdtaripan : V4yu,  Air  ; the  special 
supporter.of  all  life,  which  allots  their  respective  functions  to  the  forces  of 
Nature,  urging  fire  to  burn,  the  Sun  to  give  his  light,  and  the  clouds  to  pour 
their  rain.  Action ; the  manifestations  of  all  activity ; the  actions  of  human 

beings  as  well  as  natural  phenomena. 

5 It  moveth ; it  is  motionless : substantially  a repetition,  to  add  force  to 
the  assertion. from  verse  4.  It:  the  entity  of  the  Atmd.  Altlmugh  constant 
and  uumoviug  in  itself,  it  seems  to  the  ignorant  to  move.  Or,  physicaHy, 
it  is  stationary  in  plants  and  minerals  and  moving  in  animated  creatures.  Ear 
distant:  far  beyond  the  reach  of  the  ignorant.  Near:  close  to  those  who 
know  its  nature.  Or,  Mahidhara  .says,  it  is  far  away  in  the  sun  and  the  stars 
and  close  at  hand  in  the  earth.  Within  This  All.  being  all-perv^.ng  and 
extremely  subtile  it  is  at  the  same  time  witbm  aud  without  the  Universe 

6 The  man:  he  who  has  renouuced  the  world  and  wishes  for  final  release 
from  transmigration  In  his  Self:  as  not  distinct  from  his  own  Atm, I or  Self. 
Thence : consequently.  Doubts  no  longer:  this  interpretation  of 

sati  is  given  by  Mahidhara  who  quotes  a Sfitra  from  Papim  (3.  1.  5)  imply - 
ine  that  the  affix  san  is  used  in  the  root’s  own  sense-^fr^e  san  pratyayah 
-i  e not  in  the  desiderat  ve  sense.  The  reading  or  the  K^iiva  recension  is 
na  vijugupsate,  that  is,  does  not  shrink  away  from  them  as  alien  and  interior 

^7^  AsTgum  ance,  the  source  of  grief  and  delusion,  has  been  destroyed  m 
the  man  who  beholds  the  one,  all-pervading,  pure  belf,  free  from  duality, 
his  condition  is  one  of  uninterrupted  bliss. 

20 


306 


THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  XL 


What  wilderment.  what  grief  is  there  in  him  who  sees  the 
One  alone  1 

8 He  hath  attained  unto  the  Bright,  Bodiless,  Woundless, 

Sinewless,  the  Pure  which  evil  hath  not  pierced. 
Far-sighted,  wise,  encompassing,  he  self-existent  hath  pres- 
cribed aims,  as  propriety  demands,  unto  the  everlasting 
Years. 

9 Deep  into  shade  of  blinding  gloom  fall  Asambhuti’s  wor- 

shippers. 

They  sink  to  darkness  deeper  yet  who  on  Sambhiiti  are 
intent. 

1 0 One  fruit,  they  say,  from  Sambhava,  another  from  Asambhava. 
Thus  from  the  sages  have  we  heard  who  have  declared  this 


lore  to  us. 

11  The  man  who  knows  Sambhdti  and  Vinasa  simultaneously. 
He,  by  Vinasa  passing  death,  gains  by  Sambhuti  endless  life. 

8 Re  the  man  who  has  this  right  knowledge  of  the  Self.  The  Bright,  etc.  : 
Brahm.v.  the  Highest  Essence,  the  Supreme  Being.  Sri  Sankara  explains 
diflferentlv  : He  (the  Atmil)  encompassed  or  pervaded  all,  being  bright,  etc., 
thus  putting  these  neuter  adjectives  in  apposition  to  the  masculine  pronoun 
sah  (he).  M.ihidhara  also  gives  this  alternative  explanation.  Far-sigiued, 
etc.  referring  either  to  the  man  who  knows,  or  to  the  Atmfi,  accortiing  to 
the  preferred  interpretation  of  the  first  line  of  the  verse.  A.^propi  iey 
demands:  so  that  every  living  being  might  receive  the  proper  fruit  ot  liis 
action.  Years:  PrajApatis  or  Creative  Powers,  Praj&p^i  ^ingKlentihea 
with  the  Year,  of  which  he  is  the  Presiding  Genius.  See  IX  20;  XXV U 40. 

9 lu  order  to  enjoin  the  combined  worship  of  Asambhfiti  and  bambbati, 
their  separate  worship  is  condemned,  AsainbhUti  is,  according  to  , r an 
kara.  undeveloped  Prakriti,  Nature  ia  its  causal  or  germinal  state  when  it 
has  not  evolved  as  the  universe  which  is  the  effect.  It  is  also  called  tainas, 
darkness  or  chaos.  This  worship  is  mere  blindness  and  ignorance,  and  ite 
adherents  fall  into  corresponding  darkness  Samhhiti:  explained  by  i?n 
Sankara  as  the  manifestation  of  Brahma  as  Brahm^l  the  phenomenal 
called  Hiranyagarbha  the  Golden  Germ,  or  Praj^pati.  See  R.  V.  X.  121, 
According  to  Mahldhara’s  first  explanation,  Asambhuti  is  the  denial  of  a new 
birth  or  existence  after  death,  and  Sambh  iti  is  the  exclusive  asserUon  ot 
that  belief,  devotion  to  which  will  produce  excess  in  the  practice  of  Karma. 

10  The  text  now  declares  the  separate  fruit  of  each  element  of  the  coim 
bined  worship  of  Undeveloped  Nature  and  Hiranyagarbha  in  order  to  teac^ 
their  combination,  having  first  condemned  the  cults  practised  separa^  > • 
From  Sambhava : from  the  cult  of  Sambhava  which  is  the  same  as  Sambhuti 
in  verse  9,  or  Hiranyagarbha.  Asambhava:  Undeveloped  Nature  or  Asam- 
bhfiti.  The  result’ of  the  former  cult  is  the  attainment  of  certain  superna- 
tural powers  called  Siddhis  which  enable  their  possessor  to  increase  or  re- 
duce his  size  and  weight  to  any  extent  at  his  pleasure,  etc.  Eight  of  these 
faculties  are  usually  enumerated.  The  worship  of  Prakriti  results  m absorp- 
tion into  Prakriti.  Each,  therefore,  fails  to  attain  the  object  to  be  desired, 
redintegration  in  the  Supreme  Self. 

11  Sambhuti:  standing  for  Asambhfiti,  say  the  Commentators,  by  aphae- 
resia,  and  so  meaning  Undeveloped  Nature,  Vindm:  (Destruction)  that  is» 


VERSE  15.] 


WHITE  YAJURTEDA. 


307 


12  To  blinding  darkness  go  the  men  who  make  a cult  of 

Nescience. 

The  devotees  of  Science  enter  darkness  that  is  darker  still. 

13  Different  is  the  fruit,  they  say,  of  Science  and  of  Nescience. 
Thus  from  the  sages  have  we  heard  who  have  declared  this 

lore  to  us. 

14  The  man  who  knoweth  well  these  two,  Science  and  Nescience, 

combined, 

O’ercoming  death  by  Nescience  by  Science  gaineth  endless 
life. 

15  My  breath  reach  everlasting  Air ! In  ashes  let  my  body  end. 
Om  ! Mind,  remember  thou ; remember  thou  my  sphere ; 

remember  thou  my  deeds. 


Hiranyagarbha.  The  combinatioo  of  the  two  cults  is  now  expressly  enjoined, 
since  the  fruits  can  be  obtained  only  by  one  and  the  same  person  succes- 
sively, and  not  by  different  persons  practising  each  cult  independently. 
Patting  death : that  is,  overcoming  death  in  the  shape  of  the  absence  of 
supernatural  powers  and  of  vice  and  desire  by  me-ansof  the  faculties  obtained 
by  the  worship  of  Hiranyag.ii  bha  (verse  10)  SanibhMi : here  again  mean- 
ing Asambhhti  or  Undeveloped  Nature.  Endktt  life  • that  is,  conditioned 
or  limited  immortality  by  absorption  into  Prakriti. 

12  Nescience:  Avidyd,  the  opposite  of  Vidyd  or  true  Science;  including 
ignorance  of  the  real  nature  of  the  Atmi  and  belief  in  the  phenomenal  and 
transient  objective  world.  See  Professor  Max  Muller’s  Three  Lectures  on 
the  Veddnta  Philosophy,  pp.  97 — 100.  Here  the  word  is  used  as  equivalent 
to  Karma  (verse  2),  one  of  its  results,  the  constant  performers  of  which, 
exclusively,  fall  into  darkness  which  prevents  their  knowing  the  truth. 
Science:  Vidya  ; meaning,  here,  only  knowledge  of  the  Devatds  or  Deities, 
not  of  the  Paramitmi  or  Supreme  Self  This  Science,  alone,  is  insufficient. 

13  Different  it  the  fruit:  Science  (knowledge  of  the  Deities)  leads  a man 
after  death  to  the  Devaloka,  the  world  of  the  Devas  or  Gods.  Nescience, 
that  is,  Karma,  leads  to  the  Pitriloka,  the  world  of  the  Fathers,  Manes  or 
Ancestral  Spirits. 

14  The  person  who  practises  the  sacred  rites  and  conjointly  cultivates 
the  Science  of  the  Deities  successively  attains  the  fruits  of  both,  obtaining, 
in  the  end,  the  union  with  the  Gods  called  immortality  in  a limited  sense. 

15  This  and  the  two  succeeding  verses  are  a^idrossed  to  Brahma,  the  Ti  ue, 
typified  by  Fire,  and  designated  Om  the  Sacred  Symbol  of  the  Deity.  The 
Solar  Fire,  the  Supreme  Deity,  and  the  Self  manifested  in  the  Mind  are 
here  addressed  in  identity  by  the  dying  devotee,  meditating  upon  the  Sup- 
reme Light  in  the  Sun  as  no  other  than  liis  own  Inner  Light.  The  meaning 
of  this  verse  is  May  my  breath— the  life-principle  in  me  (calh  d tlie  lihyn- 
tartra,  and  consisting  of  the  five  organs  of  action,  the  five  organs  of  sense, 
the  five  Airs,  the  Mind  and  the  Intellect),  leaving  its  bodily  limitation, 
reach,  or  be  united  with,  the  immortal  Hiranyagarbha  or  S itr&tman,  the 
Soul-thread,  the  Divine,  all-pervadiiig,  Cosmic  Life : and  may  this  gross 
body  consumed  on  the  funeral  pile  end  in  ashes.  Mg  tphere:  Iclihe,  which 
18  not  in  the  Kinva  text,  is  explained  by  the  Commentators  as  ‘the  region 
allotted  to,  or  intended  (kalpita)  for,  me*. 


308  THE  TEXTS  OF  THE  [BOOK  XL. 

16  By  goodly  path  lead  us  to  riches,  Agui,  thou  God  who 

knowest  all  our  works  and  wisdom, 
llemove  the  sin  that  makes  us  stray  and  wander:  most 
ample  adoration  will  we  bring  thee. 

17  The  Keal’s  face  is  hidden  by  a vessel  formed  of  golden  light. 
The  Spirit  yonder  in  the  Sun,  the  Spirit  dwelling  there  am  I. 
Om  ! Heaven ! Brahma ! 


16  This  verse,  repeated  from  V.  36,  and  taken  from  R.  V.  I.  89.  6,  is  a 
continuation  of  the  dying  devotee’s  prayer.  Goodly  path : not  by  the  path 
that  leads  to  the  abode  of  the  Manes  and  subsequent  transmigration,  but 
by  the  fair  road  travelled  by  the  Gods,  on  which  there  is  no  returning.  To 
riches:  that  is,  according  to  the  Comnneatatqrs,  enjoyment  of  the  re  warn 
of  our  Karma. 

1 7 The  Real's  face  • the  face  or  real  form  of  that  True  Being— Brahma— 
the  iud welling  Spirit  of  all  beings,  animate  or  inanimate,  the  Inward  lluler 
(antaryumin),  the  Purusha  who  dwells  in  the  Sun  yonder  and  in  the  body. 
In  the  Kd,nva  recension  a verse  numbered  16  follows  : 0 Nourisher,  Sole 
Mover  (or  Sole  Seer),  Yama  (Controller),  0 Sun,  Prajilpati’s  Son,  remove 
thy  rays  and  draw  together  or  C(*ntmot  thy  burning  energy,  so  th^t  I may 
behold  thy  most  blessed  Form.  That  Spirit  (Pnrushn)  who  dwelleth  in  the 
Sun  yonder,  I am  (the  immaterial  eternal  Soul).  ‘ Tliy  most  blessed 
Form  ’ implies  that  True  Spiritual  Light  which  is,  as  it  were,  veiled  by  the 
golden  orb  of  physical  material  light  which  typiftes  it. 

In  b 'th  recensions,  Mldhyandina  and  K4  iva,  the  order  of  verses  1 8 is 
the  same.  In  the  Klpva  recen-sion  verse  9 corresponds  with  12  uf  the 
yan.lina;  10  with  13 U with  U;  12  with  9;  13  with  10;  14  with  11  ; lo 
(varied)  with  17;  16  has  no  corresponding  verse  ; 17  with  15  ; 18  with  16. 

This  Upanishad  of  the  Vijasaueya  Samhitft,  called  also  the  Isavasyam 
from  its  initial  words,  iaddhydya,  and  Jsopaniahad,  Is  I Book  and  Ifl  Upani- 
shad,  has  been  translated  by  Sir  William  Junes  (Posthumous  Works) ; by 
Rdjil  Ram  Mohan  Roy;  by  Dr.  Roer  in  Vol.  XV.  of  the  Bibliotheca  ludica; 
by  Professor  Max  Muller  in  Vol.  I.  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  and  re- 
cently. together  wjtli  the  Commentary  of  ^ri  ^ankara,  by  S.  Sit^rama  Sastri, 
B.  A (published  by  V.  0 Seshachari,  B.A.,  B.  through  G.  A Natesan  & 
Go.,  Madras).  I am  indebted  to  my  old  pupil  and  valued  friend  Rabu  Pra- 
madd  Ddsa  Mitraof  Benares,  completer  of  Dr.  Ballaptyne’s  translation  of  the 
S ihitya-darpana  and  author  of  an  admirable  English  version  of  the  Bhagavad- 
Gttd,  for  kind  revision  of  my  translation  of,  npd  notes  on,  this  Upanishad, 
and  for  niany  corrections  and  improvements  therein.  The  following  Excur- 
sus from  this  scholar's  pen,  mainly  in  defence  and  justification  of  the  Com- 
mentator ?ri  Slahkara,  iu,  1 think,  a valuable  Edition  to  my  annotations. 

•‘Simple  in  language  as  this  Upanishad  is,  it  presents  difficulties  in  the 
shape  of  apparently  conflicting  sentiments  which  it  has  taxed  the  ingenuity 
of  ancient  and  modern  commentators  to  reconcile ; yet  a doubt  sometimes 
arises  whether  the  real  sense  has  been  actually  discovered. 

“ This  translation  is  generally  in  accordance  with  the  Oommentary  of  Srj 
^ankai-dchdrya  who  is  followed  by  the  great  majority  of  commentators  and 
is  recognized  as  the  greatest  authority  on  the  Veddnta  Philosophy  as  ex- 
pounded in  its  prasthdm-traya  or  triple  course,  viz,  the  Upanishads,  th^ 
Vediuta  Sutras,  and  the  Bhagavad-QUa. 


t^RSi  17i] 


Wit  ITS  YAJURVRDA. 


809 


still. ” 5?  I qi.inkai a explains  viaya  to  mean  knowledge  of  tbe  inferior  Deities 
and  not  the  knowledge  Of  the  Suprende  Brahma.  For,  according  t»  him,  the 
true  knowledge  of  the  ^u[ireui0  Brahma  being  the  highest  object  of  all  re- 
ligious duties  and  the  sole  end  of  the  Upanishads,  it  cannot  be  said,  under 
any  circumstances,  to  result  in  datkness.  \Vllil8t  a knowledge  of  the  Divi- 
nities and  cCi  tain  forms  of  their  worship,  also  termed  vidyain  the  Upanisliads, 
may  bring  a man  into  darkness  or  an  unhappy  tegiou  if  be  lieg  ects  the  duties 
ordained  by  the  .Sruti  and  Bmriti.  Bank ir.a.  in  all  his  Vedantic  Com- 
mentaries. has  Urged  repeatedly  and  forcibly  that  true  knowledge  of  llrahm.i 
cannot  be  combined  with  Karma,  for  it  removes  the  notion  of  duality  and 
fills  the  devotee’s  mind  \Vith  an  dver-abidiug  consciousness  of  the  Fteind 
Spirit,  the  Sole  Ueality,  His  mental  and  bodily  acts  lire  almost  automatic  il, 
not  being  caused  by  any  strong  desire  or  pi'slon.  Tliey  rt  e results  of  the 
residual  avulyi  the  source  of  his  pteseht  and  last  birth,  lixe  ptlon  is  made 
only  in  the  case  of  Divine  Incarnations  and  those  who  work  solely  for  the 
good  of  the  world  without  any  selfish  motive  or  passion. 

“The  fourth  Chapter  of  the  third  Book  of  the  VedAnta-Sfitias  opcn«  ivith 
theSfitra;  ‘The  end  of  man  (is  attained)  by  this  (the  independent  know- 
ledge of  the  Self  ordained  m the  Ved.lnta):  such  being  the  word  of  the 
Veda  So  says  EddarAyaua.  In  refuting  the  opponent’s  argutneuts  Sii 
Sankara  eiplains  tliat  vorae  2 of  thw  Ui«m,b*f  refer,  to  men  in  genera 
and  not  specially  to  one  who  knows  Brahma  (111.4.13),  and  that  eien  it 
it  bo  conoWl  by  virtue  of  tire  couteat  that  it  refers  to  suell  a person  it 
implies  only  a permission  and  not  an  injunction  to  perform  works,  for  t u- 

purpose  of  praising  knowledge,  as  is  shown  by  the  w,mU  m karma  hiuf  U 

Sa^rVotk  does  not  taint  the  man'.  That  is  to  say,  even  if  a .nan  wl.o 

knois  Bralima  performs  /[If 

upon  him : snoli  is  the  power  of  knowledge  (III.  4 14).t  1 l.is  ' 

about  the  connection  of  work  with  wisdom  is  concluded  by  ca  .laimlion 
VrftaU  S Ylu'zsT’  ‘keforeVnsT/m^ngTt  s’ldf-suMucl, 

S Vtom  the  wo’rld),  end.jring  ^everv 

sees  the  Self  in  llis  »*'!.“*»  * knowleilge  as  is  i.npliU  n.  the 

tion,  serenity,  e^  or  i,n,ne,li,atc 

epithet  evam-vd,  u^owledge;  whilst  aacrifice  etc  , being  cun- 

a*“w?^’th:Xt*of  and  remote  nraans. 

Such  is  their  .|,.t  *bere  is  no  inconsistency,  as  Profes- 

so;L11{»^^“b"  the 

^t^lshaipall  Misra  says:  ‘V"®  “1^  f®'"^i'ld’Vefer*to‘one*who  knows 
ed.’-Bhaniat«.  a gloss  on  ^Fasting  (anisfcka)  is  explained 


310 


WHITE  YAJURVEDA. 


[BOOK  XL. 

explanations  given  by  ^rl  .Sankara  of  verse  2 in  his  Commentaries  on  this 
Upanishad  and  the  Vedftiita-SOtras.  The  Professor  rightly  remarks:  ‘Our 
Upanishad  seems  to  have  dreaded  libertinism,  knowledge  w'ithout  work?, 
more  even  than  ritualism,  works  without  knowledge,  and  its  true  object 
was  to  show  that  orthodoxy  and  sacrifice,  though  useless  in  themselves, 
must  always  form  the  preparation  for  higher  enlightenment.’  It  would 
seem  that  it  did  not  strike  the  Professor  that  Sri  Sankara’s  contention  is 
not  that  work  should  not  precede  the  highest  knowledge,  but  that  when  it 
has  been  attained,  there  is  no  necessity  for  going  back  to  the  preparatory 
strtge,  seeing  that  the  goal  has  already  been  reached  for  which  the  prep.ira- 
tion  was  previously  undergone.  It  cannot  he  too  carefully  borne  in  mind 
that  this  knowledge  to  which  the  great  SannyAsi  attaches  so  much  value  is 
not  a Verbal  or  even  a speculative  knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Brahma,  which, 
as  the  Professor  justly  fears,  may  lead  to  libertinism.  Far  from  being  the 
highest  knowledge  as  understood  by  Sri  Sankara,  the  latter  knowledge  may 
indeed  be  lower  than  that  of  the  Gods  who  are  manifestations  of  Brahma  as 
Wind,  Fire,  Sun,  etc.  Brahma  so  manifested  is  wt>rshipi>ed  in  verses  15—17 
of  our  G[)anishad.  So  Sankai4nanda,  the  preceptor  of  S4yan&ch&rya,  fol- 
lowing as  he  does  Sri  Sankaia,  adds  an  alternative  explanation  of  vidyi  in 
verse  12,  viz.  a knowledge  of  Brahma  that  lies  only  on  the  lip  or  in  the  mouth 
(mukhato  BrahmavAdino  v4),  and  not  in  the  actual  realization  of  Brahma, 
shown  in  a life  altogether  free  from  desires  and  affections,  doubts  and  fears, 
grief  and  delusion  (see  verse  7).  Certainly  it  would  be  a contradiction  to 
connect  such  knowledge  with  libertinism,  and  so  after  all  Sii  Sankara  must 
be  pronounced  to  be  right. 

“ It  may  uot  be  out  of  place  to  remark  here  that  Sri  Sankara’s  view  of  the 
relation  of  wisdom  to  work  ac:ords  also  with  the  teaching  of  the  Bhagivad- 
Oltft  whicli  sets  forth  so  prominently  the  importance  of  duty  done  un- 
selfishly, without  expectation  of  reward.  The  GttA  says  : * But  the  man 
who  delighttith  in  Spit  it  (the  Inner  Self),  is  satisfied  in  Spirit,  and  is  con- 
tented in  Spirit  alone,  he  (indeed)  hath  no  work  to  do.’  IIP  17. 

“ I feel  tempted  to  give  here  an  interpretation  of  verse  12,  being  the  ex- 
pansion of  an  idea  hinted  at  by  a Pandit.  It  is  uot,  however,  fouujl  m any 
of  the  published  Commentaries.  It  removes  the  apparent  contradiction  o 
the  veise,  and  at  the  same  time  restores  the  force  of  iua  rendered  meauin  . 
less  in  all  the  other  interpretations,  and  gives  to  vidyd  its  highest  sense 

“Those  who  are  devoted  to  knowledge  (the  highest  knowledge  of  Brahma) 
enter  into  darkness,  as  if  blinder  still,  i e.  a darkness  devoid  of  all  forms 
and  colours — of  all  this  phenomenal  world — darkness  indeed  as  being  m- 
yon*^  the  light  of  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  fire  and  lightning,  for  the 
^ruti  says  : There  the  Sun  shines  not,  nor  the  Moon,  uor  the  Stsr^  nor  do 
these  lightnings  shine,  far  less  does  fire  (Katha  Up.  5.  15).  ^ri  Sankara  m 
hi.'s  Auandalahart,  a hymn  to  the  Primeval  Power  or  Sakti,  sings  : ‘ I 
the  Supreme  Sambhu,  seated  in  the  lotus,  named  Ajlii-ohakra,  between  the 
eyebiows  (termed  Avimukta  or  KArt  in  the  JAvAla  Upanishad),  bearing  the 
brilliance  of  a hundred  millions  of  suns  and  moons,  united  on  one  aide  with 
the  Supreme  Intelligence  (Para  Chit,  the  power  of  universal  consciousneM); 
whom  to  worship  with  devotion,  man  dwelleth  in  the  lightless  house  of  his 
own  Light,  unapproaohed  by  the  Sun  and  Moon  and  fire*.  The  Bhagavad- 
GltA  also  gives  expression  to  a similar  idea  when  it  says:  ‘What 
all  eieatlou— therein  waketh  theself-conceutrated’  (II.  69).  Milton  s Dark 
with  excessive  light’  might  perhaps  be  explained  in  a like  spiritual  sense. 

“ Lastly  in  favour  of  Sri  Sankara  it  may  be  observed  that  he  avoids  th6 
tautology  which  other  Commentators  make  of  verses 
SambUAti  and  Asaiubhfiti  in  the  same  sense  almost  as’ViuyC  khd  avidja. 


I.— INDEX  OF  HYMNS  AND  VERSES  TAKEN  FROM 
THE  RIGVEDA  AND  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA. 


RIGVEDA. 


BOOK  I. 


Hymn 

: k Verbb. 

Page. 

1 Hvmn  a Verse. 

Page. 

1. 

7-9 

19 

86. 

13 

93 

]. 

63 

248 

1 40. 

1,  5 

287 

2. 

4 

52 

40. 

3 

278 

2. 

7 

274 

40 

15 

283 

3. 

3 

274 

44. 

13 

269 

3. 

4-6 

195 

45. 

6 

136 

3. 

7 

57 

50. 

1 

66,  271 

3. 

10-12 

195 

60. 

3 

66 

1 

210 

60. 

4 

272 

2 

210 

50. 

6 

271 

6. 

3 

251 

50. 

10 

188,  300 

9. 

1 

270 

62. 

1,2 

281 

10. 

3 

65 

71. 

8 

268 

11. 

1 

107, 156 

75. 

5 

267 

14. 

3 

273 

79. 

4-6 

136 

16. 

3 

233 

82. 

2,  3 

23 

15. 

9 . 

234 

84. 

2 

65 

18. 

1-3 

20 

84. 

3 

65 

18. 

6 

266 

84. 

19 

50 

22. 

3 

13 

86. 

1 

64 

22. 

13 

64, 118 

89. 

1-10 

226 

22. 

17 

37 

90. 

6-8 

118 

22. 

19 

44,  118 

90. 

9 

291 

23. 

6 

273 

91. 

1 

179 

23. 

17 

48 

^91. 

16-18 

113 

24. 

11 

168, 196 

*91. 

19 

33 

26. 

10 

84 

91. 

20,  21,  23 

282 

26. 

10 

186 

92. 

6 

109 

27. 

7 

49 

92.  ■ 

13 

284 

30. 

31. 
31. 

7 

1 

12 

89 

286 

281 

95. 

96. 

97. 

1 

5 

1-8 

267 

100, 157 
288 

34. 

11 

285 

98. 

1 

232 

35. 

2 

273 

98. 

3 

11 

’ 35. 

8-11 

282 

102. 

1 

271 

36. 

9 ■ . 

92 

106. 

1 

278 

312 

INDEX 

OF  VERSES  FROM  BIGVEDA  AND  ATHARVA-VEDA. 

Ktmn 

& Verse. 

Page. 

Hymn  & Verse. 

Pa  OB. 

107. 

1 

60 

162.  21 

212 

112. 

24, 25 

283 

164.  31 

2^6 

114. 

1 

145 

164.  34 

216 

114.’ 

7,8 

141 

164.  49 

297 

115. 

1 

56, 120 

165.  3 

270 

115. 

4 

272 

165.  4 

275 

115. 

5 

272 

165.  9 

277 

132. 

6 

68 

165.  15 

285 

147. 

2 

105 

186.  1 

271 

154. 

1,2 

38 

187.  1 

280 

154. 

4-6 

44 

189.  X 

3,  42,  58 

162. 

220 

BOOK  11. 

1.  1 

90 

27. 

1 

287 

3.  11 

159 

29. 

6 

274 

6.  4 

105 

30. 

8 

170 

7.  6 

97 

32. 

6 

281 

9.  1 

92 

33. 

14 

146 

9,  3 

158 

41. 

1,2 

238 

10.  4,5 

90 

41. 

7-9 

195 

23.  15 

231 

41. 

13 

57 

23.  19 

287 

book  III. 

. 

2.  7 

276 

31. 

6 

274 

9.  9 

267 

34. 

3 

270 

11  2 

207 

35 

6 

234 

12  1 

57  * 

37. 

1 

170 

14  5 

171 

38. 

4 

270 

22.  1-5 

106 

45. 

1 

192 

24.  1 

77 

47. 

2 

58 

26.  7 

170 

47. 

4 

275 

29.  3,4 

281 

47. 

5 

67 

29.  8 

92 

61. 

7 

57 

29.  10 

18, 106 

59. 

6 

96 

29.  16 

139 

62.  10 

21,  206 

30.  1,  2 

282 

1 62. 

16 

196 

INDEX  OF  VERSES  FROM  RIQVEDa  AND  ATtf aRVA-VEDA. 


313 


BOOK  IV. 


Hymn  & Verse. 

Page. 

1. 

4,  6 

196^ 

1. 

20 

269 

2. 

16 

182 

2. 

17 

151 

4. 

l-S- 

115 

7. 

1 

135,  267 

10. 

I 

158 

10. 

1-3 

137 

15. 

3 

90 

20. 

1 

191 

20. 

2 

192 

Aymn  & Verse. 

Page. 

21.  1 

191 

31.  1—3 

239 

32.  1 

275 

40.  3,  4 

73 

40  5 

84 

42.  10 

52 

47.  1 

238 

54.  2 

274 

57.  8 

1U9 

58. 

1.59-161 

58.  5,6 

119 

BOOK  V. 


1. 

1 

135 

44. 

1 

53 

1. 

12 

135 

46. 

2,3 

273 

5 

1 

17 

47. 

3 

156 

6. 

1.2,9 

187 

50. 

i 

27,97 

20. 

1 

181 

62. 

8 

82 

24. 

20 

81. 

1 

37.87 

24. 

1,  3,  4 

137 

81. 

2 

100 

25. 

7 

232 

81. 

3 

88 

28. 

3 

268 

82. 

5 

255 

33. 

8 

83 

85. 

2 

^2 

42 

4, 

62 

book  VI. 


4 

7 

268 

47. 

26-31 

253 

6. 

7 

171 

48. 

1.  2 

239 

7. 

1 

135,  268 

49. 

4 

274 

11. 

1 

135 

49. 

8 

oo 

11. 

6 

135 

50. 

14 

286 

16. 

13 

91, 134 

52. 

9 

276 

16. 

14 

91 

52. 

13 

274 

16. 

15 

92 

59. 

6 

278 

16. 

16 

233 

60. 

5 

275 

16. 

28 

150 

70. 

1 

285 

16. 

34 

268 

71. 

3 

275 

19. 

1 

58 

71. 

6 

60 

44. 

9 

285 

75. 

251 

46. 

1,2 

238 

75. 

16-18 

154 

47, 

11-13 

192 

314 


INDEX  OF  VERflES  FROM  BIOVEDA  AND  ATHARVA-VEDA. 


BOOK  Vlt. 


Htmn  & Vekse. 

Page. 

HiMN  & Verse. 

Page, 

1. 

3 

158 

41. 

284 

8. 

4 

104 

59.  12 

24 

16. 

1.  2 

136 

62.  5 

197 

16. 

7 

268 

66.  4 

269 

23. 

4 

269 

66.  16 

292 

23, 

6 

192 

74.  3 

278 

26. 

8 

38 

90.  3 

237 

32. 

22,  23 

238 

91.  3-5 

237 

35. 

1 

291 

92.  1 

52 

38. 

7.8 

74 

94.  11 

276 

39. 

2 

273 

99.  3 

37 

BOOK  VIII. 


3. 

8,  4 

277 

52. 

12 

275 

3. 

8 

279 

58. 

3 

107 

6. 

1 

58 

61. 

12,  13 

269 

6. 

28 

233 

64. 

1 

119 

11. 

1 

29 

64. 

4 

134 

11. 

7 

113 

64. 

15 

97 

14. 

13 

182 

65. 

10 

66 

19. 

20 

136 

72. 

7 

273 

26 

21 

238 

73. 

3 

121 

27. 

13 

278 

77. 

1 

232 

27. 

14 

279 

78. 

1 

188 

42. 

1 

32 

78. 

2,3 

279 

43. 

4 

267 

82. 

4 

272 

43. 

9 

104 

88. 

3 

272 

43. 

13 

113 

88. 

5,6 

275 

44. 

3 

207 

90. 

1 

278 

44. 

16 

18, 116,  134 

90. 

9 

277 

45. 

2 

270 

90. 

11,12 

272 

48. 

13 

180 

91. 

20,  21 

98 

49. 

9 

239 

VALAKHILYA. 

3.  7 21,  «0  j 4,  7 

S.  9 277 


09 


INDEX 

or  VERSES  FROM  I 

IIQVEDA  AMD  ATHARVA-VEDa.  315 

BOOK  IX. 

Hymn  a Vkrsb. 

Page. 

Hymn  & Verse. 

Page. 

] 

• 1,2 

234 

66.  20 

232 

()5 

1 

n 

. 6 

172 

66  21 

. 1 

275 

67  22,  23,  25 

178 

54 

. 1 

19 

96  11 

179 

61 

. 10— 

12 

233 

110.  3 

207 

66 

. 19 

177 

BOOK  X. 

]. 

1 

102 

81.  1^7 

150 

1 

. 2 

93 

82.  25-31 

151,  152 

8. 

6 

116,  135 

87.  22 

90 

9. 

1-3 

94 

88.  15 

179 

13. 

1 

87 

91  14,  15 

191 

14 

6 

179 

97.  75-98 

109-111 

14. 

9,  16, 

, 16 

288 

101.  4,3 

lOS 

15 

1 

179 

103.  1-J3 

152-154 

15. 

2 

182 

110  1-11 

250 

15. 

3-5 

180 

120.  1 

277 

15. 

5 

290 

121.  1,3 

210 

15 

6,7 

181 

121.  4 

226 

15. 

$ 

179 

121.  5 

264 

15. 

11 

180 

121.  7,  8 

237 

15. 

12 

181 

121.  10 

83 

15 

13 

182 

123.  1 

53 

15. 

14 

181 

128.  9 

285 

16 

11 

181 

129.  5 

276 

16. 

12 

182 

130.  7 

286 

17. 

4 

212 

131.  2 

84,  173 

17. 

10 

26 

131.  4 

86 

17. 

11 

114 

139.  1 

155 

17. 

12 

55 

139  2 

156 

18. 

1 

288 

139.  3 

108 

36. 

12 

269 

141.  1 

76 

37. 

1 

33 

141.  3 

75 

45. 

4 

101 

141.  4 

277 

45. 

8 

100 

141.  5 

76 

46. 

7 

267 

152.  4 

67,  170^ 

5u. 

1 

270 

157.  1-S 

230 

53. 

8 

289  ' 

170.  1 

271 

57. 

3-6 

23 

173.  1 

101 

61. 

3 

54 

180.  2 

no 

63.  : 

10 

196 

185. 

20 

64. 

6 

74 

189. 

17 

72 

2 

151 

191.  1 

135 

74. 

4 

271 

316 


isbEX  OF  VEHSES  FROM  RIGVEDA  AND  ATHXRVA-VEbi. 

ATHARVA^VEDA. 


BOOK  !. 


Hymn  & VersIs. 

Page. 

Hymn  & Verse. 

Page. 

4.  4 

72 

35.  1,3 

286 

13.  1 

292 

BOOK  II. 

1.  2 

2G5 

1 

6.  1-^8 

235 

Book  hi. 

2.  6 

154 

1 

19.  1,3 

99 

17.  5,8,9 

109 

1 

book  IV. 

1.  1 

114 

1 

1 

c* 

1 

ir>7 

book  V. 

27.  1 

236 

book  VI. 

63.  3 

62 

1 123.  1.  2 

169 

ll6.  3 

188 

book  VII. 

6.  2,  3 

196 

82.  3 

235 

16. 

236 

82.  5 

89 

ir.  4 

62 

84.  1 

235 

25.  1 

69 

89.  8 

47 

26.  3 

88 

97.  1 

69.  1 

291 

97.  3,4 

62 

BOOK  IK. 

5.  17 

138 

BOOK  X. 

3.  13 

263 

■ 1 " 

BOOK  XII. 

2.  8 

290 

■ "■>* 

BOOK  XIX. 

9.  14 

292 

55.  1 

98 

47.  1 

283 

II.-INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 

Abhisheka,  Aspersion,  V.ik,  29;  the  Protec-  Messenger,  11, 55, 103, 

Consecration  of  a King,  tress,  81, 154;  Earth  as  136,  207  ; giver  of 

page  79.  the  first  layer  of  the  children,  13, 179, 188 ; 

Absolute,  the,  Brafima,  altar,  124  ; Queen  of  Householder,  Lord  of 

265.  Order,  196;  Mother,  the  Home,  14,  21,  78, 

Aohcbh.lv^ka,  Inviter,  Sire,  and  Son,  227  ; 81,  84,  244;  guest  of 

one  of  the  priests  enj-  Agui,  243.  men,  17,55,  102, 103, 

ployed  in  important  A'litya,  son  of  Aditi.  268,  269;  represents 

services,  41,  55,  250.  Aditya,  the  Adity.ipd)*  the  Sun,  17,  87,  100, 

Ad^bhya  Graha,  the  In-  ezcellettcc,  ihQ  Sun,  or  166;  head  of  heaven, 

vincible  Lihation,  67.  Varuna,  60,  114,  120,  18,  55,  116, 134,  168; 

Adhavauiya,  a Soma  re-  160,231,248,272,301.  Omniscient, 21;  Master 
servoir,  56,  176.  Adity.l,  a name  of  the  of  the  herd,  21;  guar^ 

AdhipatiGraha,  a certain  Soma  Cow,  30.  dian,  2S;sonof  Rishis, 

Libation,  164.  Adityas,  a class  of  Gods,  34;  son  of  himself,  31, 

Adhvaryu,  a Yajurveda  six,  seven,  or  eight  in  190  ; sacrificed,  212; 

priest ; one  who  per-  number,  but  occasion-  his  three  bodies,  35  ; 

forms  the  practical  a Jly  said  to  be  twelve,  mediator, 196;rera()ver 

part  of  the  ceremony,  corresponding  to  the  of  sin,  42,  187,  X'lJgS 

1,  2,  8,  230,  242,  276  ; number  of  tim  months,  55,103,  268;  sage.  5.5, 

identifies  himself  with  10,  12>  13,  fi'h  95,  105,  63, 268;  suckling,  68 ; 

the  Supreom  Self.  61.  125, 133, 15.3, 190, 198,  his  mother,  Earth, 63; 

Adhvaryus  of  the  Gods,  209, 211,  224,  225, 230,  Purishya,  88,  91,  93, 

the  Asvins,  3, 124, 125,  240,  247,  285,  287.  97,  106;  the  Path  (to 

214,  27J,*27fi.  Aditya  Oraha,  Libation  heaven),  168  ; repre- 

Adi-Piinrsha,  the  Sup-  to  tfie  Adityas,  60.  sented  by  a lump  of 

r,eme  Spirit,  2fil.  After-burp,  the  inter-  clay,  89-91,  93,  94 ; 

Aditi,  Infinity,  Infinite  calary  month,  209.  born  from  forest  trees, 

Nature,  82,  95,  130,  Age  Libations,  165.  90-92  ;Child  of  Heaven 

164,  208.  224,  225, 227,  Aghnyd,  Inviolable,  oxen  and  Earth,  93;  found 

228,230,  247,253,261,  employed  in  the  con-  in  plants,  93;  child  of 

269,  272,  286,  297  ; struction  of  the  altar,  Waters,  93;  alone  im- 

Earth,  3,  4,  6,  8, 9, 30,  109.  mortal,  265;  the  Law, 

82  ; Mighty  Mother,  Agpi,  pas«m.  Lord  or  93,  107  ; the  Truth, 
72;  Mother  of  ludra,  Guardian  of  Vows,  2,  93 {child of  plants,  94; 

275  ; of  Agni,  243  ; 14,  29,  35,  42,  189  ; Good  Protector,  94  ; 

of  the  Gods,  96;  Vish-  Lightning,  7,  18,90;  ' Svishmkrit,202,2U4; 
nu’s  Consort,  264 ; the  his  brothers,  7,  9;  Son  of  Strength,  97, 

Cosmic  Cow,  29  ; sacri-  Hotar  Priest,  11,  63,  103,113,136;  Lord 

ficial  name  of  the  cow,  92,  102,  119,  150,  171,  of  Red  Steeds,  97, 136; 

20,  66,  297;  double-  97,  202,  243,  267  ; Ukhya,  of  the  Fire- 

beaded,  29;  represents  bidden  by  Panis,  12  ; pan,  100-105, 107,1 24, 


318 


lliDlLX  OJ*  SAMEB,  ETC. 


156  ; Son  of  Heaven, 

102  ; hie  three  forms, 
the  Sun,  sacrificial  fire, 
lightning,  102 ; guar- 
dian of  Soma,  103 ; 
Anikav^n,  254  ; his 
mothers  Heaven  and 
Earth,  112;  the  One 
Imperial  Lord,  113  ; 
identified  with  the 
Fire-altar,  117,  119, 
140,  162,  169;  identi- 
fied with  the  Sun,  120, 
251,  267  ; represented 
by  a goat,  120;  Fire  or 
Moon  by  night,  267  ; 
his  flight  and  capture, 
136  ; becomes  Rudra, 
140  ; sprung  from  Pu- 
rusha,  262  ; called  Buf- 
falo, 159,  160  ; vital 
heat  ill  bodies,  161 ; 
corpse-eater,  290 ; Ag- 
ni-Praj&pati,  saciific- 
ed,  171.  Agnis  (plural), 

117,  125,  204. 
Agnichayana,  Construc- 
tion of  the  Fire-altar, 
87,  164, 171,  239. 
Agnldh,  the  priest  who 
kindles  the  fire,  63,  59. 
Agntdhra  = Agnldh,  8, 40, 
41,  69,  66,  174,  175, 
242. 

Agnidhriya,  a hearth  or 
fire-shed,  40. 
Agnihotra,  a burnt  obla- 
tion of  milk,  1,  2,  17, 
231,  304. 

Agnish^ma,  Praise  of 
Agni,  49,  168, 164. 
Aguishvittas,  a class  of 
Manes,  179-181,  220. 
Agni-Soma,  the  dual  dei- 
ty, 3,  4,  6, 12,  46,  225. 


Agniyojana,  Equipment 
of  Agni,  168. 

Agnyidh&na,  establish- 
ment of  sacrificial  fires, 

1,  17,  290. 

Agrayana  Graha,  a Liba- 
tion to  the  All-Gods, 
64,  123,  164. 

Abavanlya,  the  eastern 
fire  and  hearth,  1, 2, 9, 
19,  21,  34,  41,  95,  100, 
114,149,158,167,177, 
188,  247,  261,  300. 

Ahi,  the  Serpent,  a de- 
mon of  drought,  27 5. 
Ahibudhnya,  Ahi  Budh- 
nya,  a deity  of  the  at- 
mospheric ocean,  41, 
83,  286. 

Ahutis, fire-oblations,  176. 
Aida,  the  name  of  a Si- 
man,  123 

Aiudrigna  Graha,  a Liba- 
tion to  ludra-Agni,  67, 
164. 

Aindravdyava  Graha,  a Li- 
bation toIndra-Vdyu, 164 

Air,  214,  289,  192,  307. 
Airs,  Vital.  See  Vital  Airs. 

Aitareya-Brdbm8nam,3l, 

123,  267,  302,  303. 

Aja.  See  Unborn. 
Aja-Ekapdd,  41,  280. 
AjM-Chakra,  810. 

Ajya  Uktba,  a litany  to 
Agni,  132. 

Aksharapankti,  a metre, 
131. 

All-Embracer,  the  Sun, 


AU-Gods,  40,  47,  57,  61, 
67,  95, 107,  165,  166, 
171, 189, 205, 207,209, 
226,  226,  254,268,  273, 
292,  299,  801,  803. 


Sec  Visve  Dcvdh. 
AlMightbrick8,U7,l39. 
All-lights,  certain  bricks, 

96,  126. 

Altar, 7,9.36.87, 88,169, 
171,  174,  281;  called 
lioness,  36;  centre  of 
earth, 216, 240;8haped 
like  a bird,  87, 100, 149, 
239;  consecration  of, 
139;  taking  po8se88i.»n 
of,  148;  of  the  uni- 
verse, 124. 

Altars,  formulas  accom- 
panying construction 

of,  87  seqq  , 97. 

Ambd,Ambdlikd,Ambi- 
kd,  feminine  names, 
212. 

Ambikd,the  personifica- 
tion of  Autumn,  Ru- 
dra’s  sister,  24.  ] 

Ambrosia,  103. 

Amrit,  drink  of  Gods, 
nectar,  8, 60,  72, 159, 
192. 

l.Aiphisaspati,  Genius  of 
the  intercalary  month, 
56,  209. 

Aipsa.oneof  the  Adityas, 
80,  287. 

Amsii  Graha,  a certain 
libation,  164. 

Amulet,  magic,  1,44. 
Auda,  a catcher  of  fish, 
257. 

Anghdri,  one  of  the 
guards  of  the  Celestial 
Soma,  31,  40. 
Angiras,  a title  of  Agni, 
17,  86, 101,113, 281 ; 
Agni's  goat  so  called, 
93 ; a semi-divine  Rish 
27,  88,  89,91,95,106 
126,126,151,182,288 


INDEX  OF  names,  ETC. 


ADgirasee,  descendants  of  in  exorcisms,  78,  289 ; Arrow's,  three  presented 
Angira8,5,27,136,179,  anexorcizing  ceremonj,  toaKingonliisconse- 

271,  282, 298.  77.  cration,  81. 

Animals,  tied  to  stakes,  ApasyA  (Watery)  bricks,  Arya,  188,  234. 
218-223;  dedicated  to  122,  125,  Arya(s),  130,  277. 

various  deities,  218-  Apnavtlna,  an  ancient  Aryaman,  one  of  the 
223;  different  parts  to  Risbi,  18,  135,  267.  Adityas,  20,  76,  225, 

various  Gods,  224  ;b)iilt  Apiatiratba,  Irresistible,  227,228,269,287,291; 
alive  into  foundations,  the  name  of  a hymn,  husband-finder,  24. 

118;  cruelty  to,  regard-  1 56.  Asamaratha,  the  fanciful 

ed  as  sin,  22.  Apii  hymns,  175, 190, 197,  name  of  a Kaiu-mooth, 

Annastuti,  Praise  of  Food  236,210,  247,  250.  134. 

(Soma),  280.  Apsarases,  celestial  Asambhava,UiideveIop' 

Anointing,  of  the  Sacri*  nymphs,  133, 134, 166,  ed  Nature,  306. 

ficer  with  fresh  butter,  167.  227,  256.  AsambhAti  = AvidyS, 


26;  of  his  eye  with  oint- 
ment, 26;  of  axle-pins, 
37;  of  the  Udumbara 
post,  40;  of  the  cap  of  . 
the  stake,  44;  of  vic- 
tims, 45,  46. 

Antaka,  the  Finisher, 
Death,  256,  258. 

Antara,  Interior,  224. 

Antary&ma,  a certain  li- 
bation, 51,  52,  122. 

Antelope  8kiu(8),  32,  42, 
92,  100.  • 

Ant-hill,  used  in  sacrifice, 
89;  Ant-hills,  ofiferiugs 
to,  225. 

Antistrophe,  175. 

Ants,  White,  293. 

Anumati,  Divine  Grace, 
77,  254,  281. 

Anunilochanti,  name  of 
an  Apsaras,  134. 

Anupad,  132. 

Anushtup,  a metre,  67, 
82,  88,  95,  122,  123, 
197,  213,  243,245,254. 

Anushtup  bricks,  135. 

AnuyAjas,  post-ofierings, 
175,  245. 

^pAmArga,  a plant  used 


Apsas,  moisture,  124, 131. 

Apsu-dlkshA,  consecra- 
tion by  water,  26. 

Aptya,  Watery,  a title  of 
Trita,  280. 

ApvA,  Colic  or  Dysentery 
personified,  154. 

ApyAyana,  Sprinkling 
the  Soma  plants,  35. 

Arani,  the  fire-drill  form- 
ed of  two  pieces  of 
wood,  26,  232. 

Araru,  the  name  of  a 
fiend.  7,  8. 

Ardhendra,  HalMndra, 
obl.itions,  163, 

Ardour,  a name  of  Sum- 
mer, 15;  the  year,  128. 

Arishtanemi,  fanciful 
name  of  a month,  134. 

Arjuna,  a name  of  Indra, 
83. 

Arka,  Agni,  the  Sun,  168, 
285. 

ArkAsvamedha-santati 
oblations,  168. 

Armour,144, 154, 251,252. 

, Arrow,  personified,  223, 
253;  Arrow  deity,  256; 

[ —maker,  256. 


310. 

Asandl,  Sacrificer’s  seat, 
75,  174,  186. 

AsapatnASjFoelessbficks, 

131. 

AshAdhA,  Invincible, 
brick,  117. 

AshAdha,  mid-June  to 
mid -July,  56. 
AshtlchatvAriinsa,  hymn, 

ik 

AshtAdasa,  hymn,  128. 

, Asikni,  name  of  a river, 
282. 

Askanda.  the  name  of  a 
die,  268. 

AsrAvaya,  a sacrificial 
. call,  175. 

i A8r!vaya8,fancifulname 

of  a metre,  127. 

Ass,  223;  present  at  sac- 
rifice, 88,  89,  93;  of 
, the  Asvins,  89,  230. 
Assembly’s  Lord,  Agni, 
266. 

Asterisms,  167,  209. 
t.  Astrologer,  256. 
r.  Asura  LordOi>d,69, 120, 
; 2-36,  270,  283. 

Asura,  fiend,  53, 86, 194. 


320 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


Asuras,  fiends  who  op- 
pose the  Gods,  7,  15, 

35,  152,  201,  304;  as- 
Burae  various  shapes, 

15. 

Asvamedha,  Horse-sacfi- 
'ficc,  164, 205, 280,  231, 
247,  255. 

Asvastuti,  Praise  of  the 
Horae,  228. 

Asvattha,  FicusReligiosa, 
83,288. 

Asvina,  name  of  a month, 
mid- September  to  mid- 
October,  56. 

Asvina  Graha,  libation  to 
the  Aavius,  52,  164. 

Asviui  brick,  124. 

Asvins,  two  Light-Goda, 
heralds  of  dawn,  3,  6, 

7,  52,  85,  86, 109,  166, 
172-177, 183-186,  190, 
192-195,204,  224,  227, 
236,  242,  263, 271,278, 
283,  293,  296,  301  ; 
celestial  Adhvaryus, 
242,  271 ; physicians, 
174,  236;  lovers  of 
sweetness,  53  ; their 
Whip,  52,  53. 

Atharvan,  an  ancient  sage 
and  fire-priest,  69,  91, 
134. 

Atharvans,  179 ; spells, 
257. 

Atharva-veda,  7,  14, 15, 
23,  24,  39,  46,  52,  76, 
77,  80,  143,  183,  200, 
213,217,  220,  221,224, 
225,  256, 257, 260,261, 
289,  292,  293,  302,303. 
See  also  Index  J. 
Atichhandas,  redundant 
metre,  198,  244,  246; 
hypermfiter  brick,  137. 


Atigr^bya  Graha,  Addi-  Badari,  Jujube  fruit,  85. 
tional  or  Superiority  Bahishpavamana,  41. 
Libation,  65,  66.  Bibya,  Exterior,  224. 

Atithya,  solemn  reception  Bambh&ri,  one  of  the 

of  Soma,  34,  174.  guards  of  the  celestial 

Atmi,  the  Self,  305-307.  Soma,  31,  40. 
Atonement,  303.  Banyan,  Ficus  Indica,  83. 

Atri,  an  ancient  sage,  one  Baptism,  26. 
of  the  Seven  llishis,  Barlus,  sacrificial  grass, 
151,286.  9,10,13. 

Audgrabhana  oblations,  Barhishads,  a class  of 
Manes,  179, 180,  220. 
Ausija,  son  of  Usij,  mat-  Barley,39, 44, 85,173,185. 
ronymic  of  KakshlvSn,  Barter,  between  a wor 


20. 

Autumn,  15,  22,  24,  82, 
134,  198. 

Avabhritha,  a purifica- 
tory bath,  22,  63,  64, 
164, 176, 187. 


shipper  and  a God,  23. 

Base,  that  which  sup- 
ports or  holds  the  liba- 
tion, the  earth  or  a 
cup,  51. 

Bats.  221. 


AvakA.a  water^weedjllS,  Bauddhas,  304. 

148,  224.  Bay  Horses,  Indra’s,  23, 

Avak&sa  formulas,  56.  61,  65,  190,  192,  195, 

Avidy.l,  ignorance  of  the  2'0,230, 270,272, 282. 

Self,  307,  309.  Bdellium,  37. 

Avimukta.nameof  a holy  Beasts,  Lord  of.  See 
place  near  Benares,  3 10.  Pasupati. 

Awful,  the,  Winter,  15.  Beauty,  Goddess  of,  263. 
Axe,  43,  46.  Beer,  16. 

Ayaa,  iron  or  perhaps  Bhadra,  mid- August  to 
bronze,  234.  See  Iron,  mid -September,  56. 
Ayavas,  dark  half  - Bhaga,  a God,  80,  194 

months,  129,  130.  227, 269, 273, 284, 28 

Ayogh,  of  uncertain  Bhagavad-Gits;  310. 

meaning,  256.  Bh!lgavata-Pur4naj  260 

Ayu,Ayu8,  son  of  Urvarf,  263. 

34 ; Life,  a name  of  Bharadvlja,  an  ancien' 
Agni,  36, 108, 139,228;  Rishi,  12,  286. 
of  Varuna,  52.  Bharata.VasishthajlO^ 

Azure-necked,  Budra,  Bharata8,atribe,78, 10‘ 
, 140.  185. 

Bhdratl,  a Goddess  c 
BkDARAYANA,  reputed  Devotion,  191,  19- 

author  of  Vedanta  Phi-  197,200,203,237, 

losophy,  304,  242,  244,  247,  251. 


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC. 


321 


Bliftratia  (plural),  Bhil-  Bowls,  sacrificial,  49,  50,  Breathiugs,  6.  See  Vital 
rati,  BlAjSarasvatt,  244.  55.  Airs. 

Bhauviiyaiia,  122.  Bowls,  the.  Heaven  and  Breezes, calvessocalled,!. 
Bliava,  the  Existent,  Earth,  31,  50.  Bricks  of  the  Altar,  their 

Rudra,  142,  302.  Bowstring-maker.  256.  names,  96-139. 

Bheel,  257.  Bowyer,  256.  Bright  One,  the  Sun,  53. 

Bhilla,  257,  258.  Brahma,  the  Supreme  Brihad.ArAnyalm  Upani- 

BhrAja,  a guard  of  the  Self,  the  All,  the  Ah-  shad,  309. 

Celestial  Soma,  31.  solute.  263-265,  305-  Briha8pati,Lordof  Pray- 
Bhrigus,  ancient  fire-  310 , prayer,  114,  165,  er,  20,  27,  45,  75,  85, 

worshippers,  5, 18, 1 35,  202  ; sacred  lore,  183,  106, 111,117, 133, 153, 

157,  169,  179,  267.  21 5;  the  priesthood,  28,  154,171,187,224,225, 

Bhtlr,  bhuvah,  8v.\h,  255.  227,231,235,254,201, 

Earth,  Ether,  Sky',  BrahmA,  the  phenoraen.al  295,  298,  301  ; repre- 
a sacrificial  exclauia-  Creator,  171.  176,  197,  sents  priesthood,  72, 


tion.  See  Earth,  etc.  214, 265, 286, 305,  306.  73, 129;  his  portion,  72, 


Bhuva,anaraeofAgai,122  BiahmAkrishna,  a name  Brihat,  the  name  of  an 


Bird,  the  Sun,  18,  156,  of  the  Moon,  211,  212.  important  SAman,  55, 
249;  Agni  as  the  Sun,  Brahman  priest,  11,  32,  82,100,122,131,  183, 

157;  the  sacrificial  40,  41,  84,  159,  205,  165, 198, 254;  Lord  of 


horse,  211.  211,212,216,228,230;  the,  Indra,  55. 

Birds,  the  sacred  metres,  Brihaspati,  75  ; Indra,  Brihatl,  A Vedic  metre, 
12.  243.  '125,136,197,213,243, 


Birthlesa,  the,  121.  BrAhman(8),  20,  36,  40,  245;-brick8, 136. 

Black-buck,  representing  60,  78,  105,  111,  186,  Buffalo,  Agni,  159,  160, 
sacrifice,  0;  horn  of,  235,253,255, 259,262,  Buffaloe.s,  221.  • 

28  63^  263.  Bull,  offered  to  Indra, 185, 

Black-deer  skin,  4,  6, 14,  BrAhmaua,  the exegetical  201,  202,  204,  Agni  so 
27  186.  portion  of  the  Veda,  c.dled,  159;  theSun,17, 

Black-neck,  Agni,  211,  224.  18, 67, 156  ; Soma,  32, 

212.  BrahmapAchchham.il, 40,  51,269,270;  Indra,  57, 

Blacksmith,  143.  55.  58, 191,240,270;  Tvash- 

Black  Yajurveda,  188,  Brahmanaspati,  Wd  of  tar,  200;PrajApati,  61; 

258,  Prayer,  11,  20,  155,  an  important  altar 

Bloomfield, Prof.M.,  293.  278,  284,  287.  293.  brick,  118;  a King,  83. 

Blue  Jay.  225.  Brahmanicide,  303.  Bulls,  the  Maruts,  102. 

Boar,  223  ; Incarnation  Brahmaudana,  boiled  rice  Burglars,  98. 
of  Vishnu,  294.  or  porridge  distributed  Burnouf,  Prof.  E.,  263. 


Bow,  praise  of  the,  251  ; to  priests,  160. 
emblem  of  military  Brahmodyam,  an  enig-  Caldron,  292-299,  303. 
rank  81*  right  end  maticaldiscu88ion,211,  See  Gharma. 

Mitri’s  and  left  Varu-  214,  215.  Calf,  white,  representing 

na’s,  81  , used  at  the  Breath,  of  Gods,  to  which  the  Sun,  167 ; of  Night 
RAjaafiya  ceremony,  the  victim’s  breath  and  Morning,  Indra  as 
83^  goes,  47.  the  Sun,  240. 


21 


322 


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC. 


Calves,  driven  away  from  Chaturvim^  hymn,  128, 
their  mothers,  1;  of  129. 

Prisni,  Mists,  53,  54.  Chatashtoma,  129. 
Camels,  221.  Chatustrimsa  hymn,  128. 

Car,  to  Lrry  Ukhya  Agni,  Chnvala,  a sacrificial  pit, 
103,  104;  for  battle,  55,  63,  72,  2G9,  300. 


Car>builder,  256. 


Chhandasya  bricks,  122, 
125,  127,  134. 


Carpenter,  43.  143,  256.  Child-birth,  liturgy  of, 
Cart,  containing  the  sac-  64;  Goddess  connected 


rificial  elements,  3, 13,  vvith,  281. 

;^2.  Chipfs),  from  the  sacrifi- 

Castes,  four.  227, 232  262.  cial  stake,  45,  62;  of 
Castles  of  drought  de-  gold,  139,  157. 

Tnons, 240;  throe,  forms  Circuinambulatioo,  as  a 
of  Agni,  35.  sign  of  reverence,  41, 

Cat.  222.  295. 

C dtle  = rays  of  light,  Cleanser,  name  of  one  of 
281,  282.  side-hearths,  41 ; 

Centre  of  Earth,  the  one  of  the  priests  (the  ( 

altar,  216,  240.  Potar).  178.  ' 

Chaitra,  mid- March  to  Cleansing-bath,  188.  See  ' 
mid-April,  56,  117.  Avabhritha. 
Chakravakas,  221,  225.  Cleansing  Gotldess,  178. 
Cliaiiiasds,  cups  or  bowls,  Cloth,  given  as  a fee,  59. 

^•2  ^ Cloud,  homage  to>  208. 

Chambers's  Encyolopso-  Cock,  222  ; peg  so  called 
di.i,  293.  5- 

Chameleon,  223.  Couch-blower,  258. 

Ciiandrd,  female  Moon,  Colebrooke,  H T.,  255, 
the  Soma  cow,  30.  260,  263,  265. 

ChandrauiAs,  the  Moon,  Confession,  22, 

*264  301.  Consecration,  26,  27,  35, 

Cl.apya,  a sacrificial  ves-  42,  53,  176;  of  Agni 
ael,  184.  Kil^^  1^2  Vftk, 

Charakas,  followers  of  129. 

oneof  the  chief  schools  Consorts  of  Gods,  96, 

of  the  Black  Yajur  221,  233,  234. 

Veda,  258.  Constellations,  263. 

Chariot,  72,  83;-raciBg,  Consumption,  111,  112. 
72;— wheel  used  in  Copper,  214. 

sacrifice,  It  Corpse-consumer,  fire  of 

Charm,  magical,  38.  the  funeral  pile,  5. 
Charu,  a mess  of  boiled  Corpus PoeticumBoreale, 
rice,  etc.,  196L  15,  29,  262. 


Cosmic  Man.  See  Fu* 
rusha. 

Cosmological  specula- 
tions, 151,  152 
Courser,  dappled,  of  the 

Sun,  109. 

Cow,  given  in  exchange 
for  Soma,  29, 39 ; uui- 
ped,  bif)ed,  three-foot- 
ed, eight- footed,  64  , 
sacrificial,  04,215;  the 
altar,  249;  Tvash'tai 's 
gnardiau,120;  Cosmic, 

Aditi,  29,  120;  red, 
to  complete  the  thou- 
sand, 66 ; of  Plenty, 
109.  157  ; black,  re- 
presenting Night,l  57  ; 
Sarasvatt,  192,  200. 
Cowell,  Prof.  E.B.,  272. 
Cowherd,  256. 

> Cows,  sacrificial  names 
of,  2,  20,  297  ; at  the 
, R^jasCiya,  83  ; com- 

, mon  names  of,  297  ; 

Night  and  Morning, 
240,245;  rays  of  light, 
84, 109,  270;  of  Gods, 
12;  swearing  by,  48  ; 

, given  as  fee  to  pi  rests, 
59;  one  thousand  so 
given,  66 ; Procession 
of,  164 ; Heaven  and 
L Eiirth,  242 ; Great 

Ones,  6,  26;  Wealthy 
Ones,  45. 

5,  Creation,  questions  re- 
garding, 150. 

Creator,  Prajapati,  116, 
124,  129,  150,  151, 
266 ; Agni,  265. 
if  Creatures,  Lord  of,  209. 

Cuckoo,  223. 
e,  Cucumber,  24. 

Curlews,  two,  225. 


INDEX  OP  KAMFS,  ETC. 


323 


Currier,  257.  Day  and  Night,  48,  209,  Diti,  a Goddess,  the  op- 

Curse,  35,  47;  pronouuc-  214,  239,  263,  267.  positeof  Aditi,82, 164. 
ed  on  an  enemy,  51.  Daybreak,  homage  to, 209.  Dog,  killed  at  the  Hor.se- 

Days  and  Nights,  96, 1 30.  Sacrifice,  205. 
Dadhikra,  73,  213.  Death,  182,  288,  289,303.  Dog-leader,  256. 
Dadbikr&'i,  73,  74,  213.  Deliverers,  certain  altar  Doors  of  the  Sacrificial 
Dadhikravan,  73,  74,213,  bricks,  129.  Hall,  197,  200,  202, 

2<84.  Demin rgn.s,  265.  236,240,241,245,217, 

Dadhikii,  a purifying  Desireof  Men,  Agni,  193.  250. 

veise,  213.  Devaloka,  the  world  of  Dragon  of  the  Deep,  4 1 , 

Dadhyach,  son  of  Athar-  God.s,  307.  286. 

van,  91,  296  Devas,  Gods,  307  ; the  Dronakalasa,  a wooden 

Daksha,  aCieativePower,  organs  of  sense,  305.  Soma  reservoir,  56, 

one  of  the  Adityas,  Devasus,  Quickening  66,  176. 

227,  261,  286,  287.  Gods,  78.  Drop,  Soma,  120;  Indn, 

Dakshdyanas,  deceudants  Devotion,  Goddes.sof.  30.  meaningAgui,168 ; tbe 

of  Dnk&ha,  266.  Dewy  Season.  Dews,  15,  Sun,  114, 115 ; Earth’s 

JJakeliin/l,  priests’  gucr-  82,  139,  199.  life-sustaining  m.ns 

don,  28,  30,  230.  Dlidtar,  the  Ordaiuer,  62,  tore,  7;— oblation,  55, 

Dakshinagni,  southern  161, 225,  295.  Drummer,  258. 

fire  and  fireplace,  1,  Dhayy.1,  name  of  an  ad-  Drum(s),  73,  253,  254. 

17,  21,  96.  ditional  verf>e,  175.  Durv5  grass,  116,  l^nck, 

D/ikshinahoma,  oblation  Dhisban.ls,  Goddesses  of  116,117. 

in  the  southern  fire, 58.  Wealth,  96,  237.  Dutt,  Mr.  R.  Ch  , 255 

Dames,  Consorts  of  the  Dhishnjas,  side-alt.irs,  Dv^dasilha,  a twelve-day 
Gods,  61,  96,  233.  37,  40, 41.  ceremony,  65. 

Dance,  25§.  Dhvuva  Giah.a,  name  of  DvApara,  name  of  a die, 

Dancer,  public,  256.  a libation,  55,  164.  258. 

Dflniis,  a class  of  fiends,  Dliruvd,  one  of  the  ^acri-  Dvavimsa,  a hymn,  12S. 

170.  ficiai  spoous  or  ladles,  Dvipad,  dimeter,  two 

Darbha  grass,  2,  29,  38,  10,11,29.  footed  metre,  244,215, 

39,85,169,205.  Dice,  personified,  256  ; Dvipad'i,  the  snme,  lO^, 
Darvi,  name  of  a saciifi-  names  of  five,  258;  name  of  an  altar  brick, 

cial  ladle.  used  at  consecration  of  137. 

Dasapeya  libations,  85.  a King,  84,  85;  dicing,  Dvita,  Secundus,  said  to 
Diigas,  aborigines,  277.  283.  be  Trita’s  brother,  7. 

Dasyus,  hostile  savages,  Diffusive  breath,  that  Dvivedaganga,  a Com 
92.  which  pervades  the  mentator,  xir. 

Dawn,  109,  134,  149,  body,  51.  Dviynj us  brick,  117. 

191,193,278,284.  DikshA,  Consecration,  35,  Dwarf  incarnation  of 
Dawns,  182,  288,  289,  42,174,  302.  Vishnu,  254. 

303 ; Morning  and  Disposer,  Speech,  132,  Dyaus,  Heaven,  27,  33, 
Night,  197,  200,  202,  133;  a priest,  194.  100-102,  196,  231. 

236,  247.  Dipy&s,  Regional  bricks,  Dyaus  hpitft,  Father 

Day,  299.  126.  Heaven,  11. 


324 


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  BTC. 


Dyer,  257.  Enclosiag-sticks,  9,  12,  Fervour,  Austerity,  Reli^ 

Dyutina,  sou  of  the  Ma-  262.  gious  Zeal,  26,27,31, 

ruts,  40.  Encompa88er,tlie,Varuna  85,  42, 

the  Starry  Heaven,  9 ; Ficus  Iiidica,  83;— lleli* 
Eagle,  221,  222;  the  Vritra,  the  cloud-do-  giosa,  83,  288. 

Sun,  278  ;— shape,  tho  men,  4.  Fig  tree.  Holy,  110. 

altar,  87,  100,  239.  Etasa,  one  of  tho  Snn’s  Filter,  65. 

Earth,  7, 11,12, 112, 116,  horses,  149.  Finisher,  tho.  Death, 803. 

208,  209,211,  214, 271,  Eunuch,  81,  259.  Fire, domestic,  5;  sacri- 

286,290,292,294,301;  Evening  Soma  Pressing,  fichil,  5;  funeral,  5; 
Consort  of,  n ; Mother,  60.  Solar,  identi  fieri  with 

11,  75,  97,  198,  227  ; Ewe,  120.  Brahma,  307;  kindling 

Earth  and  Heaven,  the  Evorcisin,  77.  of,  281  kimlling 

parents,  251.  SeeHea-  E.'cpi.ition  Ceremonios,  priest,  8,  59; — drill, 

ven  and  Earth.  61,  68.  34,  282;— poker  or 


Earth  ! , a sacrificial  ex- 
clamation, 187,  188. 

Earth  ! Ether  ! Sky  ’ , 
a sacrificial  formula, 
17,21,  68,211. 

Egg,  the  Mundane,  261. 

Eggeling,  Professor  J.,  32, 
37,  38,  40,  47,  50,  63, 
67,80,81,81,85,87.97, 
101,108,116,124,129, 
138,1  10,141,144,14.5, 
150,155,156,  166-168, 
170, 171,  202,  302. 

Eight-footed,  the  ritual 
name  of  a cow  in  calf, 


Faith,  176. 

Falcon,  bringer  of  Sotna, 
34,  49  ; shape  of  the 
altar,  87. 

Fast,  176  -food,  28;— 
vow,  189. 

Father,  the  Univeraal, 
Dyaus,  Heaven,  Sky, 
11,74,118,  179,  184, 
217;  thePiimcval,156; 
the  Creator,  152. 

Fathers,  Manes,  Spirits 
of  deceased  ancestoi's, 
10,  15,  23,  39,  44,  70, 


shovel,  5. 

Fire-altar,  97,  121,  239, 
See  Altar. 

Fire-pan,  94-97,  lOl,  102, 
104, 107,  119, 120 
making  of  the,  95 ; 
fumigating,  95  ; bak- 
ing, 96  ; represents 
Agiii  as  the  Sun,  100. 

Fires,  11 7. 

Firmament,  208,  209, 
222,  231,  30C 

First  year  of  the  five- 
year  Cycle,  257. 

Fish  incarnation  of  Vish- 


64. 

Ekadhanas,  pitchers  used 
in  sacrifice,  35, 

Ekadhanavid,  a title  of 
Iiidra,  35. 

Ekata,  Primus,  said  to  be 
a brother  of  Trita,  7. 

Ekatriinsa,  name  of  a 
hymn,  128. 

Ekavirnsa,  a hymn,  123, 
128,  129,  198,  254. 

Elephant,  221;- keeper, 
256. 

Embryo,  development  of, 
symbolized,  81. 


105,130,177,182,220,  nu,  207. 
227,253,266,276,288,  Fisherman,  256,  257. 
290,  298,  299, 307  ; the  Fi^h-veuder,  257.  , 
friends,  23  ; grades  of,  Five,  the,  tho  fingers,  8 ; 
179,  181  ; give  riches,  races,  232;  tribes,! 03, 
181;  have  power  over  —year  cyde,  257. 
seasons,  15 ; bestow  Five  fold  gift,  278;  life, 
children,  15;  punish  227,228;  man,  1/0, 

sin,  181 ; their  raiment,  227,  228;  river,  281. 

I5_  Flawless  hand.  See  Hand- 

Favour,  divine.  Sec  Ann-  Strainer,  the  winO, 
niati.  4,  8. 

Fences = enclosing  sticks,  Flies,  oblation  to,  224. 

I *2^  Floods,  sacrificial  water- > 

Fencing- sticks,  three,  9.  26. 


ISPEX  OF  names,  Etc. 


325 


Phite  player,  258. 

Fore-offerings,  175  ; -re- 
gioi  a,  47. 

Forest  file  guard,  258. 

Forest,  Ood,  222,  224  ; — 
lord,  tall  tree,  sacrifi- 
cial stake,  43,  211,245; 
drum,  73  ; fires  in  tlie, 
258. 

Foitntie,  263;  oblation 
to  108. 

Foundations,  liveaniinalf- 
built  iutx),  118. 

Four  castes,  262. 

Fourth  Aditya,  Indra,60 

Freedom,  the,  i.  e m(»st 
independent,  Agui,269, 

Friend,  the,  Mitra,  235. 

Frog,  148,  149. 

Fruitage,  82. 

Full  Moon  sacrifice,  1,3,12. 

Funeial  ceremonies,  for- 
mulas for,  288  — 290. 

Furrow,  jiersonified,  lu9 ; 
drawu  on  each  side  of 
the  altar,  109. 


Oanra,  Gaur,  BosOaurus, 
121,160,221,  222;^ 
Y.ijha,  sacrifice,  160. 
Gavamayana,  a great  sa- 
ciifici.il  Ses.siou,  66.67, 
168. 

ja\aya,BosG.ivaeus  121. 
J.ivishthiia,  A Vedic 
Ul.^hl,  13l>. 

G.tyal,  a species  of  wild 
o.x,  121,  221 

lay.itia,  composed  in 
G.ty.itrl  metre,  88,100, 
122. 

Gly.itii,  one  of  the  chief 
Vedic  metres,  7,  14, 
30,  34,81,95,  122,125, 
183,  197,  211,213,243, 
24."),  2.54,  299  ; connec- 
t<Hl  with  cattle,  1 25  ; 
use<l  at  morning,  30  ; 
— the,  par  rxccllencey 
see  S Ivitrl, 

Genii,  256. 

Gharma,  a libation  of 
heated  milk,  and  the 
cablron  in  which  it  is 


to  Indra,  218;  to  Pii- 
shall,  248;  to  V.'iyii, 
237  ; sprung  from 

I’l.ijilpati’.s  head, 
121  ; pre.sent  at 

sacrifice,  88,  89,  93  ; 
represents  Agni,  120; 
ippresents  V'jk,  120, 
female,  216;  used  at 
pu  I chase  of  Soma,  31, 
milk  of,  96;  goat’s 
li.iir=i  light,  91;  used 
in  sacrifice,  94;  goat 
fikin,  75;  goats  and 
sheep,  22, 

Goatherd,  256, 

Goddesses,  96,234:  sa- 
crilici.il  wuter.s,  26. 

Gods, mind-born,  28;  not 
originally  iiiiinortal, 
121 ; tlieir  number,  51, 
267, 285;  thirty-three, 
187,190,  285;  wives  of 
the,  see  Consol  ts, 
Dames. 

Gold,  identified  wijli 
light,  29;  symbol  of 


Gall -heat,  149. 

Gambler,  256,  258,  259. 

Gaiidharva,  the,  the  Sun, 
71,88,152,  166,  167, 
255,  205  ; Vi.svavasu, 
9,  248. 

Giindharvas,  a class  of 
Celestial  beings  connec- 
ted with  light,  9,  72, 
112,  144,  227,  2.56. 

O.irgatrirAtrl,  a three 
day  festival,  66. 

G.lrhapatya,  the  western 
fire-place,  1,  2,  14,  18, 
19,  41,83,108,138,174; 
formulas  for  construct- 
ing the,  105, 107;  a title 
of  Agni,  21. 


heated,  68,  164,  174, 
192,  269,  292,  293,297 
—301,  303. 

Olirita(m),  ghi,  claiified 
butter,  16  ; hymn  in 
praise  of,  159 — 161. 

Ghritaelii,  the  name  of 
an  Apsaras,  134. 

Girdle  of  sacrificer,  27; 
for  the  saciificlal  horse, 
205. 

Giriprasidavarman,  Raj.i, 
six. 

Girls,  speech  of,  24. 

GiiAs,  Divine  Dames.  96. 

Goat,  sacred  to  Agni,  184, 
243  ; offereil  to  the 
Asvins,  200,  202,  204  ; 


the  Sun,  100,  205  ; 
the  Sun,  135;  olfering 
with,  29;  amulet, 236; 
disc  with  21  knobs, 
100, 101;  chipsof,  149, 
157;  a thousand  chips 
used  at  consecration  of 

altaD,  139,  157;  plate 
of,  100,  108,  114,  295; 
pieces,  31;  discs,  84; 
chain,  20-5  ; castles 
35;  nceilles,  218,214; 
given  as  fee,  59;  put 
on  the  King’s  head  and 
under  his  foot,  82 ; 
put  in  the  track  of  the 
Soma  cart,  37 ; charm 
against  lightning,  180; 


326 


index  of  Kames,  etc. 


represents  purity  and  H 
immortality,  119  ; H 
splinter  put  in  month,  H 
nostrils,  eyes  and  ear 
of  dead  victims,  119.  H 
Gold-eyed,  Savitar,  283.  H 
Gold-Germ,  114.  See  h 
Hiranyagarbha. 

Golden  figure  of  a man, 
symbol  of  Praj3,pati,  11 
Agfhl,  the  Sacrihcer, 
114,  116,119;-Gbrm, 
See  Hirapyagarbha.  I 
Goldenhanded, Sivitar,  F; 

6,  31,  283  ; -tongued, 
S.witar,  275;  horns,  1 
the  mane  of  the  sacri- 
ficial horse,  249.  1 

Goldsmith,  258. 

Gomrigu,a  wild  bull, 211,  1 
218.  1 

Good,  the,  Vayu,  295. 
Good  works,  rewarded, 
169.  ^ 

Gotama,  a great  Rishi,286. 

Grace,  divine,  254.  See 
Auumati. 

Graha,  a cup  of  Soma, 
164,  176, 187. 

Grahagrahana,  drawing 
of  cups  of  Soma,  51. 
Grass,  barhis  or  altar- 
oovering,  13,  202,  241, 
242,  245,  247. 
Grass-bunch,  12.  See 
Piastara. 

Grassmann,  Prof.  H.,102, 
156, 180,  263. 
GiAvastut,  an  assistant 
priest,  280. 

Guerdon,  priest’s  fee,  29, 
30,  59,  176. 

Guest,  the,  Agni,  17,102, 
103 ; Soma,  34. 
Guggulu,  bdellium,  37. 


Hair,  braided,  145. 

Half- Indraoblations, 163. 
Half-months,  209,  214, 
239. 

Half-years,  235.  H 

HSll-door  fire,  150.  H 

H.itnsa,  swan,  the  Sun  F 
that  floats  through 
heaven,  84,  102, 183.  F 
Hand, flawles.-!, with  closed  F 
fingers  that  let  no  F 
grain  fill  through, 5, 6.  F 

. Hare  215. 

Haris, Indra’s  Bay  Steeds, 
61. 

Harisvlmin,  a commen-  F 
tator. 

Hdriyojana  Graha,  a liba- 
tion to Indra,  6 1,  161. 

, Harlot,  253,  2.59. 

Hasta,  one  of  the  guards 
of  the  celestial  Soma,  1 
, 31. 

Haug,  Prof.  M.,  31,  123,  1 

1.  267,  302,  303.  1 

e HaviidliAua,  the  store  j 

where  the  saciificial 
, elements  ate  kept,  32, 
37,  66,  63,  242. 
g H.ivis,  sacnfici  d food,  13, 
34. 

r-  Havishkrit,  oblation-pre- 
[,  parer,  4,  5. 

Hawk,  173.  See  Falcon. 
‘6  Heaven,  personified,  12, 
102  ; feminine,  271  I 

2,  home  of  the  pious, 212; 
stages  of,  157;  a sacri- 

nt  ficial  exclamation  308; 

Father,  11.  See  Father 
>9,  Heaven. 

Heavens  and  Earth,  11, 
12,  27.  35  60,  61,  74,  81, 

103,  117,  118,  124, 
151,  224,  225,  263, 


265,  269.  270,  272, 
275,  298,  303  ; build- 
ing of,  151 ; separation 
of,  285. 

Hell,  7,  255. 

Herbs,  209.  See  Plants. 
Flerdsmau,  the,  the  Sun, 
296. 

Heron,  222. 

Hide-dre.sser,  257. 

: High  Altar.  87,  114. 
Hillcbrandt,  Pi  of.  A , 31, 
71,79,  89,  103,  159, 

, 172,230,238,255,302, 

303. 

Hiranyagarbha,  Gold 
Get  m,  Source  of  Gold- 
en Light,  the  Sun  ideu 
tified  with  PrajApati 
114,  210,  226,  264, 
301,  306,  307. 

, Hiranyavati  Ahuti,  Ob- 
lation with  Gold,  29. 

, Homer,  252. 

Homicide,  255. 

D Honey,  5,  148,  150,  170, 
,1  19.5 lovers,  the  As- 

:,  viiis,  53. 

Horn  of  black-buck.  Set 
Black-buck. 

Horns  of  Agni,  160. 

;•  Hoise,  used  in  battle 
251  ; present  at  sacn 
j.  fice.  88-90  ll3;giviu 

>,  as  a fee,  59  ; sprun] 

[ I from  the  sea  of  an 
2;  as  the  Sun,  90,  212 

i-  sacrificial,  205—207 

3;  211  seqq  ; identifiei 

er  with  the  Sun,  212, 24f 
eulogy  of  the,  228, 22i 
.1,  Hordes,  of  the  Vajapc} 
!1,  chariot,  72 

;4,  Horse  Sacrifice,  168,  20; 

53,  See  A?vamedha. 


INDEX  OP  names,  etc. 


Hotar,  saciificing  or  iu-  Idivatsara,  name  of  a ludra-graina,  175,  l'^4, 
Yoking  priest,  11,  92,  year  of  the  five  year  199, 

190,  199—202,  210,  cycle,  239,  257.  Imlranl,  Indra’s  ConsM»rt 

230,  240;  divine,  Agui,  Idvatsara,  another  year  225,  297, 

199,  217,  240  ; Hotar’a  of  the  same, 239,  257.  Indii, Soma, Gl,  180.185, 

hearth,  40;  hi»cup,49.  Iguana,  222.  191,  275;  bihCousortH 

Hotars,  seven,  230  ; two  Illusion,  phenomenal  na-  the  \saters,  61. 
celestial,  191,  193, 197,  tuie,  216.  Indus,  09, 272,  2S1,  2S2, 

200,  203,  204,  236,  Immolator,  191,  200 ; 300. 

240,  242,  214,  245,247,  Vauaspati,  241,  244  ; Inlimte  Nature,  Aditi, 
251.  A^ni,  237.  227,  '' 

House,  addressed  by  the  Immortal,  originally  only  IntelU‘Ct,theiIuon.  125. 
householder  on  leaving  Agui. and  the  other  Gods  Intelligence,  divinr, 

and  returning,  21,  through  him,  265.  28, 

22.  Immortality,  307.  Invincible  brick, the  fust 

House  prieat,  oftheGods,  ludra,  2,  ti,  10,  11,  18,  laid,  96 
187.  See  Purohita.  1-33,  171,  175-177,  Invitiug-prayers,  175, 

Human  Sacrifice,  255.  See  183,189,191,192,195,  190,  196,  2oo  207, 

Purushamedha.  197-204,  21.5.  221,  226. 

Hundred,  autumns,  227,  225  ; his  mother,  275;  Iron,  25,  108,  214.  214 

286,289,  292;  winters  King  of  Gods,  78;  the  249  ; castle,  35 

14,  19;  years,  178  ; Sun,  270,  272 ; God  <>f  is,  the  Loid,  the  Su 

Powers,  Lord  of, Indra,  Battles,  36,  152— 154,  preme  Sell,  »o4 
23,200,231,232,279;  Goad  Deliveier,  .“o.  Isaiah,  227.  2ls6 

Vauaspati.  241,  244  ; 17‘2,  173.  184,  190,192,  Isiua,  ,i  title  of  iiuOra 

Hundred  Rudras,  201.  194,195,  2ol,  2-i2,  221.  3o2. 

Hundred-headed,  Agui  201  ; slayer  of  Vritia,  Upanidiad;  I^av  .-ly 
as  Rudra,  157.  4,  ,58,  81,  170,  190,  195.  am ; I'oi.anidi.ad.  Hook 

Husband-finder,  Rudra,  27o  ; Lord  of  Sj.eech  XL  of  the  Whito  Va 

24;  usually  Ary. iman,  67  ; V svak.iriuan,  67,  juivela,  3U8 

24,  Maiutv.in,  57,  58  ; I^^h,  the  name  of  an  aj 

Hyena,  223.  sprung  fimn  the  union  tumn  mouth,  .56. 

Hypermeter  brick,  137.  of  Y..jfia  and  Dakshi-  Isha,  the  sanw,  127, 

n i (Sacrifice  .m<l  Guer-  209. 

Ice,  226,  donl,  28;  his  re-eie.i- 

Ibhaeuraon,  221.  tiou,  184,  1«5  ; = the  J-vckal,  222 

IdA,  Nourishment  per-  Sacriticer,  31  ; repie-  Jagatf,  one  of  tlie  three 

ftonifieil,  a Goddess  of  sents  the  Rajanyas,  chief  Vedic  metre.. 

Sacrifice,  30,  109, 191,  73  ^ '197, 211, 213,  244/245, 

19.3,  197,  200,  203,  ludia-Agni,  Indr-Agni,  254;— biicks,  l3o. 

237!  241,  242,  244,  12,  18,  55,  107,  117,  Jainadagni,agie.dRibhi, 

247,  250,  281 ; symbo-  198,  205,  225,  254  ; 25,  123,  286 

licalnameofthesacri-  Biiha^pati,  55  225 Jatavedas,  Knower  of 
fieial  cow,  20,  30,  66,  Vanina.  52.  55  ;-Va-  Beings,  Agni,  17,  89, 

297  ; son  of,  Agni,28L  yu,  52  Vishnu,  55.  102,  106,  113,  118, 


328 


Index  oj*  nameIs,  etc. 


136,161,169,178,182,  Kapardin,  having  coiled  IvirUa,  a savage,  wlio 
237, 247,  250,  209,281  and  braided  hair,  a lives  by  hunting,  257, 

290.  title  of  Hudra,  HI*  258. 

JAv.lla  Upanishad,  310.  Kapinjala,  the  heathcock  Knife,  razor,  26 ; slaugh- 
Jester,  268.  or  francolin,  220,  223,  tering,  46. 

Jesus,  Logia  of,  200.  224.  Kratn,  one  of  the  Seven 

Jeweller,  256.  Karalt,  a tongue  or  flame  ftishia,  151. 

Jibananda  Vidydsagara,  of  Agni,  158.  Kratustball,  the  allego- 

Pandit,  xix.  Karka,  a Commentator  ,xix.  rical  name  of  on  Ap 

Jones,  Sir  W.,  21,  308.  Karma,  religious  work,  saras,  133. 

JuhO,  one  of  the  sacri-  304,307-309.  Kravydd,  Raw-flosh-eator, 

ficial  spoons,  10*13,  29.  K:\rshinarya  tree,  115.  Agni  of  the  funeral  pile, 

Jujube,  a tree  and  its  Kartika,  inld-October  to  290. 

fruit,  85,  173,  175,  mid-November,  23,56.  Krimuka  wood,  97. 

184,  185,  199.  Kdsi,  310.  Kpsanu,  a guard  of  the 

Jumbaka,  a Vedic  name  Kasyapa,  an  ancient  Ri-  celestial  Soma,  31,41. 

of  Varuna,  226.  shi,  2.5,  254,  286.  Krishna  Yajurveda,  xvii. 

Jupiter,  11.  Katha  iTpanish.vd,  310.  Krita,  the  name  of  a die, 

Jyaislitha,  May  15  to  Kdty.lyaua,  xix.  258. 

June  15,  60.  Kavya,  a cla.''S  of  Manes,  Kshatra, royalty,  the  no- 

and  the  offerings  made  bility,  73,  255. 

Ka,  Who  ’ Prajilpati,  3,  to  them.  181  vahi-  Kshatnya,  a man  jff  the 

14,56,  92,  112,  114,  na,  Agni  as  carrier  of  princely  order,  80,  99, 

186,  207,  210,  214,  these  oblations,  181.  172. 

220,  226,  237,  2C4.  Kilvy.a,  name  of  a metre,  Kshatriyd,  a woman  of 
Kakshtvun,  a Hishi,  20.  131.  the  same  rank,  255, 

Kakup,  a Vedic  metre,  Khadira,  the  tree  Acacia  268. 

125,  131,  136,  198,  Catechu.  43, 65,  84.  Kshurabhraja,  Bright 

213,214,246.  Kilala,  a sweet  beverage,  Razor,  the  Snn,  tl»e 

KcUi,  the  name  of  a ton-  16,  22,  193,  256.  fanciful  name  of  a 

gue  or  flame  of  Agni,  Kimpurusha,  monkey,  metre,  131. 

158.  120.  Kubhil,  the  name  of  a 

Kalpa,  ceremonial,  160  ; Kindler,  53.  river,  300. 

Success  Libation,  lu5;  Knidlers-hip,  11.  Knnarn,  a demon,  170 

a day  of  Brahma,  Kiudling-stick(s)9  11.17,  Kunis,  a northern  people, 
432000,000  year.s,  265.  63,  61,  99.  240,  262;—  78. 

Kdma,  the  Gixl  of  Love,  verses,  175,  235.  Kiisa  grass,  used  for  sa- 

223,255.  King,  75,  187  ; Soma, 75,  ciiticial  purposes,  2, 

.Kampila,aplace  in  North  177  ; Vanina,  63  ; In-  26, 34, 43, 4i),  109, 1 14, 
India,  212.  aiiguration  of  a,  77;  149,150. 

Kanva,  a famous  Vedic  consecration  of  a,  79,  KOshmas,  a word  of  un- 
Rishi,  157.  81,  84.  known  meaning,  225. 

Kaiwa,  the  name  of  a Kingdom-supporting  Li- 
recension  of  the  White  bations,  I OG.  Ladies,  celestial,  deities 

Y..juiveda  Sainhitd,  Kingdiip,  82.  of  sacred  metres,  96. 


t:^DEX  OP  naWks,  etc. 


329 


Ladleg,  aacrifiolal,  10.  Long  lifo,  prayer  for.  See  Malnlvfra,  the  chief  sac- 
Llja,  parched  grain,! 72.  Hundred  winters.  rilicial  caldron,  292 — 

Lakshmi,  Foitune,  263.  Lotus,  16,  91,  114;  = akj%  299,301.  Sec  Ghanna, 
Lannian,  Prof.,  182.  91  ; leaf  used  in  a Mahivratiya  Graha,  66. 

Lasaen,  Prof.,  282.  aolemn  rite,  91,  92,  Muhendra,  Great  India, 

Law,  the  order  of  the  114  = 9ky,  134.  58,220,232. 

universe,  20,  62,  74,  Ludwig,  Prof.  A.,  31,  Mahendra  Graha,  68. 
148,158,166,231,  253;  102. 150, 151,  153,166,  Mahidhara,  the  great 

saciiftce,  10,  20,  41,  84,  l59,  180,  2.30,  239,  Commentator  on  the 

92,  118,  182,  183,  197,  260,  263,  282,  2S6.  W.  Yajnrveda,  passim. 

205;  Agni,  93,  102.  Lunar  MansioiiH,  Aste-  Maliiman  libationa,  210, 
Law-maint:uner(s),  li'iiis,  72,  164.  209.  • 217. 

tra  and  Varuna,  81;  Lustrous.  Libati-iiie,  167.  Maina.abird  likea  star- 
Vaiuna,  84.  Lute-player,  268.  -ling,  221,  222. 

Lead,  used  as  a charm,  Main.lla,  a netter  of  fish, 

183  ; used,  syinboliz-  Ma,  fanciful  name  of  a 257, 
ing  the  head  of  Na-  inetie,  127.  Maitr.lvaruna,  the  Ho- 

muchi,  at  the  Conso-  Macdonell,  Prof.  A.,7, 15,  tar’s  first  assistant,  49, 
cration  of  a King,  82  ; 41,  184,233,  280,286.  55,  80,  280. 

needles  of,  213,  214.  Madluva,  name  of  a Mai  tra  Varuna  Gtaha, 
Leper,  258.  Spiingnumth,  56, 117,  104. 

Life,  natural  duration  of  209,  Makha,  a mythical  being, 

human,  227.  Madliu, honey, sweetness,  95.293,295. 

Lightning,  224,  292,302.  the  name  of  a month,  Male,  or  Spirit,  the  Pre* 
Ijine,  to  keep  off  fiends,  56,  117,  209.  siding,  261. 

1.5;  drawn  with  a Madhuvidya,  esoteric  lore  Malimlucha,an.amoof  the 
black-bjuck’s  horn,  28  of  Soma,  296.  intercalary  month, 209. 

Lines,  of  altar  and  nit,  Madiiyandina-Savana.ihc  Man,  the  Cosmic.  See 
36  ; on  three  sides  of  Midday  Soma  Pressing,  Puiusha. 
idtai',  7 ; round  the  57.  Milu.a,  a Hishi,  28.5. 

luiupof  clay  ie|)reseiit-  M'ulhy.andina,  xviii.  Manas,  mind,  138  30.5. 
ing  Agui,  90  ; furrows  Magadha,  South  Lihar,  M ind:liya,a  Vedicliard, 
pbiuglied  on  each  side  2.55.  285. 

of  the  altar,  109.  Magadha,  a professional  Manes,  Spirits  of  decc.as* 

Li(*n,  125,  173,  185;  hair  bard,  25.5,  259.  ed  anc-  stors,  15,  231, 

f»f,  mixed  .vith  Sura,  M.l.'lia,  mid-January  to  288,  307,  308. 

173;  Indr.a,  201.  mid-February,  56.  Manly-soul«-d,  or  Friend 

Liones-s  223  ; the  High  Maghavan,  Lord  of  of  Man.  Varuna,  Pra- 

Altar,  36.  Ilounty,  India,  192  jaiijiti  or  Dy.aus,  102. 

Lofty  Point,  the  zenith,  Mahadeva,  Great  God,  Mann,  Mr.  John,  xvhi. 

126,  133.  Kudra,  302.  Manning,  Mrs.,  xviii. 

Lokainpriuds,  space  fill-  MalKliwmnts,  certain  R.  Manthin,  Soma  juice 
ing  bricks,  107,  139.  V.  verses,  213.  wnxt‘^1  with  meal,  54. 

Long-hail  ed  man,  eu-  Mahavaisvadeva  Graha,  56,  123  ; the  mr>on, 

uuch,  81.  01,  164.  53, 56, 69;  Graha,  164. 


330 


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC. 


W anti  a,  160. 

Manu,  represtjntative 
Man,  97,  295. 

Jlare  (bearer)  of  earth, 
•295. 

Mares  of  the  Maruts, 
12,  230. 

Margasirsba,  Mid-Novem- 
ber to  Mid-December, 
56. 

Marichi,  one  of  the  Seven 
liishis  151,  158.  • 

Miirj.iliya,  a place  where 
sacrificial  vessels  are 
cleansed,  41. 

Matka,  the  name  of  a 
fiend,  54. 

II  ir.ita  Uktha,  a litany 
to  the  Maruts,  133. 

M.iruts,  Stoim-Gods,  12, 
13,  22,  57,  64,  83,  102, 
1U7,  148,  153,  154,166 
167,  189,  191,197,198 
209,  214.  220,225.227 
228,  230,233,  251,  253- 
255,  268,  270,  271,273 
276,  279-281,  285. 
2S7,  301,  302  ; thiee 
or  nine  tro(»ps  of,  7, 
158  ; seven  rice-cakes 
ofiered  to,  158  ; their 
names  or  titles,  158, 
159,  .302;  clans,  159; 
singers  of  hymns  so 
called,  189,  295. 

Marutvan,  a title  of  In- 
dia, 57,  58. 

Maiutvatiya  Graha,  57, 
58,  161,  268  Uktha, 
133. 

M&sara,  a peculiar  decoc- 
tion, 172,  174,  183, 
187,  193,  199-201. 

Mat  of  the  Sadas  or 
Priests'  Shed,  40. 


Mata,  representing,  Hea- 
ven and  Earth,  100, 
108. 

Matai  isvan,Viiyu,  Wind, 
Air,  2,  92,  305  ; 

Mdtariavan’s  caldion, 
mid-air,  2. 

Mati,  Thought,  Devo- 
tion, 223. 

Matioii,  13;.  See  Sacrifi- 
cei’.i  Wife. 

Matron's  Hall,  32,  l74. 

Matron-',  celestial.  Con- 
sorts of  Vanina,  104; 
deities  of  the  stars,  96. 

Miiyil,  plieiiomeual  Na- 
ture, 216 

Mayii,  M'lyu,  perhaps  a 
monkey.  222. 

Mtdha,  a Ilishi,  278. 

Medi.itor,  Agin,  196. 

Menakii,  an  Ap'.ua.s,134. 

Merchant,  the  God  who 
gives  boons  in  return 
for  .sacrifice,  India, 23 , 
Rudia,  14-2. 

Metheglin,  16. 

Metre  biicks,  127,  134. 

Metres,  30,  48,  127  ; sn- 
pernatuial  poweis  at- 
tributed to,  14  ; class- 
ed by  syllables,  76,  77; 
f.moiful  names  of.  127 ; 
131  ; called  birds.  12. 

Miciuritiou,  formula  for, 
28. 

Mid-day  Soma  Pres-iing, 
57. 

Milch-cow  = wealth  in 
cattle,  52. 

Milch-kine.  See  Cow.s. 

M>lk=  wealth,  120. 

Milker  at  sacrifice,  may 
be  any  one  above  the 
rauk  of  a Sddra,  2. 


Milton,  35,  310. 

Mind,  27,  28,  122,  305,  j 
307;  of  Gods, 47;  Pia- 
jdpati,  131. 

Minstrel,  259. 

Mist  a,  Vilchaspati  309. 

Mithra,  9. 

Mitra,  the  Friend,  iden- 
tified with  the  Sun, 

9,  29,78,  04,  225,  228. 
235,  242.2.53,268.269, 
276  287,  -201,  300- 
302;  God  of  Day,  272, 
Rita,  Right,  Tuith,  52 

Mitr;l-Vai  u ,ia,  a dual 
deity  9,  52,  55,  196 
197,  225,  254,  267  , 
predecessoi  s,  us  Kings, 
of  India,  79,  81 ; Law- 
maintdineis,  81 ; Sov- 
ran Lords,  82;  Ram 
Gods,  12,  106 

Mitia,  Balm  Pramadil 
Drisa,  308. 

Muck -man,  a piippei 
used  in  sacrifice,  89, 
120,121  , 

M'dles,  said  to  mean 
Wateis,  125 

Monkey,  221,  222. 

Mvmotlieism.  285 

Month,  the  intercalary, 
209,  239. 

Months,  209,  214,’  28-3. 
238;  technical  names 
of,  56,  74,  209;  fanciful 
ii.iinesof,  165;  mani- 
festations of  Agui,  165 

Moon,  103. 167, 209-211. 
216,  230,  301;  Soma, 
252;  spots  in  the,  8; 
Sacrifice  at  New  and 
Full,  1-13;  waxiugand 
waning  sVaruna  and 
Mitra. 


INDEX  OF  Names,  etc. 


331 


Morning  Soma  Pressing,  Nagnahu,  a root  used  as  Nigada,  loud  recitation, 
49,  65.  yeast,  174,  198,  199.  289. 

Morning  and  Night,  241,  Ndkasadas,  Sky-seated  Night,  18,  19,  191,  283, 
245.  See  Night  and  bricks,  132,  133.  299. 

Dawn,  Night  and  Name  Libations^  165.  Nightand  DawuorMorn- 

Morning.  Namachi,  a certain  Asu-  ing,  100,157, 191, 193, 

Mortar,  of  wood,  for  ra,  86,  177,  182,  193,  240,244,251,273. 

pounding  grain,  4,  66 ; 194;  his  head  repre-  NigrAbhyil,  water  for 

mortars, mortar-shaped  sented  by  a piece  of  sprinkling  Soma  plants, 

cups,  177.  lead,  82.  49,  50,  67 

Mother,  the  Earth,  11,  Naraka,  hell,  7.  Nilagrlva,  Bhie-necked, 

74,  75,  84,  97,  179;  Narandisha,  of  uncertain  lludra,  143. 
each  of  the  quarters  of  moaning,  69.  Niiriti.eartlj  in  her  1"W- 

the  sky,  60.  NarAsainsa,  the  Praise  or  est  depth,  /7,  10ft;  the 

Mothers,  the  Waters,  26,  Desire  of  Men,  Agni,  GoddessofDestruction, 

81;  Plants,  110.  69,  181,  190,  193,  199,  107, 108,  224,225,  256: 


Motive,  to  sacrifice,  27. 

Mountain -haunter,  Uu- 
dra,  140,  141. 

Mrityu,  Death,  288. 

MOjavAns,  a people  in  the 
northern  hills,  24. 

Muir,  J.  (Original  Sans- 
krit Tests),  24,  120, 
140,  141,  147, 151,174, 
177,  262,  255,  260— 
262,  2^8,  292,  293. 

Mukti,  Liberation,  Final 
Beatitude,  304. 

Muller,  Prof.  F.  Max,  23, 
34,  63,  92,  137,  157, 
181,  226,233,  255, 262, 
265,  270,  282,  285, 290, 
805,  307-31". 

Mundane  Egg,  the,  261. 

Muagoose,  221,  222. 

Mufija  gra.s6,  27,  97,  100. 

Musician,  258. 

Nabbas,  mist,  vapour,  a 
name  of  Agni,  36 ; 
name  of  a month,  56, 


203, 236.240, 242, 250, 

NftiAsarnsa,  (cu[)s),  be- 
longing to  the  Fathers, 
181;  an  epithet  of 
Fathers,  69. 

NAsatyas,  the  Asvins, 
184, 194,  195,  199,  274, 
285. 

Nature,  306,  307. 

Navadasa,  nineteen -fold, 
a hymn,  1*28. 

Navagvas,  members  of  a 
mythological  priestly 
family,  179. 

Navel,  the  centre  of 
Earth,  the  High  Altar, 
301. 

Nectar,  103,  172 

Needle,  38,  40,  ‘213,  214. 

Nescience,  ignorance  of 

the  Self,  307. 

Neshtar,  the  priest  who 
leads  forward  the  sac- 

, rificeris  wife,  40,  61, 

; 233, 234. 

New  Moon  sacrifice,  1, 12 


formul.ts  for  averting, 
107, 108;  bricks  devot- 
ed to  her,  107,  108 
Ni8hada(s),  wiM  aboii- 
gines,  143,  227,  232, 
256-258. 

Ni-shkevalya  Gra^a,  161; 
Uktha,  133. 

Nivid,  invoking  formula, 
175,  269,  270. 
Nobility,  the  lUjauyas 
or  Kshatiiyas,  men  of 
the  piiucely  and  mili- 
taiy  class,  5,  54,  73, 
129, 130,166,  167,298, 
299;  represented  hy 
Indra,  130. 

Numbers,  homage  totbi 
Genii  of,  209. 
Nyagrodha,  Ficus  ludica, 
211,  212. 

I Nychtbemera,  96. 

, Ocean,  49,  222,  286 
golden  disc,  116. 
Offering-prayer,  196,206. 


126, 209.  Nibhiiyapa,  a title  of  226. 

Nabha,y»,  misty,  a Vishnu,  207,  208.  Oiutment  maker,  257. 
mouth,  50,  126,  209.  Nidh,inavat  SOmaii,  123.  Old  No,thuiou,tL«r  U- 


332 


TSDEX  Of  SaMES,  P.T0. 


lief  a,  regards  their  Panchilaa,  a people  in  PnSUpat., 
pivti'iarcUe,  15.  northern  Imlui.  73. 212.  Buclra,  89,  143,  ;j 

Ol.lenWrg,  Prof.  It,  22,  Ihatlclmviipea,  the  name  302. 

90,255,268,303.  of  a hymn,  128, 129.  Path,  the,  Agm> 

OM,theflacre(l  mystic  syl-  Pifiini,  the  great  gram-  Bacrifice,  1. 

lahle,  11, 175,  307,308.  marun,  305.  Path,  to  Gods  or  Fathers, 

Oraoutum,  46.  Pa'iis,  demons  of  dark-  179.  | 

Omnific,  the,  Vdyu,  122;  ness,  12,  160,  288.  Pathway,  the,  sacrifice, 

Prajapati,  169.  Pahkti,  a Vedic  metre,  13,  63. 

Omniform,  Indra.  270.  82, 122.  123, 137, 197,  PAthya,  a proper  name, 

Omniscient,  the,  Agni,  21,  213,244,245,254.  92.  o m * 

One,  the  One  Being,  151,  Paramfitmd,  the  Supreme  Patni.  bee  Sacnficer  s 
152,286.  Self,  231,  307.  Wife. 

Order,  Cosmic  Law,  28,  Parameslithin,  Supreme  Patnis,  Consorts  of  Got  s 
55,240,265,268;  Queen  Lord,  68,  125,  139.  176.  ^ 

of,  Aditi,196;  childof,  Paramesvara,  Supreme,  PatiitsalA,  le  arons 

Prajdpati  or  Vak,  265;  Rnleror  Lord,  13, 151.  Hall,  32. 

= 8acnfico,  46,  59,  247,  Parents,  the.  Heaven  PatidsamyAjas  1/  . 

250  266  and  Karth.  251;  Speech  Patntvata  Graha,  61,164, 

Orders,  liturgical  direc-  and  Mind,  138.  P.^ulkasa  the  son  of  a 

tioim,  175.  Paiidhis,  sticks  placed  Nishihb  and  a Kbha- 

Other  Folk,  Spirits  of  rouudthcsacrificirvlfiro,  triya,  258. 

darkness,  22-2,  9.  See  Enclosingsticks.  Pavam.ina,  he  who  flows, 

Otter^223.  raitsdsa,8ac.ificial  tongs,  blows,  or  glow»  clear 

Overlord, Mind,  132,133.  297. 

Owls,  221.  Parisriit,  foaming  liquor,  A ayu,  41,  47, 1/b, 

Oxen,  draw  the  Soma  a sort  of  beer,  16,  174,  207  ; Agni,  232. 

cart,  13,  32;  for  the  188, 185.  Pavlru.  tbepnnee  of  the 

t.IoukIi  108,  109;  Parivatsara,  a year  of  the  Riisamas,  27  . 

twinkling  .tare,  44.  five-year  eyck,  239,267  P'>vitram.  a Btrmner,  2. 

Parivrit.auenclosetlshed,  Peacock,  221,  224. 
PaDa,  a veree-diviaion,  294,  leaeautry,  129. 

quaiterof  a8tanza,175.  Parjanya,  the  (lod  of  the  Pebbly  9 . 
r.ia.ii)ankti,  the  name  of  rain-cloud,  58,  134,  Peg,'«th  w le  P ^ 

a metre,  l»l,  137.  152,  163,  169, 208,291.  atone,  are  beaten  a 

Pak,lru,eomedi8eaK>,109,  Parna,  the  P,d,8a  tree,  for  etretch.ng  clot  . 
p..ia«a  tree,  Butea  Fro...  1.  91,  110,  288.  37  ; for  at.mh.ng  mat 

do»a,  1,  2,  6,  9,  43,  81,  Parrot,  222.  or  hurdles,  38. 

94,  98,  104,  105,  177,  Par..8hut,  « river,  282.  Penance,  religious  au» 
288.  Pnvvahq  the  Genius  of 

P.,nch«ehud4s,  Five-  eloadand.nonntain,68.  Peoide,  the  82,  187  29 

crested  bricks,  133.  P»«ioo,  personified,  2t0,  Pestle,  called 

PaRch.adasa,  the  n.ame  of  203,  222,  302  ; name  stone  as 

a hymn,  100, 122, 123.  of  the  Deivy  Season,  a press-stone,  4 ,-an. 

129,  133,  198, 254.  15. 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


S83 


>fcter80D,  Prof.  P.,  260,  Potar,  Cleansiug  Prieat,  Prdna,  Breath, the Oenina 
263.  40,  178.  of  Breath,  51,  65,  164, 


’hillguua,  Mid-February 
to  mid- March,  56. 
’hysiciau,  109,  110; 

lliidra,  140  ; Varuna, 
204  ; Saraavati,  174, 
199,  200  ; TvashUr, 
241. 

’hysicians,  the  Asvina, 
174,  183,  185,192,  194 
199,  200,  202,  203; 
the  two  celestial  Ho- 
tars,  193,  197,  240; 
Lord  of,  Varuna,  201. 
hgeoiLs,  22. 

h ndapit  r iy aj  ua,  aacrifioc 
to  Auceatial  Mauea,15, 
*iou3,  the  woild  of  the, 
212. 

’is.lchas,  aclassof  fieiida, 
i05,  256.  286,  288. 

*ifc,  from  which  earth  ia 
dug  to  make  the  Altar, 
41,  55  ; purificatiou  at 
the,  47. 

;’itriloka,  the  world  of 
the  Fathers,  3o7. 
^nriyajoa,  S.icrifice  to 
the  Fathers,  288. 
I’itmlarUjPiuus  Ueodaia, 

37 

['lauets,  five,  230. 

[^laiits,  93,  94,  117,  121, 
292,  300;  seeds  of, 
sowu  round  the  altar, 
109  ; eulogy  of,  109— 
112  ; LJid  of.  11 1- 
Plenty,  Cow  of,  109. 
Pole-dauccr,  acrol)at,258. 
Porcupine,  216,  222, 
Porous  brick,  ll6,  126, 
139,  149. 

Por[)oise,  220. 
iVt -offering',  U5. 


Potsherd,  on  which  ob- 
lations are  cooked  and 
offeretl,  5. 

Potters,  143. 

Prag.Uhas,  combinations 
of  verses,  175. 

Pi  aise  of  Men,  a title  of 
Agui,  See  Narasiusa. 

Piaise-song,  stoma,  28  ; 
three-fold,  liftcoufold, 
thirty  three  foKl,  etc., 
81,82 

Prajiipati,  Lord  Crea- 
ture.s,  3,  1 4, 31,  56,  62, 
68,71,  83,  92, 107,122 
123,  125,  129,  150, 
166,  176,183, 186,205, 
207,  210,  211,  214, 
226,  237,  239,  2l8, 
354,  259,  263,  264,266 
276,  288,  300,  301  ; 
Father  of  GchIs,  87 ; 
identified  with  Agin, 
87,  239  ; Lord  of 
Thought,  26,  167 ; 

Mind,  51,  167 ; Genius 
of  the  Year,  74,  lo5, 
239  ; L-'r>l  of  Speech, 
71,  88,  167,  25.1,  Cica- 
tor,  1 16, 120;  deliverer 
from  dnath  and  evil, 
129;  his  dissolution, 
125;  Agm,  the  Fire- 
altar,  150,  239 ; the 
Sacrifieial  Borsc,  2U. 

Praj.ipatis,  Creative  Pow- 
ers, Years  30 6;  Lords 
of  created  lieings,  286 

Piakriti,Natuic.  806,307. 

Pram.l,  the  fanciful  name 
of  a inetie,  127. 

1’)  amlochanti,  the  name 
vi  an  Ape'»i-4-'^,  134. 


262. 

PrAnabhritas,  Breath- 
supporting bricks,  122, 
125,  127. 

Pra  ava,  the  exclamation 
Cm,  175. 

PranAyana,  122. 

Pranlta,  ceremonially 
brought  foiward,  ap- 
plied to  sacrificial 
water,  14. 

Prastara,  a tied-upgrass- 
biinch  put  on  the  Bar- 
his,  9,  10,  169,  302. 

PrAtaiamivAka,  morning 
prayer,  168. 

PratimA,  fanciful  name 
of  a metre,  127, 
Pratipad,  132. 

Prati(>rasthAna  Graba, 
164. 

PratipraathAtar,  an  assis- 
tant priest,  37,  38,  54, 
60,  15.),  177. 

Prauga  Uktlia,  133. 

PravahlikA,  enigmatical 
vei-e,  178. 

Pravargya,  a ceremony 
introductory  to  tho 
Soma  saeiilice,  0,  100, 
164,  291,  293,  301, 
303 ;— man,  302. 

Pravnt,  132. 

PrayAja,  fore-o4Fering, 
175,  190,244. 

PrAyanlya,  an  introduc 
tory  lihition,  174. 

Player,  for  divine  guid- 
ance to  righteousness, 
31 ; for  ehiUlren,  93, 
179;  for  wealth,  95; 
to  Indrafoi  victory  in 

batile,  152 — 1 51,  of  iV 


334 


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC. 


king  for  blessings  on  PAru,  Purus,  one  of  the  Racing,  110. 
his  kingdom,  208 ; for  five  Aryan  tribes,  104,  Ragozin,  Madame  Zdn* 
freedom  from  sin,  187;  PurCiravas,  34.  aide,  255,  274,  290 

godd  sous  obtained  by,  Purusha,  Embodied  Man,  Rains,  Rain-time.  5,  15, 
60,  179.  Cosmic  Man,  164,  171,  22,  82,  123,  126,  198, 

Press-boards,  39.  215,217,255,260—264;  227. 

Pressing-skin,  4,  6.  Purusha  Hytnu,  260  — Raivata,  a Sftman,  82, 

Press-stones,  6,  48,  49,51. ' 262,  264  ; the  S|>iiit  123,133,199,213,254. 

Priesthood,  5,  54,  81 , 129,  that  dwells  in  the  Sim  RAjanya,  73,  83,  208,255. 

166,  167,  298,  303;  re-  and  in  the  bixly,  308,  See  Ksbatriya. 

presented  by  Brihas-  Purushamedha,  Human  Rdjasiiya,  Inauguration 
pati,  72,  Sacrifice,  xix,  255,  260,  of  a King,  71,  77,  79 

Priests,  designations  of  264.  Rlkshasas,  a class  of 

eight,228; — andnobles,  Puivachitti,  an  Apsaras,  fiends,  14,  38,  30,  81, 
266.  134.  114,134,186,201.283. 


Prishtha,  an  arrangement  Pfishan,  a solar  deity,  3,  Ram,  sacred  to  Sara svati, 
of  iimans, 75,124, 131.  6,7,68,81,  155,  166,  184,199,201,202,204. 

Prishthya-shadaha,  a 186, 197, 224,  225, 227,  Ramdyana,  212,  225.230, 
'period  of  aix  sacrificial  228,  243, 253,  254,273,  289. 

days,  65.  284,  285,291,297,299,  Rasd.  the  distant  river, 

Prisni,  Speckled  Cow,  301;  guards  roads  and  226. 

'cloud,  mother  of  the  travellers,  29,  207,208.  Rlshtrabhribas,  certain 
Maruts,  53,  54,  227,  Pushya,  mid-December  oblations,  166. 

271;  sons  of,  the  Ma-  to  mid-January,  56.  Rasmi  Graha,  164. 
ruts,  227;  calves  of,  Pfitabhrit,  a Soma  Rat,  Rudra’s  victim,  24; 
masses  of  mist,  53,  54.  trough,  56, 164,  176.  sacrificed  to  Ground, 
Prithivt,  Broad  One,  Pfitikas,  plants  used  as  221. 

Earth,  11,27,  116,164,  substitutes  for  Soma,  Rathagritsa,  fanciful 
166, 231.  294.  name  of  a Spring 


Pulaba,  a Rishi,  151.  mouth,  133. 

Pulastya,  a Rishi,  151.  Quails,  221.  Rathantara.an  important 

Piifljikasthala,  allegorical  Quarters  of  the  sky,  75,  Saman,  81,  88,  100, 
name  of  an  Apsaras,  101,124,126,208,221,  122,131,132,165,198, 


133. 


226,  247,  262,  265,  254. 


Punjishthas,  fishers  or  266,289,301.  Rathaprota,  fanciful  name 

towlers,  143,  Queen,  Chief,  211,  232  ; of  a Rain  month,  134. 

Puie,  the,  Soma,  49.  her  part  in  the  Horse-  Rathasvana,  fanciful 

Piirlsha,  21,  37, 124.  Sacrifice,  213 ; Aditi,  name  of  a Summer 

Purishya,  epithet  of  Agni,  124  ; the  Eastern  month,  134. 

21,  88,  89,  91,  93,  97,  Quarter,  126, 132.  Rathavimochantya  Obla- 

106.  Question-Solver,  266,  tion,  84. 

Purohita,  family  or  tribal  Quiver,  252.  Rathechitra,  fanciful 

priest,  20,  82,  99,  104,  name  of  a Summer 

232  ; foremost  agent,  Races,  Both,  Gods  and,  mouth,  134 
263,  meu,  60 ; five,  232.  Rauhina,  oblation  of  ** 


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


335 

special  rice  cake,  296,  239,  241,  248,  257,  RudrA,  female  Rudra, 

258,  260,  265,  274,  the  Soma  cow,  30. 
Razor,  25,  26, 131.  277,  284,  286,  288,  Riulras,  eons  of  Rudra, 

Real,  the,  Brahma,  308.  289,  296,  298,  303  the  Maruts,  24,  94; 

Reed-mat,  of  the  Soma  also  Index  I.  Bright  Ones,  the  As- 

cart  shed,  39.  Rik,  Rich,  verse  of  praise,  vin8,195;  the  hundred 

Regional  bricks,  126.  26,  27,  88,  123,  291.  forms  and  powers  of 

Regions  of  the  sky,  133,  Riksama,  a certain  kind  Rudra,  140,  142,  146, 
104,  1P7,  200,  213  , of  SAman,  123.  147,  201;  a class  of  11 

Consorts  of  Gods,  213;  Rikshtkiis,  a class  of  evil  or  33  deities,  10,  12, 

five,  5,  47,  70,  76,  82;  spirits,  256.  77,  95,  105,  124,  125, 

84,  155,  208;  seven,  Rishis,  ancient,  261;  133,198,209,211,225, 

166  ; ten,  131  ; War-  Seven,  130,  151  ; crca-  240,242,  247,  273,285. 

ders  of  the,  207.  See  five,  276 ; priests, 138;  Rusamafs),  277. 

Quarters  of  the  sky.  Vital  Airs,  132,  169. 
lender,  of  foes,  Iudra,68.  Rita,  Right,  Law,  Saeri-  Sacred  Books  of  tfie 
lesolutiou,  to  sacrifice,  fice.  See  Law,  Order.  East,  xviii,  xx.,  4,  6, 

27.  Ritavya  bricks,  117,  124,  12,  28,  31,  5^  52,  68, 

letahsich  bricks,  117.  126, 129,  139.  71,  79,  81,  84,  87,  91, 

Watis,  certain  II.  V.  Ritn,  Season,  deified, 233,  109,  113,114,120,125, 

verses,  199.  213.  301.  140, 168, 171,188,235, 

.eward  of  pious  actions,  Ritu  Graha,  56-  254,  291,  303. 

Kitns,  Season.s,  234.  Sacred  grass,  9,  8.5,  138. 
hinoceros,  223.  Rivers,  Lord  of.  Ocean,  149,  241,  250.  See 

libhukshan,  a title  of  222 ; Seven.  See  Seven  Barhia. 

Indra,  228.  Rivers.  Sacrifice,  embodied,  28, 

ibhus,  tjiree  deified  Rnbber.s,  98,  258.  63, 167  ; the  underly- 

artificers.  Seasonal  Rocr,  Dr , 308.  ing  principle  of,  23  ; 

Gods,  129,  198,  228,  Rope  with  fangsciSer-  soaring  to  heaven,  167; 

257 . pent,  46  regarded  as  a ship,  196; 

ice,  3— 6,  14,— cake,  3,  Roi)e-maker,  256.  Four-monthly,  22; 

12,  14,  24,  77,  184,  Roth.  Prof,  von,  154,270,  New  and  Full  Moon, 

ichas,  strophes  from  286.  1—15;  Lord  of  the, 

the  Rigveda,  XVIII,  Royalty,  125.  the  Sacrifieer,  2,  4. 

261,  280.  Rudra.  the  Tempest- God,  Sacrifieer,  2;  called  In- 

gveda,  XVII,  1,  3,  4,  24,  83,  140,  224,  284,  dra,  31  ; becomesAg- 

7,9,12,14,15,18,22,  299,  302;  in  gentle  ni,  11,  14,  42,170; 

24,28,29,34,40,41,47  mood,  24,  84, 140,  145,  identified  with  Agni, 
49,52,  53,5)7,64,  68,  146;  husband-finder,  Rudra,  Brihaspati, 

69,  76.  81,  91,  92,  95,  24;  Lord  of  Cattle,  30,  Yama,  59. 

96,  100,  103,  105,  108,  59,  78,  83,  85,  89,  141,  Sacrificer’a  wife,  associat- 

134,  137,  148,  161,152,  201;  his  epithets  and  ed  with  him  in  reli- 

157,  171,174,  175,178,  attributes,  140 — 146;  gious  observances,  2,8, 

180,  183,  190—192,  rat  or  vole  sacred  to  22,  40,  46,  60;  repre- 

^94,  199, 209,  212,215f»  him,  24.  senfe  Aditi,  8, 13;  her 


336 


INDEX  or  NAMES,  ETC. 


prayer  for  a son,  15;  Samidh,  brand  or  kiud- 
anoints  the  axle-pins  ling-stick,  9, 
of  the  Soma  cart,  37.  Saniidhenl,  kindling- 
Sacrificial  Session,  66, 08.  verse,  175. 

Sadas,  a shed  for  llie  of-  SamishUyajus,  final  text 
ficiatiiig  priests, 37,  39,  and  oolatnm,  62,  64, 
40,  41,  59,  69,  81,  242.  169,  176. 

Sadasiispati,  Lord  of  the  Silmitra,  slaughtering- 
Sadas  or  Assembly,  place,  46. 

Agni,  266.  S.itpkhya,  304. 

SAilhyas,  a class  of  ancient  Samp.ul,  132. 

Clods,  221,  248,  257,  Sanir.ij,  the  name  of  a 
261,262,  302.  brick,  133;  universal 

Sahajanya,  an  Apsaras.  ruler,  301. 
tSahas,  strength,  the  Sainsa,  Praise  or  Prayer 
name  of  a month,  56,  personified,  273. 

129.  209.  SainsarpA,  a name  of  the 

Sahasya,  Strong,  the  in  tercjilary  month, 209. 

hame  of  a mouth,  50,  Sainsrip,  Creeping  OOIa- 
129, 209.  tion,  85. 

SAkamedha  offering.^,  23.  SamsthA,  Consummation, 
S ikra,  the  Mighty,  Indra,  176. 

‘ 192.  Samvatsara,  a year  of  the 

Sikti,  Primeval  Power,  five-yearcyole,239,257. 

310.  Samyu,  the  name  of  an 

Slkvara,  a Siman,  82,  oblation,  176. 

123,  133,  154.  Sanda,  the  name  of  an 

Sakvaris,  hoptisyllabio  Asura,  53 

metres,  198,  213.  Sankara,  Sii,  305,  308, 
S.llildvdrya,  Sacrificial  308—310. 

Hall  Door  fire,  68.  Sankardiianda,  310. 
Sdlmali,  the  Silk  Cotton  Sannydsa,  lleuuuciatiou, 


Goddess,  13,  27,  65,8.T 
86,  119, 166,  172-17 
176,  177,  183-186 
190-195,  197,  199- 
204,  208.  218.  224,22.^ 
227,  237,  241,  242,24 
247,  251,254,  297;  he 
fountains,  Mind  ar 
Speech,  119;  name* 
the  sacrificial  cow,  6( 
297  ; Consort  of  tli 
Asvins,  185. 

Siiravya,  the  Arrow-God 
desp,  2^3. 

S.urva,  a name  of  Rink: 

’ 302. 

Sarvamotlha,  Uni  vers: 
Sacrifice,  264,  280. 

Sarv.is,  Rndras,  146. 

Sarydta,  S.lry.lta,  S iry;\t 
names  of  kings,  57. 

Sashpa,  husked  rice,  17: 

Sastra,  recitation,  pra^i 
hymn,  175. 

Slstras,  304. 

Sata,  a saciificial  baskc 
176. 

Satakratu,  L»rd  of  Hui 
died  Powers,  ludr. 
23,  279.  See  Hundre 
Powers. 

Satanlka,an  ancient  Kini 


tree,  211,  212.  304.  286. 

SAman,  chanted  hymn,  Saptadasn,  a hymn,  123,  S itapatha-Bnlhmana, 
psalm,  26,  27,  75,  187,  128,  133, 198,  264.  xix,  xx,  12,  29,  5 

261,  280,  291.  Sarabha,  a mythical  ani-  72,  157,  192,  286,  29 

S<imaveda,  xvii.,  55,  ’ pial,  121.  \ Satarudriya,  a litany  : 

170,213,239.  Siiramd.  274.  the  hundred  forms 

Sambara,  the  name  of  a Saranyu,  daughter  of  Rudra,  140,  147,  148 

’ fiend,  275.  Tvashtar,  238.  Satubrihatl,  a Vedic  ni 

Sambhava,  306.  Sdras,  Indian  Crane  222.  tie,  125,  136. 

Sambhiiti,  Biahm:!,  300,  Sliasvata  Graha,  164.  Sattra,  a sacrificial  se 
307_  Sarasvati,  the  liver.  79,  siou,  66,  68. 

Sarabhu,  310.  P32,  281,  232,  300  , Sattrottkina,  rising  fro 

Simitrc’e,  1,2,  157.  the  Indus,  281,  the  a saciifieial  session,  t 


t5DEX  OE  NAMes,  nC4 


837 


S^fiyari^jab,  ntuftl  name  28B,  304,  307  ; the  in-  Steve,  17S. 
of  anatteDdautatsacri*  dividual)  205,  304, 305.  Silver^  30«  2t8,  214; 
fiee,  180.  Self-eliatent,  the  Sun,  caatle  of,  35 ; plate, 

Sautrdlnafll,  36,  172, 174,  14  j— Ruler, Vama, 131.  295}  disc,  as  a oharm 

176, 178,  186,  190, 281,  Senajit,  a Winter  month,  agamat  death,  180. 

240  ; its  conneaioQ  1 34.  Sin,  expiation  of,  22,  23, 

with  Soma  aacrifioe.  Serpent  (a),  40,  63,  74,  03;  confeaaion  of,  22; 

174—170.  81,  134,  225  } power*  washed  away  by  bap- 

Savirasa,  a hymn,  128.  fnl  superhuman  beings,  tism,  20;  prayer  for 

Savitar,  the  Sun-God  as  114,  115,  227,  260.  removal  of,  42,  58,  04, 

the  great  vivifier  and  Session,  SaerifioiaL  See  108,  187,  230,  285; 
stimulator,! — 3,6,10  Saittra.  against  Gods,  63,  64. 

18,  21,  27,  81,  87,  44,  Seven,  Waters,  287;  Ho*  against  Fathers,  62; 

60—62,  72,  86,  87,  tars,  210 ; metres,  160;  against  one’s  self,  02 ; 

100,  155,166,178,183,  Sun-beams,  160;  chief  against  men,  22,  64, 

184,  186,187,194,198,  priests,  48;  commu-  187;  against  wild  ani- 

201,  202,  204,  206,  nities,  231;  domestic  mals,  22,  187;  bonds 

20?,  212,  230,  254,256  animals,  76 ; ^lishis,  of,  101,  108 ; punish- 

269,  271,  273,  275,277,  87,  163,  286;  organs  of  ment  of,  63. 

282,  283,  288,  293,295,  perception,  231,  237  ; Sindhu,  Indus  or  river, 

297,  208  ; protector,  vital  atrs,  287  ; ton-  69,  272,  283. 

11 ; purifier,  96  ; pun-  gues  of  Agni,  158 ; Sinlv.Mi,  a Lunar  Goddess, 
isher  of  the  wicked,  7;  rivers, 282, 300;  priests  94,  281. 


• giver  of  immortality  of  Agni,  158;  mansions  Sipivish^a,  a name  of 

to  Gods,  274;  Courser,  of  Agni,  158;  logs  of  Vishnu,  09,  207,208; 

76, 88;  Gandharva,  88.  fuel,  158.  of  Rudra,  143. 

SAvitra  Graha,  60,  61,  Seventeen,  Prajdpati’s  Sitaram  Sastri,  308. 

164  269.  number,  73;  chariots,  Sitikantha,  White-throat- 

Sfivitrl,  the  most  holy  73;  drums,  73.  ed,  or  Black- throated, 

text,  theGayatrl  par  Seventeen  fold  hymn, 254.  Rudra,  143. 

excellenco,  21,  206.  See  Saptadasa.  Siva,  a later  form  of 

SaVrit,  132.  Shattritpsa,  a hymn,  128,  Rudra,  24. 

Soabbwd-maker,  267.  Shaving,  a sacrificial  cere-  Sivasankalpa  Upanishad, 


Scherman.Dr.  J., 297, 298.  raony,  25,  26.  280. 

Science,  knowledge  of  Sheep,  184,  199.  Sky,  214,  292,  301. 

the  Gods,  807.  Ship = sacrifice,  190.  Slaughterer.  See  ItUmo- 

8ea  the  Sun,  166.  Ships  = streams  of  water,  lator. 

Season,  deified,  233,  SOI ; 88.  Sleepless  Gods,  Inbreath, 

— ^ups,  209,— lords,  Sho^st,  sixteen-hymned  and  Outbreath,  287. 
joQ  Hbation,  05  ; a title  of  Sling  for  carrying  Ukhya 


Seasons,  130,  148,  233,  Indra,  66,  282;  of  Pra-  Agni,  100,101,  107. 


^9  ; five,  100  ; six,  jfipatb  264.  Snake.  See  Serpent. 

15,  76  ; personified.  Sickle,  108,  Snipe,  182. 

107,125, 166,  209,235.  Siddbis,  superaatural  Snowy  Mountains,  121. 
Self,  the  Supreme,  61,  powers,  306.  So-and-So, 6 1,78-80, 83, 231. 


338 


INDEX  OF  NAMES)  ETC. 


Sobha,  the  city  of  the  Spade,  38,  44,  88—90, 92,  Stallion,  the,  Dyatm  o 
Gandharvas,  144.  293;  called  womau>  Heaven,  216 ; the  Pra 

Sobhya,  a title  of  Rudra,  88,  293.  vargya  Caldron,  300. 

144.  Speckled  Cow,  the  Earth,  Stars,  21 4.  226,  301. 

Soma,  the  God,  74,  176,  12;  cloud,  54;  mares  of  Sthilll,  a Cooking-pot,  2 

202,  208, 225, 227, 243,  the  Maruts,  12.  , 60. 

248,264,282,284,291;  Speech,  216,  291;  perso-  Stoma.  See  Praise-aong 
Lord  of  the  Forest,  84;  olfied,  13.  SeeV  Vk.  Stoma-bh4g4  bricki 
of  plants,  111;  of  trees,  Speech,  Goddess  of, Saras-  132. 

130;  King  of  Brdh*  vat!,  65,  192;  Lord  of,  Stomas,  enumerated, 165 
mans,  78.  BribaspatiorPrajApati,  fanciful  meanings  o 

Soma,  the  plant,  grows  26,  .78;  PrajApati,  7l,  names  of,  128;  brick 

on  mountains,  32 ; used  88,  255  ; Pr4na  the  represeutiiig,  128. 

to  curdle  milk,  2;  fit  Genius  of  Breath,  51  ; Stiainer  (s),  2,  4,  80,  85 
parts  picked  out,  30 ; India,  67.  the  wind,  4,  8,  26 

purchase  of,  29  -31,  Sphya,  a sword -like  sacri*  the  l»>id  of  the,  th 

174;  watering,  172;  ficial  instrument,  7,  36,  conseciated household 

pressing,  35— 39;  taken  85.  er,  27. 

from  the  cart,  48 ; Spirit,  Lord  of,  said  to  be  Strength,  1 66 ; son  of 

measured  out,  60  ; God  the  Moon  or  Parames-  Agni,  97,  103,  113 

connected  with  the  vara,  13.  185 — 137,  238. 

Fathers,  15,  24;  sage,  Spoons,  sacrificial,  10.  Strength-quickening  ob 
19, 179;  identified  with  See  Ladles.  lations,  166. 

the  Sun;  Lord  of  the  Spotted  Bull,  the  Sun,  17.  Strophe,  xviii,  175. 
world,  32;  Lord  of  Spring,  15, 22,  81,  117,  Subhadnl,  a womau’i 
Consecration,  36  ; im-  122,  133,  198.  name,  212. 

mortal,  50  ;Brihaspati’8  Sprinkling  with  holy  Success  Libation,  165. 
son,  61;  the  Soma-pur-  water,  4,  9,  36,  45,  46,  Suchi,  mid-June  to  mid 
chasing  cow,  29, 30,  68;  72,82.  July,  56,  124,  209. 

Soma  identified  with  Sprinkling-water,  8,  39.  Sudra,  2,  130,  168,  188 
various  Gods  and  sac-  Spritas,  Deliverers,  cer-  206,231,  255,259,262 
red  objects,  68,  69 ; tain  bricks,  129.  Suhasta,  one  of  th« 
Soma  sacrifice  in  gene-  Sraddh4,  Faith,  Surya’s  guards  of  th6  celestia 
ral,  26—86.  daughter,  172.  Soma,  31. 

Somavats,  a class  of  SiAvana,  mid- July  to  Sukla  (White)  Yajurveda 
Fathers,  179,  220.  mid- August,  56.  xviii. 

Soul,  the  Universal,  260,  Sri,  Beauty,  263.  Sukra,  Bright,  the  Sun 

264,  304 ; the  indivi-  Snshtis,  Creation  bricks,  63  ; mid-May  to  mid 
dual,  260,304.  See  Self.  129.  June,  64,  56,  124, 209 


Sound-holes  for  the  press-  Sruk,  an  ofEering-apoon,  Sukra  Graha,  123,  164. 

stones,  38,  39.  8,  13,  158.  Sumangala,  the  ritua 

Southern  Fire,  17,  206,  Sruva,  a dipping-spoon,  name  of  a aacrifipia 
See  DakshinAgni.  8, 13,  168.  attendant,  186. 

Sovran  Lords,  Mitra  and  Stake,  sacrificial,  191.  See  Summer,  16,  82,  122 
Varuua,  82.  Yupa.  124, 134,  198. 


INDRX  OF  NAMES,  ETC. 


5un,  thp,  ptmim;  eye  of  Suahena,  aWinter  month,  Taifctirfya-SatnhitA,  xvii, 
A.^ni,  32;  of  Vanina  134.  26,28,140,188,  254. 

and  Mitra,  33  ; of  the  Snti^man,  Good  Deliver-  TanOnapiit,  Son  of  Him- 
Univerae,  292;  self-  er,  Indra,  85,  172.  self,  Agni,  24,197, 199, 

existent,  14;  the  True,  SOtrAtman,  Soul-Thread,  236,  240,  243,  250. 

294;  Son  of  Dyau8,83;  Hiranygarbha,  307.  TdnOnaptra,  34,  190. 
All-embracer,  123  ; SutndrI,  the  Sutlej  river,  Tapa,  Pain,  the  fanciful 
represented  by  a co-  282.  name  of  a month,  139. 

loured  atone,  156  ; SvadhA,  food  offered  to  Tapaa,  the  same,  56,  209. 

Sfurit  in  the,  308  ; the  Manea ; also  the  Tapaaya,  Painful,  the 
sprung  from  Purnaha,  accompanying  sacrifi-  same,  56,  139,  209. 

262.  SeeSffrya,Savitar.  cial  exclamation.  10,  Tarkahya,  a peraonifica- 
Jiina  Sira,  two  deities  or  15,  70,  177,  178, 181.  tion  of  the  morning 

deified  objects  connect-  Svagft,  Qo<m1  Speed,  a Sun,  213, 227;  the  fail- 
ed with  agriculture,  aacrificial  Umediction,  eiful  name  of  an 

109,  220  164,205.  Anturan  month,  134. 

AniitA,  Pleasantness,  S vAh A,  a sacrificial  excla-  Teg.is,  a word  of  unknown 
278.  mation,  11, 12, 18, 191,  meaning,  224. 

iipreme  Lord,  13,  68,  198,  201,  20.),  298.  Tempest,  224. 

151,  1,52,  304.  SvAhAkriti  Goddesses.  Terujite(8),  98,  293. 

upreme  Self,  61,  231,  Introductory  Oblations  That,  the  Supreme  Self, 

264, 304.  deified,  244  264. 

url,  wine,  spirituous  SvAna,  the  name  of  one  Thieves,  98;  Lord  of, 

liquor,  71,  85,  172,174,  of  the  guards  of  the  Rudra,  143, 

177,  183,  189,193,194,  celestial  S«)ma,  31.  Third  height  of  heaven, 

199.  200,  204  233,256;  Svara,  a certain  S,tman,  138,  265. 

preparer,  of,  256.  122.  Thirty,  indefinite  for 

arabhi,  the  Cow  of  Svaraj,  the  name  of  a many,  18. 

Plenty,  289.  brick,  133.  Thirty-three,  Gods,  187, 

Arya,  the  Sun-God,  4,  Svarga,  heaven,  133, 257,  190;  steps,  divisions  of 

14,  18,  32,  33,  60,  290,304.  day  and  night,  278. 

82,85,  118,  139,  160,  SvayaraAtrinnA,  porous  Thirty -three-part  Stoma 
164,167,  168,214,216  brick,  116,' 139.  199,254. 

232,  264,  271,272,291,  Svishtikrit,  Fair-Offering  Thousand -eyed,  Agni 
295,  295,  296.  300,301;  Maker,  a title  of  Agni,  with  1000  chips  of  gold, 

expeller  of  evil  spirits,  202,  204,  243.  157. 

10;  frees  from  sin,  188;  Swan,  182,  222;  theSun,  Thread,  sacrifice,  191. 
eye  of  Mitra,  Vanina,  183.  Threads,  formulas  so 

and  Agni,  58:  pupil  of  SyAuaAka,  millet,  172.  called,  70. 

Agni’s  eye,  32 ; House  Syllables,  of  sacred  me-  Three,  the,  Mitra,  Varu- 
Priest  of  the  Gods,  tres,  216.  na,  Aryaman,  20 ; God- 

272  ; the  Wise  One,  desses,  IdA,  Sarasvatl, 

32;  sacrificed,  212  ; his  TaDEVa,  a title  of  Book  BhAratt,  193,  200,  203, 
daughter,  172,  285.  XXXII.  regarded  as  an  237, 241,  242,  244, 245; 

ryA,  Sunlight,  285.  Upanishad.  bonds, i248  ; great  lus- 


m 


INDEX  07  NABlBS,  ETC. 


trea,  65j  264;  aftcHfloItil  ma,  76,  81,  100,  122,  nifwi,  the  Creator,  162; 

elements,  200;— eyed,  129,  182,  198,  264.  the  Sun,  386, 

Siva*  24  ; three  step*  True,  the,  the  Sun,  294  ; Universal  Qods,  64,  67, 
or  conditions,  286,  Brahma,  307,  808.  197,  See  Viave  Devaa, 

Thunder,  224.  TruUi,  the,  Agtii,  93,102;  Universal  Sacrifice,  365, 

Thunderbolt,  7,  25,  26,  reality,  godhead,  2 207.-  See  Sarvamedha. 

86,  263 ; a ohariot,  72.  and  falsehood,  183.  Unnetars,  t-’ass  o( 
Tokmau,  green  barley,  Tryambaka,  a name  of  priests,  44;. 

172.  Itudra,  24,  220.  Untruth,  unreality,  hu- 

Tortoise,  322 ; buried  in  Tutha,  the  Brahman  manity,  2. 
the  altar,  114,  118;  in-  priest,  40,  60.  Upablirit,  one  of  three  of. 

carnation  of  Vishpu,  Tvashter,  the  divine  arti-  fering  spoons,  10, 12,13, 
118,  207;  supports  the  ficer.shapei  oftheforms  Upilrnsu,  Oraha,  51,  78„ 
world,  118;  represents  of  living  beings,  14,  122,  164  ; press-stone, | 

the  Sun  or  Prajftpatl,  01,  62,  72,  85,  121,  50;  Savana,  61. 

111.  170,  191,  193,  108,  Upanishad,  XX,  140,  26 

Tortoises,  oblations  to,  200,208,225,228.230,  280,304 

224.  233,234,237,238,241,  Uparava,  sound-hole,  38, 

Trades  and  occupations,  244,  248,  251,  203,  Upasads,  85,  174. 

256—258.  296;  creator  and  lord  UpayAma,  a saorificial 

Trayastriipsa,  a hymn,  of  cattle,  46,  121.  formula,  224. 

123,  128,  129,  133.  Twain,  the  Righteous,  Upayamanl,a  large  wootl 
Trayovimsa,  a hymn, 128.  Mitra  and  Varuna,  52.  en  spoon,  299. 

Treasure-guard,  the,  62.  Two  Goddesses,  Heaven  Cirj,  Energy,  the  name 
Trees,  130,  292.  and  Earth  or  'Day  and  of  a mouth,  56, 

Tieta,  a die.  Night,  210,  242,  t)rja,  an  Autumn  month, 

Tribes,  Celestial,  241,  127,  209. 

Tripava,  a hymn,  123,  UdoAtai^  Chanter  of  S4*  tfrdhvanabhas,  probably 
128,  129,  133,  254.  ma  hymns,  xvii,  61,  VAyu,  47. 

Triocular,  a name  of  Siva,  215.  UrvasJ,  a celebrated  Ap- 

24.  Udumbara  tree,  28; — saias,  34,  134. 

Triple  bond,  J60;  Praise-  wood,  39, 73, 75,  80, 83,  Ushas,  278.  See  Dawn. 

Song,  81.  84.97,  100,  116,  118,  Ushpih,  a Vedio  metre, 

Trishtup, one  of  the  chief  157.  126,136,243,245,254. 

Vedie  metres,  7,  14,  Ujjitis,  Victory  Fonau-  UshnihAc:  Ushnih,  197, 
30,  34,  67,  82,  88,  95,  las,  76.  213. 

122, 197,  211,  213,244,  UkhA,  Fire-pan,  89,  94,  Uttaraiedi,  the  High 
245,  254.  117,  176.  Altar,  representing  the 

Trish^p  bricks,  135.  Ukhya,  of  the  Fire-pan,  universe  and  identified 

Tnka,  or  Trijta,  an  anci-  Agni,  100— J06,  107,  withAgni-Prajapati,8?. 

eot  Vedio  deity,  per-  J24,  166. 

haps  Agni  as  Light-  Uktha,  hymn  of  praise,  VAcHAgpATi,  Lord  o 
tting  which  is  his  third  66,  182,  176,  176.  Speech,  51;  Indrs 

form,  6,  7,  246,  280,  Ukthya  Oraha,  56.  67 ; Prdna  the  Oeoiu 

Trivrit,  tr^le,  2;  Sto-  Unborn,  the,  Visvaltar.  of  Life,  61. 


INSRX  OF  KAMI8,  ETC. 


m 


VaikaWcAta  wood,  85,  46,63,  7®,  120,  V9,  S3;  repments  royBttf, 

97,157r  138,  166,  178,  193,  186 ; made  a jiath  for 

Vairaja,  a Saman,  82,  204,231,265,278,800.  the  S»d,  63;  God  of 

123,  183,  198,  254.  Vala,  the  ra>n*witldiold>  night,  872  ; dwelks  ia 
VairOpn,  ditto,  ibid.  ing  cloud,  peraoniOed,  the  waters  of  the  Air, 

Vaiaakha,  mid- April  to  a demon  of  drought,  81 ; Lord  of  physicians, 

raid^  , . ,66,  117.  194,  201;  physician,  241; 

VaisVrtdb  A Graha,  Liha-  Valaga,  a ma^o  charm,  his  noose  for  sinnei-s, 
tionto  the  All-Gods,  38.  42,  68s  101 ; his  three 

164; — Nivid,  267  ValakhilyAs,  bricks  repre-  bonds,  248  ; the 

Uktha,  133.  senting  tlte  vital  Waters’  Child,  81. 

Vaisvadevl  bricks,  125,  breathings,  127.  Varuna  and  Mitra=8ky 

126.  ViVlmiki,  the  poet  of  the  and  earth,  247. 

VaisvAnara,  Common  to  Rlm  lyana,  225.  VarAti  Js,  Protecting  God- 

all  men,  a title  of  Ag-  V.lmadeva,  a Vedio  Rishi,  desses,  96. 
ni,  29,  48,  55,  103,109,  100.  VasA,  melted  fat,  gravy, 

118,  119,  125,  161,170,  VAmadevya,  a SAman,  47. 

188,  205,  225,  232,254,  100.  V.vs.l,  a sacrificial  cow, 64. 

268,  275,  276,  278  ; — Vanaspati.  Forest-lord,  Vasativari.  wateis  used 
rice  cake,  158;— Graha,  the  aaorificial  stake,  in  Soma- pressing,  48, 
164.  43,191,198,200-204,  49. 

Vaisya,  amanof  the  peo-  237,  241-244,  246,  Va-that,  a sncrificial  et- 

ple,  the  third  class,  83,  248,  olarnation,  55,  92,  175, 

129,  168,  172,  231,255,  VanlvAlianam,  Driving  187,203. 

202.  hither  and  thither  of  Vaaishtha,  a famous  Ri- 

Vaisy.l,  a woman  of  the  Agni,  103.  shi,  122,  286. 

third  o’ass,  205.  Vapilsrapani,  a stick  on  Vasishthas,  descendants 
Vdja,  Strength,  224;  the  which  the  omentum  is  of  V.,  192, 
name  of  one  of  tbe  wrapped  for  roastiug,  Vasishtha-hannh,  a com- 
Ribhus,  298.  46.  pound  of  unknown 

Viljapeya,  Draught  of  Varsha,  rain  year,  227.  meaning.  302. 

Strength,  a Soma  sa-  Varuna,  the  Encompas-  VasordhiiiA,  Stream  of 
crifice,  71,  75,  231.  ser,  originally  thestarry  Kiehes,  a sort  of  Con- 

VftjaprasAvlya  oblations,  heaven,  the  chief  of  the  secration  service  for 

75,  166,  Adityas,  9,  10,  32,  48,  Agui,  162. 

V&jasaneya,  or  V&jasa-  133,154,168,  183,184.  Vasu,  Good  Lord,  Agni, 

neyi,a  nscension  of  the  194, 196,  202, 204,  205,  84,  102,  209,  236,  239. 

Yajurveda  Somhitd.  225,227,  228,  231, 236,  Vasu,  sacrifice,  2. 

xvii,  six.  242,  244,  248—250,  Vasus,  a class  of  deities, 

Racers  of  the  254,  266,  269,  271,273,  10,12,13,  30,  77,94, 

Gods,  219,  223,  225.  274,  276,  285,  287,  95, 105,  124,  125,  169, 

i^ajra,  Indra’s  weapon,  291,  301  ; moral  go-  190,198,  209,211,240, 

thunderbolt,  25.  veraor  of  the  world,  247, 248,  250, 285, 297. 

Speedi,  the  Word,  78,  101,  186,  196;  re-  Vasvl,  female  Vasu,  the 
personified,  13,  28,  29,  presented  by  Soma,  32,  Soma  Cow,  30. 


842 


INDUX  of  Noms,  BTC, 


Vdt,  a saciificial  excla- 
mation, 12,  13,  297. 

Vdta,  Wind,  63,  46  ; 76, 
298. 

Vatsa,  a'Vedic  Rishi,  68, 
113. 

Viltsapra,  a religions  lite, 
102. 

Vat^apri,  a Vedic  ^shi, 
102. 

Vatsara,  a year  of  the 
five-year  cycle, 239, 267. 

Vayasyd  bricks,  125. 

Vjiyu,  the  Wind-God, 
3,  6.  26,34,  46,  47,  71, 
92, 106,  126, 172, 189, 
197,205,231.237,  238, 
262,264,  266,  268,269, 
273,  274, 276,277,280, 
288,  294,  301;  the 
Good,  294  ; frees  from 
sin,  187 ; Tvash^r’s 
8on-io-law,  238 ; his 
team  of  horses,  52 ; the 
first  draught  of  the 
libation  his,  62;  sacri- 
ficed, 212. 

Vdyu  vessels,  164,  176, 
184. 

Veda,  a bunch  of  grass 
used  in  sacrifice,  13; 
a finder,  13. 

Vedadipa,  the  title  of  a 
Commentary,  six. 

Vedas,  four,  xvii,  160  : 
three,  160, 170,  216. 

Vedi.  altar,  7,  41. 

Vena,  the  Morning  Sun, 
58,  54, 114,  270,  271, 
273,  276;  Agoi,  160. 

Verities,  thdj  236. 

Vet^  a sacrificial  exclama- 
tion, 149. 

Vibhu,  Vibhvan,  one  of 
the  Ribhus,  298. 


Victim,  binding  and  28.5,  291;  separated 
slaughtering  of  the,  45,  heaven  and  earth,  37 ; 

224.  horse,  ox,  goat,  incarnations  of  254, 

ram,  mock-man,  120.  294;  deeds  of,  38:  his 

Victims,  bends  of  the,  blessing  on  heaven  and 

114,  119;  list  of  the  earth,37;tlie  Sacrificer, 

lower  animal  at  the  28;  Sipivishto,.^;  Na- 

Asvamedha,  218— 223.  randisba,  69. 

Vidhriti,  Separation,  two  Visit nu -strides,  14,  83, 
blades  of  grass  laid  101. 
cross-wise  on  the  altar,  Vishtftrapankti,  the  name 
225.  of  a metre,  131. 

VidyA,  807,  309,  310.  Vishuchikft,  Clioler.a,173. 

See  Science.  Visva,  pei*hap8  Heaven, 

VikarnJ,  the  name  of  a 91,  134. 

brick,  139  Vi8vachi,an  Apearas,  134. 

Vilva  tree,  43.  Visvadb&yas, All-support- 

Vimridh,  A verier  of  ing,  the  name  of  a sac- 

Scorn,  or  Foe-dispeller,  rtfieisd  cow,  2» 
a title  of  Iiidra,  67.  Visva jyotis,  All-light 

Vimea,  a certain  hymn,  brick,  117,  126,  139. 

133.  ‘ Visvakarman,  Omnific, 

VinAsa,  Hiranyagarbba,  sacrificial  name  of 


306.  cow,  2;  Indra,  67; 

VipAs,  a river  of  the  Agni,  158  ; VAyu,  134, 

PanjAb,  the  BeAs,  282.  PrajApati,  116,  124, 

Viper,  46, 63.  126,  160 — 152,  169, 

Viprud-horaa,  Drop-obla*  170,  263;  Speech,  the 
tion,  65.  Word,  123  ; creator  of 

VirAj,  offspring  and  pro-  all  things,  36,  68. 
genitor  of  Purusha,  VisvAmitra,  a celebi  ated 
261.  Rishi,  123,  286. 

VirAj,  a Vedic  metre,  76,  VisvasAman,  167. 

197, 244, 245 ; tbename  Visv&vasu,  thechief-Gan* 
of  certain  altar  bricks,  dharva,  9,  248. 

131,  133.  VisvAyu,  AUlife-support- 

VirtuJ  the  world  of,  188.  ing,  sacrificial  name  of 
Vishnu,  a Solar  Deity,  a cow,  2. 

29,  118, 180,  208,  2^5,  Visve  DevAh,  Visvedevas 
276;  sacrifice,  3,  4,  7,  or  All-Gods,  a ckws  of' 
8,  10,  29,  42,  64;  deities,  13, 57,61, 109, 
guardian  of  oblations,  126,133,176,2  1,273, 

2,39,62;  strodethrough  generated  th  ly 

earth,  air,  sky,  14,  38,  Vital  Airs,  or  ^eniu^l 
44,  83'  101,  216,  254,  6,  87,  126^  i‘/W 


INDEX  oF  NAMES,  ETC. 


343 


130,132,150,169.215; 
deified,  160,  224,  301. 
Vigour  bricks,  125, 
^ivasvAtt,  the  Sun,  209, 
238. 

Ivrit,  132, 

^iydsa,  303. 

'^owjiof  fasting  or  absti* 
nence,  1,  2,  28,  189. 


292,  300,  301  ; mater*  Woodpecker,  222. 
nal,  81;  Child  of,  Agni  Word,  the  creative,  216, 
as  Lightning,  63,  104  ; Words,  play  upon,  3,  4, 
Varu^ia,  81 ; Joy  of,  18,  39,  44,  61,  269. 
Soma,  206 ; sacrificial,  Works,  religious,  804, 
4,  8,  14,  16,  26,  27,  See  Karma. 

46,  46,  49,  60,  92,  94,  Worlds,  welding  of  the, 
172,  265 ; wash  away  161. 
sin,  26,  47. 


'ow-foud,  28;— milk,  09.  Watery  bricks.  SeeApa-  Y.4jAmaHas,  certain  re- 
rata,  vow,  1, 2.  syds.  citations,  175. 

ratapati,  Lord  or  Ouar-  Weber,  Prof.  A.,  xviii*  Yajarndna,  Sacrificer, 
diaii  of  Vows,  Agni,  2,  xx,  7l,  79,  89,  118,  householder,  2. 

120,  140,  141,  192,  Yajfia,  sacrifice,  28. 
ratya,  the  chief  of  a 212,  226.  235.  257,  Yajfiakratus,  sacrificial 


band  of  nomad  Non-  258,  263,  265,  304. 
conformists,  256.  Whey,  175. 
ritra,  the  chief  demon  Which  ? See  Ka. 
of  draught,  1,  10,26,  Whip  of  the  A8vin8,52,53. 
50,  170,  189,  270,  273,  Whirlpool,  224. 

280;  the  typical  enemy,  White  ants,  98,  221. 

®1'  Wliite  horse,  represent- 

•itra-slayer,  Indra,  66,  ing  the  Sun,  113. 

81,  153,  194,  195.  201,  Wild  ass,  221. 

232,  272,  279;  Soma,  Wild  bull,  121. 


rites,  164. 

Yajftdyajfiiya,  a Sdman, 
100. 

Yajfiikadeva,  a Commen* 
tator,  xix, 

Yajnrveda,  lllack,  xvii, 
xviii,  188,  258. 

Yajurveda,  White,  xvii, 
xviii,  170,  239. 

Yajur  verses,  280. 


243;  Trita,  280.  Wilson,  Pi  of.  H.  H.,  151,  Yajus,  sacrificial  formirla, 

ilture,  223.  154,  160, 181, 233, 5^52,  xviii,  26, 105,  261,  291, 

auisa,  270.  255, 260, 261, 272.  298. 

asnuvin,  said  to  be  a Wind,  7,  13,  27,  71,  92,  YajyA,  Inviting  Prayer, 
Genius  of  Food,  209.  167,  214  ; Wind-God,  175. 

122.  See  Vdta,  Vdyu.  Yama,  God  of  the  Pc- 
iLLis,  Prof.  H.,  160,  Wind-Libations,  167.  parted,  36,  77,  105, 

51,  261,  263,  286.  Wine,  Surd,  172.  108, 144,178,  179,  181, 

implements  of,  251-  Winnowing-basket,  3,  5.  218,  225, 236,  248,  257, 

<•  Winter,  82,  123,  129, 

hariot,  167,  262.  134,  198. 

th,  168,  Winters,  a hundred,  14, 

•rman,  257.  19,  255. 

, collected  from  W»hing-Cow,  109. 

•us  places,  79,  80,  Wolf,  74,  173,  185,  200, 

— plants  on  the 
, 20:3,  243,  246. 


288,  290,  295,  803  ; 
connected  with  the 
horse,  59,  248 ; con- 
troller, 248,  308, 

Yam!,  sister  of  Yama, 
108. 

222  ; hair  mixed  with  Ydska,  201,  221, 

Surd,  173,  200.  Ydtudhdnas,  sorcerers, 


nuW  ^2, 117, 124,  Wood,  Lord  of  the,  253.  goblins,  134,  256,283. 
''dk,  Sp.  '• : 188,  208,  Sec  Forest-Lord,  Va-  Yatudhdnis,  sorceresses, 
^ 281,  291,  uaspati.  140. 


14t 


IHDEX  or  »AMB8,  nc. 


Yavas,  tlve  first  hjilvea  of  Yoair,  262,  ZacharIaE,  Mr.  T 

the  iortnights  of  the  Yoking  of  Agni,  168.  ^viii. 
waxiagMoon,  129,130.  Yoiithfullest  of  Gods,  Zeiitb,  Lofty  Point,  oh 
Yayu,  a title  of  the  sa-  Agni  as  oontiaually  of  the  regions  of  t» 

crifiml  horse,  207.  reproduced,  17,  103,  sky,  82,  126. 

Year,  the,  233  ; Genius  105,  121,  168,  171.  Zen8*=Dyau8,  Heatei 
of,  74,  109,  130,  239,  YOpa,  Sacrificial  Stake,  33. 

303^  preparation  and  erec*  Zeus  patCr,  11. 

Years,  personified,  236  ; tion  of,  42 — 45  ; chip 
Creative  Powers,  306.  of,  removes  sin,  62. 


corrigenda. 


page  3 
-»  17 

23 

* 32 

* 34 
36 

- 3S 


>>\ 


‘ 91 

» 92 

• 96 
X rj3 

• ]M 

..  1 9) 

■ 1 13 

- 1.36 

• 157 

• 158 

» 159 

» 159 

- 159 

• 159 
» 164 

i72 

72 

76 

94 

199 

233 

290 

305 

3u7 


line  5 rSad  harms  for  harm 
0 15  of  notes  read  Sky  / for  Sky 

• 11  merchandise /o?’ merchandize 
i»  9 of  notes  read  text  for  texts 

• 4 from  below  read  Ones  for  One 

■ 7 of  notes  read  the  for  he 

» 1 9 read  S.avitar  for  Savitars 

" 2 ('f  notes  read  Acliclihaviika  for  Achhavjtka 

5 f notes  read  Brahmanilehchlumsi/or  Br.ihmanaclihamsi 
' 7 from  below  read  for  31 

'»  6 from  below  read  Agnfdlira  for  Agnfdhra 

" 1 of  notes  read  recite  for  recites 

' 11  of  notes  read  title /or  little 

» 11  of  notes  read  dkishnya  for  dkuhnyd 

X 16  read  Ye /or  Yea 

• 5 of  notes  read  addresses  for  address 

» 3 of  notes  o'cad  Vr/shan  for  Vrishan 

" 9 of  notes  read  VarHirts  for  FarM<r/« 

X 1 of  notes  read  Prauga  for  Praug 
X 1 read  Visvakarman  for  the  Omnific 
X 6 from  below  read  Ayu's  for  Ayn'n 
” 3 from  below  read  Sitikantha  for  Sitikanthet 

• 13  read  bliss-invoking  for  bless-invoking 

• 1 of  notes  read  mid-region  for  mid-regiver 

■ 10  read  strengthening  for  strengthiug 

" 15  read  thou  for  those 

X 24  read  declare /or  Declare 
" 4 read  hold  for  held 

" 25  from  below  read  Mythologie /or  My thologio 

• 14  reaf7  Marntvatlya /or  Marutvatiya 

" 14  read  doth  for  may. 

» 3 from  below  after  IX  insert  1:6 

» 23  read  SautiAmani  for  Saiitnlmani 

• 1 of  notes  read  rain-withholding /or  rain-with-holdiug 

■ 3 from  below  read  turns  for  turns. 

■ 13  read  flow /or  flow  '*  • 

" 3 of  notes  after  XII.  insert  8 

" 8 of  notes  read  sorium  for  seriim 

X last  of  mAes  read  allotted /or  allotcd 


