===== Internet Archive OCR: rkas.1263.whoiskrishna0000kshe_djvu.txt =====

? 


KRISHNA 


<< 
< 
7p) 
a 
—f 
pond 
<< 
% 
Lae 
LQ 
am 
4B) 


HO IS 


w 


| 


mA ie 


Lat eee fee 
bege matt 


rig 
‘or er 


ie | 
Gus 
re, 


ai Ae a 


2 eel 


WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


BY 
KSHETRA LAL SAHA, M.A, 


Professor of English, Nalanda College, 
Bihar (Patna) ° 


PUBLISHED BY 
GANESH & CO., MADRAS 
1930 


PREFACE 


THE wide atmosphere of Indian religious thought 
is scattered all over with drifting mists of ideas 
relating to Krishna. One without proper infor- 
mation is apt to be perplexed when all sorts of 
contradictory statements reach one’s ears concern- 
ing Krishna’s history or romance. Every Indian, 
whatever be his caste or creed, any one who travels 
or sojourns in India, is sure to hear over and over 
again of Krishna, worshipped, loved, realised, 
discoursed on, or alluded to in diverse ways. The 
question naturally arises in” every mind as to 
Whois Krishna, what is the fact about him, what is 
the meaning of all that which is recounted of him. 

In these pages some sort of reply to this question 
has been offered. It may be sufficient for a casual 
querist and provoke the thinker and the man of 
religion on to investigation or disquisition broader 
and deeper. It is a vast subject unlimited in its 
scope, a subject which may fill many volumes. No 
regular treatment of any particular phase of it has 
here been proposed. A slight attempt has been 
made (1) to show the naturalness of the conception 
of Krishna as well as its universality, (2) to 


vi 


indicate the realism and the deep humanity of the 
Krishna scriptures, (3) to give some idea of the 
permanent and pervading influence of the divine 
Person on the life of the ancient as well as the 
modern Hindus, and (4) to give a simple account 
of the ideas and thoughts that work in the minds 
of those who profess and practise the religion of 
Krishna. . 

The want of organic concentration to be 
noticed by an intelligent reader in what is present- 
ed in this little book is due to the nature of its 
peculiar purpose and also to the fact that it was 
written with what may be called unceremonious 
precipitance without any idea whatsoever of 
publication. Here I should not forget to mention 
that in connection with the present work I am 
indebted to’ my friends and colleagues Babu 
Benimadhav Agarwala, M.A., who wanted with 
insistence that I should say something about 
Krishna on the last Janmastami day, and Babu 
Siddheswar Prasad Sinha, M.A., who took great 
trouble in arranging a meeting for delivering it as 
a public lecture. 


Bihar Sharif KSHETRA LAL SAHA 
28th August, 1929 


II. 


ELE: 


EV. 


CONTENTS 


Preface : ‘ ; 


The Great Synthesis 


Different view-points; Krishna as 
Man; as Incarnation ; as God; as ima- 
gination and allegory. 


A Contradiction 


The all-ruling Deity; the lord of 
every individual soul; in personal rela- 
tionship; a paradox; an explanation; 
three aspects. 


° 


Krishna Comprehends All 


The Gods of the Religions are re- 
conciled in Him; all adoration rests in 
Krishna; the ultimate Shelter for all ; 
Krishna as Buddha ; as Christ ; Moham- 
mad’s angel is a radiation of Krishna’s 
power. 


The Highest Point-of-View 


All are welcome to Krishna; a wor- 
shipper of Krishna is in a position to 
entertain all Creeds; he is able to com- 
prehend all religious mysteries; the 
widest perspective ; diverse aspects. 


PAGE 
V-vi 


1-6 


¢-12 


13-16 


17-21 


Vill 


V. Krishna Loves . 


Divine Majesty; the meaning of 
Krishna’s Love; love in human life ; 
the supreme domain of love; Radha 
and Gopis; Avatar. 


VI. Krishna in Nature 


External nature is interpenetrated 
by Krishna’s love and beauty; the 
beauties of nature are passing reflec- 
tions of Krishna’s beauteous Person; 


Radha in nature and human life; 


nature in Govinda-Lilamritam; in 
Mukta-charitam; Suggestions in 
Chhandogyopanishat. 


VII. Krishna in the World’s Literature . 


Song of Solomon; Dante’s Vita 
Nuova; Swedenborg; God as Man; 
Krishna in Shelley’s Poetry ; the Uni- 
versality of the conception of God as 
Krishna ; Roman Catholic Mysticism : 
its meaning; Orpheus, a manifestation 
of Krishna; Sufism; The poetry of 
Wordsworth; Rabindranath Tagore 
sings of Krishna and Radha inspite of 
himself; Maeterlinck; the meaning of 
his plays. 


VIII. Krishna and the Mahabharat . ‘ 


The age of Krishna’s appearance in 
India as an Avatar; wide-spread 
political dissensions; the conditions 


PAGE 
22-270 


28-37 


38-63 


64-70 


ix 
PAGE 


of Krishna’s advent in human society ; 
the contending powers: the heroes of 
Kurukshetra; Puranas and history ; 
robust realism of the Mahabharat ; 
Krishna’s relation with the Book ; 
Krishna determines the mighty Action. 


IX. Krishna and the Puranas - Fore ofa wares’ 


Krishna’s life supplies the subject- 
matter of the Puranas; every sage’s 
mind is occupied with the thought of 
Krishna ; the right way of understand- 
ing the Puranas; Instances of Krishna’s 
universal ministrations. 


X. Krishna in Individual Lives . ee CSO 


Plain and simple accounts of actual 
events in which Krishna appears to indi- 
vidual men and women; Vilwamangal ; 
Gopal Bhatta; Arjun Misra; Jaydev; 
Rai Ramananda; Karama Bai; Ali 
Bhagaban ; Govinda Goswami; Bhakta- 
mal-Grantha. 


XI. Love and Worship . ; : - 86-93 


God as Divine Majesty and God as 
Love and Loveliness; Indian concep- 
tion differs from that in other countries ; 
Krishna is a wonderful discovery ; the 
religion of love ; love human and divine; 
concrete realisation of divine love; 
Krishna’s theft; Krishna’s eternal 
longing for love ; Hindu life as worship. 


PAGE 


XII. Krishna and the Vedas and Upani- 
shads. ; : : : . 94-106 


All talk about Krishna as poetic 
Creation is meaningless; true meaning 
of imagination; Krishna is eternal; 
Krishna and Brahma ; the Character of 
the Upanishadic Consciousness; reali- 
sation of Divinity as all-pervading 
Brahma; an undulating flood of never- 
ending joy; the flood subsides; the 
spiritual conditions of Krishna’s mani- 
festation ; an invocation. 


Appendix : ; : : . 107-114 


— -aaT aaa TST 


WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


1 


THE GREAT SYNTHESIS 


THE word Krishna sums up the truths of all the 
Philosophies of the world. . Krishna is the 
quintessence of the vast and multifarious life of 
mankind. He is on the other hand the spirit of the 
little life of every individual, every man, every 
beast, every bird, every butterfly. He is the soul 
of all beauties, physical, moral and spiritual. He 
is the spirit of all goodness, all righteousness. He 
is the basis of all the interentangling problems 
which make up the universe of Thought. 

Krishna is absolute Divinity. Krishna is the 
tiny helpless babbling baby playing on the mother’s 
lap. Krishna is MAN, Superman and God 
according to the difference of the divine aspect 
considered, He is Real. He is Ideal. He igs 


9 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


Concrete. He is Abstract. He is Historical. 
He is Legendary. He is the Starting-ground 
of all legends and myths. He is the Fact of 
all facts; indeed all facts are mere legends 
when viewed in the eternal light of Krishna. He. 
is the central soul of the Indian Religion. He is 
the ultimate spirit of all the Religions of the world. 
He is the greatest determinant of Indian History. 
He is the mighty Sun round whom the brilliant 
spheres, social, political and _ religious, of the 
firmament of Indian life have always revolved and 
do still revolve. . 

There are who say that Krishna was a great 
Man. They are right. He was a Man who lived, 
moved and had his being on the sacred soil of 
India. Heewas born and brought up, grew up to 
the man’s state and had his relations and friends 
and wives andchildren. He performed magnificent 
deeds, undertook astonishing adventures and 
achieved wonderful successes. He was a great 
warrior, a far-seeing statesman, and a prudent 
politician. He was a poet anda philosopher. He 
was the shaper of the destiny of a mighty nation. 
We have got his eventful biography in a hundred 
different forms.! There are who maintain that 
Krishna is an Incarnation of God. There is 


‘That is when Krishna assumed humanity upon himself and 
entered the sphere of time and history and manifested himself 
to the world of mankind. He thus appears in all the worlds of 
the Universe in succession. Otherwise, as supreme Deity, he 
lives in the eternal Present. 


THE GREAT SYNTHESIS 3 


nothing wrong in the belief. He is an incarnation 
in some sense or other: 


onqarame fase satfeat aaa | 
Dl TaeaIseA Wesarat ws: |) 
viftTI—40 1 24, 2v 


I am Vishnu among the Adityas, the Sun 
among all resplendent bodies, Vasudeva among 
the descendants of Brishni and Arjun among 
the Pandavas. 

Others hold that he is God Himself and no 
Incarnation. gt 


Ud Wee: Ga: HIE waa CAT | 

The incarnations mentioned are all parts and 
fragments of Divinity ; Krishna, however, is God 
Himself. 

They speak the truth. Krishna fs, above all, 
God, the Lord of the universe. * Where is the saint, 
where is the philosopher, who is able to comprehend 
the infinite Truth about Krishna? You can count 
the stars of the boundless space, make a reckoning 
of the granules of sand on the seashore, but you can 
never finish counting Krishna’s attributes : 


4% fag: Ge: Was aT FANT: | 
wearfafe tara west a aaa 
THA—4o 1 2 
a fe a amaq oat fagdar a araar: | 
CAAA ACT CH GENT I 
viI—40 1 9v, 94 


4 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


The gods and the celestial sages know nothing 
of my supreme influence, I am the origin of the 
gods and the spring of the lives of the divine 
sages in every way. 


O thou of infinite power, neither the gods nor 
the demons know the process of thy’ mani- 
festation. Thou knowest thyself, through the 
perfection of thy divine intelligence, O thou 
highest of all persons! 

There are some who are of opinion that Krishna 
is an Allegory, that is, he is a creation of the 
idealising imagination of man, that Krishna is, in 
the language of Wordsworth, 


The gleam, 7 
The light that never was on sea or land, 
The consecration, and the poet’s dream ! 

There is truth even in this view. It is a pro- 
found truth. The eternal endeavour of the human 
imagination is to give concrete shapes to the 
abstract Ideas of Beauty and Truth and Righteous- 
ness, to refract the white radiance of the solar 
light that is infinite into beautiful rainbows and 
many-tinted clouds of ever-varying colours and 
forms. These abstract Ideas are a part of the 
Divine Being of Krishna. The so-called creations 
too which come out of them, are Krishna in 
different forms and figures. But the shortsighted 
man of little intelligence exclaims—can God be a 
creation of the human mind? He should learn that 
the creative power in the mind of man which 
creates these beautiful forms which every one seeks 
is a ray of Krishna’s infinite power. The poet who 


THE GREAT SYNTHESIS 4) 


works in the minds of the poets of the world is 
Krishna. 


waft SOA 
He is the eternal poet; he rules everything. 


The fascinating figures which the poets fashion 
are Krishna, that is, His fugitive gleams made 
permanent in finite frames of melodious ideas: 


2 abner Tee a Rrrgat aq aT Gat | 
ae ate a sana feasted ad agg: WA AGETT It 


BIEL 
The Srimadbhagavat says: 


Thy ways are mysterious. But they can be 
sought and found with the help of the Vedas. 
Thou dwellest in the heart as in a fresh-blown 
lotus, the heart that is free from the contamina- 
tion of profane passion and is pervaded by divine 
love. Thou transcendest all perception and 
thought and art confined to no definitive form. 
Still on account of thy izfinite mercy thou 
makest thyself manifest by assuming any figure 
that is desired and contemplated with an en- 
lightened intellect by the devoted adorers of thee. 


Krishna frames for himself forms of all kinds to 
suit the various contemplations of various indi- 
viduals who give themselves up to Him. There is 
a beautiful song of Rabindranath Tagore which 
gives an exquisite expression to this great 
truth of divine life: 


Thou art as a sunset cloud, glowing with 
brilliant colours, the cherished ideal of all my 
life’s endeavour, the one playful phenomenon of 
the vacant sky of my being. I have made thee 
of the loveliness of my sweetest feelings. 


6 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


I have dyed thy feet red with the blood of my 
heart, thou presiding deity of my evening 
dream! I have made thy lips of the composite 
substance of the poison and nectar of my sorrow 
and joy mingled in one. 


I have painted thine eyes with the collyrium 
of the vain visions of my love, thou who sportest 
in the light of my fascinated eye. I have 
fashioned thy limbs and features with the sweet 
essence of my songs. 


Thou art mine, absolutely mine ! ? 


This is creation. This is idealisation. This is 
realisation too! This is allegory. This is the 
meaning of Krishna being on allegory. Otherwise 
it is mere ignorant prattling. Where there is all- 
absorbing love dedicated to God, there is a strong 
creative imagination, for imagination is the very 
life of emotion. 


© 


‘ Literally translated from the original Bengali. 


II 
A CONTRADICTION 


BUT who is Krishna? Krishna is that God whom 
alone a man or a spirit or an angel can love with 
all his heart and soul and the offering of all his 
being thereby attaining the highest bliss imagin- 
able, the brightest summum bonum of life. That 
Divine He who is the primal originating Impulse 
that starts the creation, the ultimate Basis and the 
original Cause of the universe, is Krishna, the 
eternal harmony of ever-lasting Truth and absolute 
Intelligence and infinite Bliss, the supreme joy 
which is Love and Beauty. : 
oR: TH: FON: afaareataae: | 
SHC UCUIIC ace CALUCACCL a 
Krishna is the all-ruling God; the Highest 
of the high, the eternal embodiment of endless 
existence and perfect intelligence and supreme 
bliss. He is without a beginning; he is the 


Origin of everything that is; he is the Light of 
light; he is the Cause of all causes. 


Brahma Sanhita. 

That is Krishna. But that is notall. Weso 
often hear the phrase, my God, my Lord, my 
Beloved, the God of the man, of the maiden, of 
the bird, of the blossom. Over and above the 


8 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


absolute God, the Lord of creation, the Ruler of 
the universe, the Omnipotent Deity, over and above 
this, there is a personal God, a private God, so to 
say, the God of personal possession, the God of the 
individual heart, the God of the secret feeling 
of love. This God is Krishna, that is God when 
realised in this light is Krishna. The highest 
Divinity alone can yield Itself to the heart’s 
embrace of every individual. God is beyond the 
deepest and the highest comprehension of even the 
greatest philosopher, a Kapila, a Plato, a Sankara, 
a Hegel. 


QU a FF ayaa 
carafe yerasvsfraat Aq BACT: | 
@ sq wife arfed qaze ae Aa AC 
ear fe Reddaeaaaa wafaqa: | 
laTgMladd— yo | cw | 69 


Myriads of solar systems are floating down the 
currents of time like particles of dust in Krishna’s 
boundless Being! The gods and the angels have 
never been able to measure even a fraction of his 
endless entity. The Vedas have ransacked the 
universe of human and superhuman Intelligence, 
have failed to arrive at a conception of Krishna 
and have at last been lost in the search. 


Aaa aaena Fa: 
aarraseaafaea aay 


The Vedas, one and all, are to know Me. I 
am the revealer of the Vedas and their 
concluding parts. I alone know their real 
meaning. 


Srimadbhagavatam. 


A CONTRADICTION 9 


This God too is Krishna. But who is the divine 
Being who responds to the passionate call of a man 
like Vilwamangal? or a woman like Mirabai ? 
Who is deeply attracted by the magnetic medita- 
tion of a little boy like Dhruva ? Who yearns for a 
passing glance of a girl like a milkmaid of 
Brindaban ? 

Who is the God who receives every one’s offering 
of a short prayer, ora hymn, or a song, of a sweet 
emotion of love, of a simple act of adoration, of a 
fruit, a flower, a leaf, a drop of water?’ Who is 
the God who receives these manifold presents of 
love and is delighted and eager to lead the worship- 
pers and lovers to His realm of eternal Bliss ? He 
is Krishna, the lover of the maiden-souls, the friend 
of the forlorn. 

One of the saintly disciples of Sri-Chaitanya has 
beautifully expressed this apparent self-contradic- 
tion, this inconceivable reconciliation of opposites 
in the character of the Divine Being. He says: 


@ ofa eager anfa at ar actfaarre | 
Mafia ways sar 


It is so strange! To whom can I say this? 
Who will believe me? The mighty Lord of the 
universe is engaged in intrigues of love with young 
milkmaidens and plays amorous pranks of love 
with them in the groves on the banks of the 
Jamuna. 


* oF OUT GS aa at A aacaT Ta=aa | 
dae ARRIETA searaTcAA: Ut flar—s 1 2¢ 


10 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


It is indeed a wonder, a surprise to be sure, 
disagreeable to many, to hear that God Himself is 
in love, in a human fashion, with country girls and 
sports with them to win them over to Himself. 
But it is no wonder to the illuminated. He alone 
is God, the God of the gods and goddesses and 
angels and archangels and men and women, He 
alone is God, who does this. The greatest function 
of his Divinity lies in this. But that is a great 
problem which is beyond the province of the pre- 
sent discourse which, however, will contain some 
distant suggestions here and there of its solution.’ 

It involves a profound theological truth which is 
known in all its features only to the Hindus in the 
world. There are occasional glimpses of it in 
Christianity. One may try to comprehend it in this 
way. A yourwg man loves a blooming girl. Itisa 
passing process. But it has an everlasting aspect. 
Youth and beauty are eternal principles. The young 
man and the beautiful maiden will cease to be ere 
long. But youth and beauty areimmortal. They are 
of Krishna, emanations of Krishna’s Self. Krishna 
is, and so Radha is, wherever and whenever there is 
love and beauty and mutual attraction. Krishna 
realises himself in all the love-affairs of the world, 
in all amorous emotions, in all relations of delicious 
affection. As Krishna he is the lover, as Radha he 


'The subject is beautifully treated in Chaitanyacharitamrita 
—a great philosophico-biographical work on the life of Lord 
Chaitanya, written about 1580 by a Vaishnava saint named 
Krishnadas Kaviraj Goswami. Book I, Canto 4. 


A CONTRADICTION 11 


is the beautiful beloved. In all circumstances it is 
Krishna who loves and it is Radha who is loved. 
This is in the eternal verities of love divested of its 
mortal vesture. This is Humanity of Divinity. This 
is how the Lord of the universe is assimilated to 
man that is a poor creature of His, and man is 
elevated to a divine state. So Shelley sings: 


The spirit of the worm beneath the sod 
In love and worship, blends itself with God. 


Corresponding with the earthly phenomena of love 

and their spiritual counterparts, there are divine 
realities in the ‘highest domain of love which is in 
the super-celestial kingdom of Krishna. The terres- 
trial courses of love are faint reflections or far-off 
rehearsals of the eternal realities which are how- 
ever human in their forms ‘though divine or 
chinmaya in essence. This is true of love as well 
as of every other aspect of lifethat tends to Truth. 
The statement 

wa acalgaded AaSaT: TW aaa: 

of the Gita contains a far-reaching philosophy. It is 
easy to talk of the Unity of God, that He is only One. 
But when it is deeply realised, all sorts of startling 
truths flash forth and overpower the most philo- 
sophical of intellects and tear to tatters many a 
most fanatically cherished doctrine of religion. 

There is a third aspect of the great Truth of 
Krishna as embodying the universal principle of 
Love. The subject will be dealt with by-and-by. 
It has an intimate bearing on the question of the 


12 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


apparent contradiction in the conception of Krishna. 
It is this. Krishna is in love with every soul, human 
or otherwise. It is no metaphor, but a fact. 
Krishna yearns for every one, exactly as a pas- 
Sionate youth in love yearns for a pretty maiden | 
budding into womanhood. There are thousand 
obstacles in the way of the consummation of this 
love. These obstacles are created by the profane 
sense-life to which the man or the woman is attach- 
ed. Krishna is kept away by these. He cannot 
embrace the human spirit, unless there be a 
stripping-off of the sensual wrappage. He pines 
and repines. His affliction is eternal. He loves 
and this is the heavy price he pays for his love. 
Man does not suffer alone. God suffers with him. 
How can one love and be selfishly happy at the 
same time ? The crucifixion of Christ proclaims to 
mankind one of the greatest truths of Divine Life. 
Inspite of the immeasurable difference between 
man and God, there is no distance separating the 
one from the other. The designation of Christ as 
the Son of Man is full of significance. But the 
truth was variously expressed, realised and em- 
bodied by the Hindu Rishis many centuries before 
the birth of Christ together with a hundred other 
truths relating to the conception of God. Doctrinal 
abstraction makes an ocean intervene between man 
and God. In religious realisation the opposites 
meet. 


III 
KRISHNA COMPREHENDS ALL 


KRISHNA is not the God of a particular Hindu 
sect. The God who is the God of universal Man, 
of every man and every woman, who seeks God 
and wants to love Him, the same God is Krishna. 
The Gods of the Religions differ from one another. 
The God of Christianity is not the same as the 
God of Islam. The conceptions are different. The 
Trinity of Christianity is not acknowledged in 
Islam. The Incarnation of the Messiah, of God, 
the Son, is regarded as profanity by the Maho- 
medans. But he whose God is Krishna can easily 
accept any God of any Religion as his own God, 
that other God being always a partial conception 
formed from a great distance of the all-comprehend- 
ing Krishna. The God of the Bible, the God of 
the Koran, the God of the Jews, the God of the 
Zoroastrians, the Buddha and Bodhi-Sattwas of 
the Buddhists, the Tirthankars of the Jainas, the 
Fire of those who worship Fire, the Sun of those 
who adore the Sun, are all comprehended in 
the profound conception of Krishna. Krishna 
reconciles and harmonises all the conflicting deities 


14 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


and divinities of the multitudinous sects and creeds 
of the world. j 


TSTYAAIA Astea AWeITSaar: 
asht aaa seer aaeafahraar 
ad fe azar wat a RA A 
ag wafasatea acarasaated 2 
WHAT—s 1 23-aw 


Those who worship other gods with reverence, 
are devoted to them, worship none but Me though 
indirectly. I am the Lord of all religious 
worship and receive and enjoy the substance of 
all rites and ceremonies. They do not know the 
essential truth about Me and hence they are led 


astray. 
Gitagz IX, 25-24: 


You may adore any God, but your adoration is 
sure to lay itself down at the lotus-feet of Krishna, 
for all Gods are this-or-that-sided reflection of His. 
Krishna says: ; 


alse Tayagy 4 A Boqsfeq a foe: 
q used J at ara af a ag areraq 
TT —s< 1 88 


I regard all beings equally whether animal, 
human or divine. I have no friend, no foe; such 
distinctions are not mine. But I am his, 
whoever he may be, I am his who loves me, who 
worships me. I am in him, he is in Me. 


Gita, IX, 29. 

This is the voice of God. God is every one’s. 
The differences of relation are due to differences 
of attitude, of the purity of the Spirit, of the 
devotedness of the heart. Krishna is for every 


KRISHNA COMPREHENDS ALL 15 


Hindu, every Muslim, every Christian, every 
Buddhist : 


PCTS ATS ATT STAT: TTA: 
Aseq AT FTAA: Beate Tea cafsony aa: 


He may be a savage hunter, a Hun, an Andhra, 
a Pulinda, a Pukkasha, an Abhira, a Kanka, a 
Yavana, a Saka; whoever he may be and 
however sinful be his life, he cannot fail to be 
purified if he seeks shelter with Krishna. 


Srimadbhagavatam. 


Lord Buddha is a manifestation of Krishna. 
freafa qafaeree aftsrar | 
AIT SPATIIATA | 
Be segs sy star EX 
Tam aeay 


Krishna’s compassionate heart ceuld not 
justify the practice of animal sacrifice as ordained 
in some parts of the Vedas. He became 
Buddha and put a stop to it. 


Gita-Govindam. 


Lord Christ is an incarnation of Krishna. 


The angel of the Lord appeared unto Joseph in 
a dream, saying, Joseph, fear not, to take unto 
thee, 


Mary thy wife, for that which is conceived in 
her is of the Holy Ghost. And she shall bring 
forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus; 
for he shall save his people from their sins. 


Gospel of St. Matthew. 

This is the Incarnation of the Holy Ghost which 

means Paramatma, who is Krishna, out of whom all 
avatars spring. Krishna is Paramatma: 


16 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


FOYT AGATA BA TAA | 
SURE CIRICRUC GAC ECC IEC OM] 


I bow down again and again to Krishna, who 
is the Soul of all souls and who removes the 
sufferings of all who adore him. 


The angel, from whom the Prophet Muhammad 
received his revelation is one of the myriad 
manifestations or power-radiations of Krishna, so 
we read in the Gita: 

TEVA: GA VE ACA AACA 
TEMA AMA Aa AIT Sls FAT: TST: UN 
iftaT—9o 1 & 


The four divine saints, the seven primitive 
sages who came after them, the fourteen Manus, 
the many divine personalities who govern the 
mental and spiritual dominions of the world, are 
all embodiments of Krishna’s powers, all offspring 
of His infinite Spirit. 
Gita, X, 6. 


Muhammad’s Angel is one of these divine 
personalities.’ 


™The pronouns we and those in the following passages of the 
Koran (Rodwell’s translation) : 


(1) We parted the sea for you, and saved you, and drowned 
the people of Pharaoh. (Sura 2.) 

(2) And when our decree came to be executed we turned 
those cities upside down, and we rained down upon them blocks 
of claystone. (Sura 11.) 

(3) Those who conduct the affairs of the universe (Sura 79), 
certainly mean these divine personalities— 


ASM AMA Aa Aat StH SAT: WS: 


‘Those who conduct the affairs of the universe’ is 
a brief description of the Hindu gods who are recognised by 
the Koran under the denomination of angels of whom Gabriel is 
one. The ‘we’ in the Koran means gods, though ‘gods’ 
meaning differently are discarded again and again. 


IV 


THE HIGHEST POINT-OF-VIEW 


THE God of the Israelites, as we read in the Old 
Testament is sympathetic only to themselves. He 
is hostile in his thoughts and dealings to all other 
races and communities. The God of Islam is 
antipathetic towards the non-Muslims of the world. 
Krishna says: 


aaIsé aqHag 4 A Boasfeq a faq: | 


which means that I am of the Muslims and 
Christians and others as much as of the Hindus. 
A pious Christian or Muslim is dearer to Krishna 
than an unrighteous Hindu. There is nothing to 
be particularly noticed in this. It is as it should be, 
But Krishna as He is worshipped in India, differs 
from the Gods of the religions in certain funda- 
mental aspects of Divinity, though He comprises all 
the Gods of all Mankind. The conception of God as 
Krishna is the only conception in the world which 
includes, adjusts, organises and brings into 
harmony the contradictory conceptions of God 
which are current among mankind. He who 
worships Krishna as the highest Divinity and who 
2 


18 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


is acquainted with the outlines of the spiritual and 
divine Truth involved in the name of Krishna, 
is the only person who is able to do justice to all 
religions, to honour and rightly estimate all the 
worshippers of all the Gods in the world. The 
Christian will never understand the Muslim or the 
Hindu. The Muslim will never understand the 
Hindu or the Christian, The Hindu who knows 
Krishna will never misunderstand the Muslim or 
the Christian or the Buddhist or any one of any 
creed. This is a most significant fact. All the 
tenets and doctrines of all the religions of the world, 
all divine revelations, all spiritual principles are 
easily and naturally intelligible to all who worship 
Krishna and know something of the scriptures 
concerning Him. He who takes his stand on 
Mt. Everest, the highest Himalayan Peak, is able to 
command a view of the mountains and valleys and 
hills and dales of twenty different countries stretch- 
ing far and wide in all directions. He whose 
religion consists in the adoration of Krishna has 
got the perspective that enables him to survey and 
discern even the most secret truths and the deepest 
mysteries of every religion. In fact no religion has 
got any mystery for the Hindu, nothing which can 
defeat his wnderstanding intellectual or spiritual. 
None but a Hindu is able to appreciate all religious 
attitudes, all spiritual mentality. The Vaishnava 
religion intimately relates to those inmost and eter- 
nal functions of the human mind the satisfaction of 


THE HIGHEST POINT-OF-VIEW 19 


which immediately leads to the Satisfaction of all 
its other functions and faculties. Krishna is the God 
of the man whom we can call elemental or universal 
or natural-supernatural: of him who is above the 
conditions and conventions of artificial society and 
dogmatising religion. It is the endeavour of every 
one to attain to such a state. So Krishna is the 
God of every one knowingly or unknowingly. 
God is One, and absolutely One. 


WHATS 
UREA AATAESRICAT 


But this does not mean that He is only one Power 
or one Aspect only. His powers are countless, 
His aspects have no end. Heis absolute Existence, 
absolute Intelligence and absolute Bliss. He is 
creator, preserver and destroyer. He is the 
material cause of the universe. He is the soul of 
every man and every woman, every god and every 
goddess. He is the Father, the Mother and Lover 
of Mankind. He is the Lord of the universe. He 
is conscience. He is the moral Sense. He is the 
spirit of religion. He is providence. He is salva- 
tion. He is eternal Happiness. He is the Master 
of the destinities of beings. He is the dread Judge 
of the actions of mankind, of their virtues and 
vices. He is the Dispenser of all punishments and 
rewards, Heisthe Sky. He is the Sea. Heis the 
Universal Nature in whole and in part. He is 
Learning, and Wisdom, and Energy and Virtue and 


20 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


Prosperity and Life and Death. In all these He is no 
abstract principles or empty qualities. He is 
concrete living persons in being all these. These 
are gods and goddesses : 


cqarfaea: ges: guomecaaes feaea a fra 
Aare aq aw a aa aa act faraaaeceT 
agaaistaen: arate: sarafrecd ifrarae | 

THAT—99 1 2e-38 


Thou art the primordial God of all gods; thou 
art the ever-living Person; thou art the ultimate 
foundation of this universe ; thou knowest every - 
thing and thou art the only Thing to be known; 
thou art supreme substance; thou pervadest the 
multiform universe. Thou art the God of wind, 
of Death, of the sea, of the moon, thou art the 
Lord of Creation and the Father of the originators 
of mankind. 


FS: STATA: agaaaes sey fart go sfexarts 
CIGLEMIS;: PIAS: SATS TISAI: 
TATA Tat FATT 
aftr soar: fant Seareararaear: 

ATR MATH—2& | ¥2-v32 


Thou art the all-regulating Time; thou art the 
essential nature of all things and all beings; thou 
art that which is manifest and that which is not 
manifested; thou art the basis of all substances ; 
thou art the principle of change; thou art the 
attribute of attributes; thou art the sense of 
senses. The lords of the third heaven, the 
masters of the region of the winged animals, 
the supreme authorities of the world of men, 
the chiefs of the nether regions, the rulers of the 
Gandharvas, the Bidyadharas, the Charanas, the 


THE HIGHEST POINT-OF-VIEW 21 


leaders of the Rakshasas, the Yakshas, the 
serpents and reptiles, the greatest of the sages 
and of the celestial fathers, the kings of the 
demons, the Siddhas, and Danavas, are all of 
Krishna, in Krishna and Krishna’s Self. 


The infinitude of the Divine Being comprises 
all these persons and principles. These are the 
integral powers and forces, the supersensuous 
elements of the stupendous scheme of the many- 
worlded universe. And Krishna in his immutable 
unity is in all these. 


Vv 


KRISHNA LOVES 


BUT has he exhausted himself in manifesting 
himself in these universal beings and entities. 
No; His integrity is intact beyond all these. His 
eternal transcendence is independent of his eternal 
immanence: 


AAT aafae as singezealaar | 

aceatfe waar a are Asazafeaa: 0 

14 aceate vor Te F ahaa | 

YMA FT Ysea ARICAT HATA: UI 

arerUeaa face ay: Aa AST | 

cat eatfer aarht aecaretegrarer 
waT—< 1 w-¢ 


My unmanifested Self pervades all universe. 
All beings, all things are in Me. Iam not in 
them. Nay, they are not in Me; behold, this 
is the mystery of my supreme power. Icontain 
all lives, but I am notin them. My spirit is the 
ultimate support of all beings. As the boundless 
and pervading air is in the sky, so all that exist 
are in Me. Try to comprehend this. 


That God who is above and beyond all universal 
relations, He who is the origin and basis of the 


KRISHNA LOVES 23 


Gods of the worlds and their religions, He whose 
eternal independence is inviolable, He who is 
all perfection, supreme intelligence, supreme 
Light, Love, Loveliness and Beauty ineffable, is 
Krishna, the God of all Gods! But the most 
astonishing feature of the divine character of 
Krishna is that inspite of his inconceivable 
splendour and magnificence, inspite of all his 
supremacy, he loves to actually live with every 
one, to hover about every life, to trace every 
foot-step, to hanker after every movement of the 
feeling of love in every being. Krishna is the 
eternal beggar of love, the ever-lasting suppliant 
for the alms of affection. His thirst for love 
is insatiable. He is passionately fond of every 
one. He burns with ardent eagerness to love. 
His sorrow and suffering are infinite.” He is every 
moment suffering with the suffering of humanity. 
He cannot avoid it because he loves and his nature 
is all love. He is following every one like a 
shadow. But every one is forgetful of Him. 
Every human soul is Krishna’s dearest darling. 
He is eternally yearning for union of love with her. 
But she keeps herself coverd up in intricate layers 
of the dark life of sense and does never think that it 
is so. He who loves her with all his soul is Krishna 
and He has been waiting at her door for millions of 
years. 

This is Krishna in his suffering for mankind. 
We hear and also say that God is love. Few 


24 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


know the deep meaning of the saying. Here is 
Some suggestion of its meaning. Krishna who is 
love and beauty in embodiment, in his yearning 
for love and beauty, has created the universe. The 
truth is that the universe has its evolution in the 
processes of Krishna’s love. There is no such 
thing as creation in the human sense. God’s 
creation is spontaneous evolution. 

We see that a man has a household, a domestic 
establishment. How has it come into existence ? 
It has sprung from love. A young man falls in 
love with a blooming maiden. This is the begin- 
ning. Then there is the process called courtship. 
The two hearts know each other. Then comes the 
wedding, then the house, the equipments, the 
family, the relations, the troubles, the pleasures. 
The universé with all its complexities came into 
existence because Krishna wanted to love. The 
blessings of life are expressions of love ; the curses 
are its negations. All virtue, righteousness, com- 
passion, benevolence, amity, amiability, happiness, 
well-being, everything desirable in life are multi- 
farious expressions of the spirit of love. 

In the Brahmavaivartapuran we read that the 
universe will become a corpse in a day if it be 
forsaken by the spirit of love: 


stassca fra sages yar faa 


This spirit of love is a conjugate personality, a 
beautiful pair of splendour: 


KRISHNA LOVES 20 


Tar surance ARATE | 
varenarafa fa ger ede Tat aT Ui 


Radha is an embodiment of Krishna’s inmost 
Character of love, that universal power which is the 
source of his own everlasting delight and of the 
delight of the world. Radha and Krishna are one 
in their essence of being. They have assumed two 
bodies, but still one in spirit. Love requires this 
Dualism. The unmanifested absolute Self-involved 
Krishna is Brahma. The infinite Radiance of 
blank whiteness that surrounds the person of 
Krishna is also called Brahma : 


yasd saataafe acy qaUT 


He is eternally abiding in those infinite regions of 
splendour and beauty and love which are called 
Golak, Vaikuntha, Brindaban, Mathura and 
Dwaraka, all beyond the universe of Maya, and 
other regions of different planes of spiritual 
excellence. 


farcaiahineray gaewadeasey ahh wtarered | 
weHleeeaaaararg meee get dad warty 


aaeatea 


He abides in the realm which is made all of a 
wonderful thought-substance, called Chintamani, 
and which is covered with innumerable im- 
mortal trees and creepers which produce the 
fruits of all desires. He is served day and night 
by thousands of the goddesses of beauty and 
prosperity known as Lakshmis. 


Brahma-Sanhita. 


26 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


ararahaeracasenadhy carts va fasrercear Farha: | 
Tes v4 feqaafasrene: wWaeerfege ae Aare 
aerated 


The realm is called Golak where he lives with 
supercelestial damsels who are embodied radia- 
tions of, and suffused all over with, the love, 
which is the essence of his beatific joy, that 
which is the essence of his self-consciousness. 

He is the soul of all souls. 

Brahma-Sanhita. 
Here he lives and plays his never-ending Lila of 
Love with millions of fascinating maidens all 
aglow with the sweetest and the brightest of 
emotions. They are the personified radiations of 
his own spirit of Love called Hladini. As the 
Lord of one of these regions called Parabyom, he 
originates the incarnations, or avatars of all degrees 
of power and’ authority and sends them forth to the 
worlds with their® respective missions for the 
amelioration of the conditions of mankind. Sri-Ram 
Parusha-Ram, Nrisinha, Vamana, Vyasa, Prithu, 
Rishava, Kapila, Buddha, Kalki and a hundred 
others are these avatars. Christ is one of them. 
Every divinity has a certain function to perform in 
the universal order of creation. They cannot become 
Incarnations. Thus Brahma or Indra cannot come 
to the world as an Incarnation because he has not 
the power or the freedom to do it having an 


‘In Christianity Christ is in fact God Himself being His 
Incarnation. The Koran vehemently opposes this view. There 
is perfect justification of the view of the Divinity of Christ in 
Hinduism. 


KRISHNA LOVES 2% 


appointed duty to perform. Krishna alone is 
independent of all orders and systems. All 
Incarnations are His. An Avatar is a sort of a 
ripple rising on the ocean of Krishna’s love and 
wisdom. This endless expanse of love and wisdom 
is Krishna’s alone and no one else’s. 


VI 


KRISHNA IN NATURE 


KRISHNA is Brahma, the Absolute. Krishna is 
Love and Light and Beauty incarnate. Krishna is 
the Lord of the celestial regions. Krishna is the 
originating source of the Avatars. Krishna is the 
personal divinity of every individual human life. 
And lastly He is the indwelling spirit of universal 
nature whom Wordsworth has revealed to the 
_ EKuropeans ‘and has clothed in such deep and 
splendid verses: ° 

I have felt 

A presence *** a sense sublime 

Of something far more deeply interfused, 

Whose dwelling is the light of the setting suns, 

And the round ocean, and the living air, 

And the blue sky *** 


I felt the sentiment of Being spread 
O’er all that moves and all that seemeth still *** 


O’er all that leaps and runs and shouts and sings 
Or beats the gladsome air, o’er all that glides 
Beneath the wave, yea, in the wave itself, 

And the mighty depth of waters. 


Apparently nature is a creation of physical forces. 
Krishna is spirit transcendental. But the blind 


KRISHNA IN NATURE 29 


physical forces of nature are intelligently guided 
by spiritual forces which work through and within 
them. So the universe is interpenetrated by the 
reflections of Krishna’s love and beauty. The 
longings of Krishna’s eternal love, his radiant 
desires for beauty express themselves in what we 
call beauties of nature. 

The English poet Gray has sung: 

Full many a flower is born to blush unseen, 
And waste its sweetness on the desert air. 

The poet was wrong in making this statement. 
The bashful and loving flower blushes indeed, but 
is not unseen. Its sweetness is not wasted. It 
blooms for Krishna’s pleasure. Krishna enjoys it 
and takes delight in its sweetness. There is a 
purpose in the blowing of the flower. It isto 
satisfy Krishna’s desire for beauty. It is no poetic 
fancy. It is a truth revealed by the deepest 
meditation of the pure-hearted saints. So Words- 
worth says: 

To me the meanest flower that blows can give 
Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears. 

So we find in the Srimad-Bhagavatam : 

qaqwareaa areata fase, Saaz 34 BIHSTSAT: | 
GUAT ASTATART: AAREAAAT FIG: FH 


Translated into English verse it is": 


The silvan trees and creepers soft, 
Enriched with fruits and flowers fair, 
And branches bent their wealth to bear, 
Feeling thrills of passions oft, 


30 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


Betoken Vishnu dwelling in, 
The spirit pervading all that is, 
And showering in their ecstasies 
Nectar’d joy and beauty’s sheen. 


b] 


The immeasurable bosom of nature is over- 
flowing with ever-varying beauty and loveliness 
numberless in their forms and expressions. Who 
will collect the flowers that bloom every day in the 
gardens, meadows, parks, woods and forests of the 
earth ? Who will delineate their delicate combination 
of finely tinted petals, sepals, anthers and pistils ? 
Where is the poet who can describe the millions of 
colours and tinges quickly melting into one another 
in the cloud-besprinkled evening sky plundering the 
treasure-house of the splendours of the sun? Who 
will measure the wealth of beauty which is mani- 
fest in the bright and gaudy plumes of the birds. 
Is there any end to the beauties of the mountains 
and woodlands? The ever-lasting bright blue of 
the sky, the glorious arch of the rainbow, the 
flowing dance of the fountain, the ever-swinging. 
blue-black expanse of the sea—-what do they reflect ? 
The loveliness of the boy, the sweetness of the girl, 
the charms of the blossoming maiden—do they not 
make up a boundless paradise of beauty on the face 
of the earth? All these are multiform impressions 
caught from the dainty limbs of Krishna—remote 
radiations of the resplendence of his love, glistening 
through the inmost heart of nature on her visible 
surfaces. Nay, they are the apparent reflections 


KRISHNA IN NATURE 3 


of the ever-lasting play of love on the physical 
plane, of the eternal pair, of Radha and Krishna! 
Nature is material, panchabhoutik, but her beauties 
are all spiritual He who has his Spiritual 
consciousness awakened in him knows: how to 
Separate these beauties and graces from their 
physical forms and their materia] counterparts.! 
Krishna is revealed to him who practises this 
process of elimination. These beauties are of 
Krishna, in Krishna and for the enjoyment of 
Krishna. That smile on the lips of the girl, the 
love-laden glance stealing from the bashful eye of 
the bride, that musical voice, that graceful pose, 
that elegant movement of this or that youthful 
woman, you praise, you wonder at, you dream of !— 
that is of no avail, foolish perturbation of the mind. 
Shake off that sensuous attitude ; contemplate it in 
a spirit of pure and simple adoration of supersensu- 
ous beauty—that glance, that grace, that loveliness 


' To every natural form, rock, fruit or flower, 
I gave a moral life: I saw them feel, 
Or linked them to some feeling, the great mass 
Lay bedded in a quickening soul, and all 
That I behold respired with inward meaning. 


WORDSWORTH’S Prelude, Book III 


Thrice welcome, darling of the spring ! 
Even yet thou art to me, 

No bird, but an invisible thing, 
A voice, a mystery. 


WORDSWORTH’S Cuckoo. 


This is how Wordsworth has separated the physical form 
from the spiritual truth. 


a 


32 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


will pass on to their proper place in the person of 
Radha, the eternal queen of love and beauty. Here 
it is momentary, there it is ever-lasting. 


Seft weoaeft sient afar We | 
aqeediaht adqarfea: aeaifedt We Ul 


Radha is filled full of Krishna. She is the 
supreme Deity in its feminine aspect. She has 
sprung from the concentrated essence of all the 
beauties and graces which are in the universe. 
She is all fascination. No beauty can excel hers. 


Brihad-Gautamiya-Tantra. 


Krishna is transcendental. His supreme abode 
is beyond the Empire of Nature called Prakriti. 


But He is immanent too. He is everywhere in the 


world. As a lovable svirit He isin my heart. As 
a yearning “lover He is always hovering about me. 
To love Him is to enter on the plane of eternal 
bliss. Moksha or salvation, Sarupya, Sayujya, 
Salokya, is nothing beside the blessed disposition 
to love Him: 


afy afafs Aga FI 
Love and devotion to Me is immortality itself. 


The earth knows not herself in ecstasies of joy 
when she is touched by the dainty feet of Krishna 
while sporting in the woods : 


ca ad faa aia fanifreriiccicqetaamectaate 
ASAT 


KRISHNA IN NATURE 33 


The milkmaidens of Brindaban ask the trees and 
creepers of the forest to show them the secret paths 
of Krishna. The wild hinds, on hearing the melody 
of Krishna’s flute, feels delighted, are attracted to 
him, come near, and worship him with their 
wistful looks. Flights of happy birds flutter over- 
head and eagerly express their joy in harmonious 
warblings when Krishna comes home in the evening 
after his pleasant rambles in the woodlands. 

To speak more specifically Nature represents 
on a physico-spiritual plane an Aspect of Radha, 
who is an embodiment of Krishna’s consciousness 
of Love and Beauty. As such she is ever engaged 
in unfolding ever-varying beauties which are 
without end in order to satisfy Krishna’s insatiable 
thirst for beauty. Krishnadas Kaviraj-Goswami 
while giving exquisite descriptions of the natural 
beauties of Brindaban in his Govinda-Lilamritam, 
expresses the idea in a most definite way— 


The fair woodlands of Brindaban are a reflection 
of the lovely person of Radha. 
In the sixth canto of the Poem we find when Krishna 
enters into the wide woods in the morning with his 
friends and cows and calves, the creeping plants are 
all awake, the trees are in blossom, the animals 
frolick about, the birds warble their pleasure, the 
bees fly murmuring about the flowers, the peacocks 
spread their gorgeous plumes and dance with 
ecstasy and all nature is alive and aglow with the 


influence of an all-pervading spirit of TOV«. in the 
3 


34 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


absence of Krishna she was faint and faded and 
almost destitute of life. Now she is kindled with life 
and eager to welcome Krishna and delight his heart. 
She is full of happiness and desires to adore him 
with charming presents of the same. Her smiles 
manifest in flowers, her songs in the warblings of 
birds, dances in the dancing leaves, delicious drinks 
in the honey that is in flowers, and dainty dessert 
in the fruits, are offerings of worship with which 
she entertains her Beloved. When the large-eyed 
does come to Krishna and fawn on him, he re- 
members the love-laden eyes of Radha. When the 
peacocks and pea-hens dance about him, their 
extended plumes put him in mind of Radha’s 
profuse locks of hair. In the chirpings of the 
sparrows he seems to hear the jinglings of her 
bracelets. The sounds of the cranes resemble the 
tinklings of her anklets. The fragrant lotuses are 
in bloom. Black bees are flitting round and round 
about them. They remind him again and again of 
the sweetly smiling face of his beloved Radha 
with her restless eyes and dark eye-lashes. 
Branches are bent with ripe pomegranates, oranges 
and apples. They reflect her delicate breasts. 
Krishna’s quick glances run in all directions and 
everywhere he catches glimpses of Radha’s beauties. 
His heart quivers with joy as he finds every object 
of nature astir with a living passion of Jove. 
Raghunathdas Goswami, one of the saintly 
companions of Sri Chaitanya, in his Mukta Charitam 


“Ye 


KRISHNA IN NATURE 35 


conceives of nature in a similar way. He Says the 
golden jasmines have got a touch of Radha’s 
beauteous person. The champak-flowers reflect a 
ray of her radiant complexion. The fresh-blown 
lotus vainly endeavours to imitate the loveliness 
of her fascinating face. The bimba-fruit and the 
bandhuli-flower are of the tinge of her ruddy lips. 
The tender twining plants are living similes of her 
soft and rounded arms. The sesame flower speaks 
of her sharp-shaped nose. The silvan flowers are 
her sweetest smiles fixed into fragrant forms. Her 
eye-brows are two rows of black-bees sitting on 
two twinkling flowers. 

When. in the Chhandogyopanishat we come across 
such passages as 


aah dazed a feat Fat are | yea | 

ante @ sxtat faite carerfa aeactier: | 

sgeta afaar Hag SF THey stay 

The vapours rack in the sky and come to- 

. gether. Itis a divine truth called Hinkara. The 
clouds form: it is also a divine truth called 
Prastava; they pour down as profuse showers 
of rain. It is another called Udgitha. Whey flash 
and mutter. It is a tourth called Pratihara. 
The water percolates through the earth, It is 
a fifth called Nidhana. All are processes of 
divine energy. 

we feel that the Rishis are getting glimmerings 
of the Divine in nature which distinctly move in 
the direction of Krishna, but the time for the 


definite conception of him has not yet come. The 


me 


36 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


clear realisation is to be met with in the Puranas 
in such expressions as, 


alder Assage afseraur | 


I bow to thee, Krishna, who have the blue 
cloud for thy body and the lustrous lightning 
for thy garment. 


In the same Upanishad we read: 
AY | woseaact fara: gest 7a faraaery festa. 
STINTATCaa VA BA: 
' A person is visible in the inmost part of the 
Sun. He isall golden. His beard is gold. His 


hair is gold. Everything is gold of him from the 
head to the tip of the toe. 


The conception reaches its full development in 
the Puranas, 


saqeaal afiqrsareradt arm: afisraaataras: 
Rar saw PHA ent fawaragaaican: 


— 


In the resplendent sphere of the sun, there is 
a lotus. Krishna sits onit as Narayan. There 
is a golden crown on his head, and golden orna- 
ments on his arms and ears. He wearsa garland 
on his breast. He holds aconch-shell, a disc, a 
mace and a lotus in his four hands. His person is 
made all of gold. 


A certain chapter of the Chhandogyopanishat 
begins with the following line, 


TATAIHSIS WI VlSl=say WW 1c 1 93 


KRISHNA IN NATURE 37 


Apart from the meanings of the commentators, it 
yields a very simple meaning: 
We pass from the green-complexioned Krishna 

on to the multifarious Nature and from it we 

come back to, and rest in Him. 
This significant statement may be regarded as the 
key to the question of the relation of nature with 
Krishna. 


Vil 


KRISHNA IN THE WORLD'S LITERATURE 


I HAVE said every one worships Krishna distantly 
or mistakingly or unwittingly. I know of a few of 
the wisest and most free-hearted men of the world 
outside India who actually and intimately knew 
Krishna or Radha or both and dedicated their lives 
to their adoration. They are the man who conceived 
and composed the Song of Solomon in the Old 
Testament, Dante, the greatest Italian poet, Sweden- — 
borg, the celebrated Swedish philosopher and saint, 
and Shelley, the creat English poet, the greatest 
poet of the spiritual world. A big book can be _ 
written on this subject. My statements will not 
carry conviction until I break up considerable 
portions of their works and bring out their main 
significance. But that is impossible here. I will 
content myself with one or two references. 

The so-called Song of Solomon is the passionate 
expression of the ardent love of a maiden, who 
according to the orthodox interpretation of the 
Christians, is the personification of the church. 
This love is for a lovely youth whose heart over- 
flows with love and whose person shines with 


KRISHNA IN THE WORLD’S LITERATURE 39 


ineffable beauty. Christians think that this is the 
immortal spirit of Christ in whose 


Face, divine compassion visibly appears, 

Love without end and without measure grace, 
Unexampled love, * * * 

Love nowhere to be found less than divine. 


Paradise Lost, III, 140-42, 410-11. 


The lovely youth thus speaks of the beloved 
maiden: 


There are threescore queens and fourscore 
concubines and virgins without number. My 
dove, my undefiled is but one * * * The daughters 
saw her and blessed her ; yea, the queens and the 
concubines and they praised her. 


Then again: 


Thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine 
eyes * * * if cd 

How much better is thy love than wine! * * * 

Thy lips, O my spouse, drop as the honey -comb. 


Honey and milk are under thy tongue. 
A garden inclosed is my sister, my spouse, 
A spring shut up, a fountain sealed. 


When Christ or whoever the lover may be, speaks 
in this strain of the Church or the loving spirit of 
man in relation to God, the matter differs from 
Krishna-Lila in nothing but the name. The maiden 
says: 


lam my beloved’s 

And his desire is toward me. 

Come, my beloved, * * * 

Let us get up early to the vine-yards * * * 
There I will give thee my loves. 


40 _ WHO IS KRISHNA? 


When a religion conceives the relation of the 
human soul to God in this fashion, it becomes 
something of Vaishnavism, call it Christianity or 
Islam, or anything. Every word of the Song of 
Solomon vibrates with the spirit of what is called 
Ragamuga-Bhakti or sex-passionate love of God. 

The fact is here was some love-inspired Vaish- 
nava, Solomon or any one of his court, whose heart 
was possessed by the spirit of Radha and to whom 
the vision of Krishna was revealed in an over- 
whelming fashion. 

The whole life of Dante was an unbroken process 
of adoration dedicated to the eternal spirit of. 
divine love that is Radha. Radha apart from 
Krishna in her truth or swarup cannot be revealed 
to any finite spirit unless it is able to entirely 
assume the nature and character of the feminine, 
because on the plare of divine life on which Radha 
fives divinity manifests itself as one single male 
Person or Purush 


Gey aad feerq 


and the eternal Feminine Radha and her shin- 
ing attendants. who are her embodied radia- 
tions. Every human being in his or her ulti- 
mate essence is such an attendant of Radha. 
He who is able to realise immediately and 
intrinsically the eternal feminine truth of love in 
him, is at once freed from the bondage of worldly 
life and becomes a seraphic sister of Radha to 


KRISHNA IN THE WORLD’S LITERATURE 41 


love Krishna eternally. All the great Vaishnava 
teachers, the Goswamis of the 16th and 17th century 
Bengal were such feminine spirits of love in their 
inner consciousness. Dante became one like them, 
All the world knows that he loved Beatrice, an 
Italian lady. But even a superficial study of his 
Vita Nuova shows that it was a wonderful kind 
of love, having nothing in it of the love for a 
woman however devoted which sometimes domi- 
nates the life of a man. It was an entire self- 
dedication, a sort of immersion like that of a bee 
in a lake of honey, or the unbroken flow of a 
stream into the sea: 


HaCaT Fat TRTERRISETT | 


Here is an evidence out of many, Dante’s own 
words translated by Rossetti : 2 


But as soon as I thus resolved, I began to feel 
a faintness and throbbing at my left side, which 
soon took possession of my whole body. Where- 
upon I remember that I covertly leaned my back 
unto a painting that ran round the walls of that 
house; and being fearful lest my trembling 
should be discerned of them, I lifted mine eyes 
to look on those ladies, and then first perceived 
among them the excellent Beatrice. And when 
I perceived her all my senses were over-powered 
by the great lordship that love obtained, finding 
himself so near unto that most gracious being, 
until nothing but the spirits of sight remained 
to me; and even these remained driven out of 
their own instruments, because love entered in 
that honoured place of theirs; that so he might 
the better behold her. And although I was 
other than at first, I grieved for the spirits so 


42 WHO IS KRISHNA? | 


expelled which kept up a sore lament, saying: If 
he had not in this wise thrust us forth, we also 
should behold the marvel of this lady. 


By this many of her friends having discerned 

my confusion, began to wonder; and together 

with herself kept whispering of me and mocking 

me. Whereupon my friend, who knew not what 

to conceive took me by the hands and drawing 

me forth from among them, required to know 

what ailed me. Then, having first held me at 

quiet for a space until my perceptions were come 

back to me. I made answer to my friend: Of a 

surety I have now set my feet on that point of 

life, beyond the which he must not pass who 

would return. | 

No psychology of sex-love, that powerful passion 
that a man feels towards a woman, no psychology 
of this can offer an explanation of these strange 
experiences of Dante, especially when we consider 
how this mysterious passion dominated the entire 
life and poetry of the mighty poet. The incredible 
truth is that in Beatrice, Dante found embodied 
his own soul: in other words his inmost spirit of 
love was awakened in him and he saw her reflected 
in the mirror of the figure of Beatrice. And so 
it was not that Dante loved Beatrice as a man loves 
a woman, but he felt that he was not himself but 
what ?—Beatrice? one like Beatrice? a sister to 
her? a serving-maid to her ?—anything and no- 
thing. There arose a confusion of feeling about his 
identity. This is because the ‘sleeping beauty ’ in 
the heart of Dante awoke and she saw that divine 
Feminine of whom all human souls are loving 


emanations. This Feminine is an embodiment of 


KRISHNA IN THE WORLD'S LITERATURE 43 


the love-faculty of God that is Krishna, and this is 
Radha who revealed herself to the perfectly pure 
ensight of Dante in the person of Beatrice. If not 
considered in this light Dante’s behaviour in rela- 
tion to Beatrice is nothing but effeminate insanity. 
The manner in which he personifies and presents 
his master love is extremely interesting. Whata 
profound significance is there in the words: I have 
now set my feet on that point of life, beyond which he 
must not pass who would return: because Dante in 
such moments would set his feet on the very brink 
of the ocean which Prabodhananda Saraswathi has 
called Radha-Rasa-Sudhanidhi, the sweet ocean of 
the love of Radha. In the whole History and Fic- 
tion of Europe there is no instance of love which 
can be compared with this wonderful love of Dante. 
Who in Europe knows the full significance of the 
astonishing life of Dante ? 

Swedenborg who never knew anything of Hindu- 
ism-has given the name of Divine-Love-and-Wisdom 
to God and it is almost a translation of Sachchida- 
nanda which is a name of Krishna. He Says: 

God alone, consequently the Lord, is Love 


itself. Because He is Life itself: And angels and 
men are recipient of Life. 


This is purely Vaishnava philosophy : 
God alone is Love itself : 


that is Love in its ultimate essence is one with 
God ; and God in his essential Being is all Love: 


44 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


TARRAUAAAA AAT | 

HAUT AeTIed Tara | 

Gey afta feat earawara 

TAPIA ATA APTA | 
AAAI | 


TAAAVESAR: SATATTAIFIS: | 
GraesqeN: Walt AWArAqyAeqy: | 


ATER | 


God is an embodiment of the highest ecstasy 
of Love. He fascinates all, even Himself. He 
is the Cupid of Cupids. He attracts men, women, 
plants and animals. His name is Krishna. 


Chaitanyacharitamrita. 
He appeared among the Gopis, his lotus-like 
face beamjng with smiles, clad in a purple attire, 
agarland of flowers on his breast, looking like a 
very Cupid of Cupids. 
Srimadbhagavatam. 


Krishna is Love itself, Love and Loveliness. All 
other attributes of His are consequences of Love. 
Krishna is Love in personal embodiment, Love and 
Beauty: the Love of all love and Beauty of all 
beauty. 

God is Love itself because 
He ts Life itself. 

This is the last word of human philosophy. God 
is all perfection: he is all-completion, and all- 
contentment: why has he taken the trouble then 
of the creation ?—that is, the manifestation ? 


KRISHNA IN THE WORLD’S LITERATURE 45 


Because He is Love and Love knows no complete- 
ment. Everything can be fulfilled, Love never. 
Because Love is eternal wanting in eternal having 
—what ?—having and wanting itself and the Self of 
Love is the supreme bliss of giving away in the 
moment of receiving and receiving in the moment 
of giving, the process ending never. This is Radha- 
Krishna-Lila and this is Love and this is Life and 
this is God in the universe and in transcendence. 
Swedenborg the great saint realised a little of this 
profound Truth in his own life and he wanted to 
remodel Christianity accordingly. 

God as Love is God as Life: So Krishna is called 
Narayan: Nar means the totality of beings with 
man as their head and ayana means Life or the 
basis of life. So it is in the Vaishnava Philosophy: 

Thou supportest the life-process of mankind 
and all living beings generally. So thou art the 
primal Narayan. The universe rests on the fact 


that thou knowest it; thy forgetfulness of any - 
thing would mean its annihilation. 


Chattanyacharitamrita 


In the Vishnu-Puran it is stated : 
atfeett ofeach afia aera aqeferat | 
and in the Srimad-Bhagavat 
acd fag qractraed aelaa aa gare: | 
ae a afta aaa ataeay atest & maar Aetaa | 


Krishna is known as the son of Basudev: 
Basudev means pure substance or the ultimate 
basis of Life. Krishna though He transcends the 


46 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


farthest scope of sense-knowledge becomes an 
object of comprehension to him who goes beyond 
the external forms of life and reaches their final 
substance. I adore Him as the foundation of Life 
with the devotion of my heart. 


Angels and men are recipients of divine Life: It isa 
general truth which is to be met with everywhere 
in the Hindu scriptures: 


Apsley Haka safest wWevsars: | 
feud a sencrfearat aesarfeged ae wef 
AAA | 


The lives of the ruling divinities of the world, 
which mean millions of ages, are bound up with 
one passing breath of Krishna. He is Life eternal 
and infinite. The lives of the gods and angels 
are fractional moments of this Life. 


Brahma-Sanhita 


The whole of the»Tenth Canto of the Gita isa 
magnificent expression of this truth: Angels and 
men are recipients of this life. 

But the: most astonishing thing in the life of 
Swedenborg is his realisation of the central princi- 
ple of Divine Life, so profoundly grasped by the 
Hindu sages and so wonderfully delineated in the 
Scriptures, the principle that God is Divine Man, 
that is, God is the eternal Man who is omnipotent, 
omnipresent and omniscient.! All the philosophers 
and learned men of the world except the Hindu 


' Christianity recognises the truth but does so only half- 
heartedly and half-obscures it in its half-harmonious doctrine of 
the Trinity. 


KRISHNA IN THE WORLD’S LITERATURE 47 


India dismiss this greatest truth of religion by 
honouring it with the name of Anthropomorphism. 
But this word contains the most fundamental truth 
of divine life. So Swedenborg says: 


God is very man. In all the heaven, the 
conception held of God is that he is Man; 


and then, 
Since He is a Man, He has a body and every 
thing belonging thereto; thus He has a face, 


breast, abdomen, loins and feet. * * * He has 
also eyes, ears, nostrils, mouth and tongue. 


In the Chaitanya-Charitamrita this truth is distinct- 
ly stated, 


BON WA Bat aatad ASIST AY TERK AKT | 


Of all manifestations of God the highest is that 
He lives as Man among men: The hunfan form of 
His is His proper eternal Form, 


In the Gita Krishna says: 


aastated At yet: aratt agar 

eased Al Yaaeae \—atar 

The foolish folk disregard me in my assumption 
of the human form, because they do not know 


that in this form I am the Lord of aJl and the 
supreme truth of my life lies in this. 


In the Srimadbhagavat we have 
TATRA S CATACH SASTASTAA 
facateaad # aagefarth: faccat aritacra afean: afar fava 


48 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


His shining face lit up with playful smiles is 
the fountain of all grace, beauty and joy, the face 
with its finely-chiselled ears and cheeks like 
radiant blooms of emerald. The very sight of it 
is ever-lasting jubilance. Men, women and angels 
are drinking his beauty day and night, but they 
are never satiated. 

But these limbs and organs of the person of God 
are not made of the ordinary physiological tissue. 
They are of a fine spirit-substance, a kind of 
exquisite thought-stuff so to say. Milton makes 
some unsuccessful attempts to describe them in 
the Paradise Lost in connection with the angelic 
bodies. The truth is indicated in the Brahma- 


Sanhita : 


wat seq aaefesaafeated wafea afea seated fax 
ted | 

aarahrayaparetanecy miaeaarfeged dae AST 

His limbs are all instinct with sense-faculties. 
They perceive, they think and feel, they support 
the worlds and direct their courses. His body is 
made of the eternal substance of resplendent Joy 
and Intelligence. 

The whole of the poetry of Shelley is pervaded 
by not only the principle but a vivid realisation of 
Sri-Radhakrishna-Lila in its eternal process. He 
first of all calls Krishna by such names as Loveli- 
ness, Intellectual Beauty, and Spirit fair. He then 
incarnates him as Laon in the Revolt of Islam and 
profoundly realises him as Prometheus in Prome- 
theus Unbound. Radha appears as a charming 
vision of a resplendent lady to Shelley’s wandering 


KRISHNA IN THE WORLD’S LITERATURE 49 


poet in Alastor. Shelley’s conception grows in 
depth and reality and Radha is again there in the 
Witch of Atlas, as the Witch: 

A lovely lady garmented in light 

From her own beauty, deep her eyes * * * 

The dim brain whirls dizzy with delight, 

Picturing her form* * * her soft smiles shone afar. 


And her low voice was heard like love, and drew 
All living things towards this wonder new. 


She was beautiful, her beauty made 
The bright world dim, and every thing beside, 
Seemed like the floating image of a shade. 
Cupid charms all. Krishna charms Cupid. 
Radha charms Krishna. Therefore she is an 
enchantress—the Witch! After this Radha, the 
Queen of Beauty and Love, revealed herself to 
Shelley in the person of an Italian Jady named 
Emilia Viviani. She proved, to Shelley what 
Beatrice was to Dante. She was no human being 
to Shelley. He found in her the universal spirit of 
love manifested to him ina human shape. She is 
Sweet Benediction in the eternal curse ! 
Veiled glory of this lampless universe, 
Thou Moon beyond the clouds! Thou living Form 
Among the Dead! Thou star above the storm ! 
Thou harmony of nature’s Art! Thou Mirror 
In whom, as in the splendour of the Sun, 

_ All shapes look glorious which thou gazest on! 

Shelley calls her Epipsychidion which is the 
most significant name that one could coin to 
denominate Radha in her relation to human souls. 


It means a soul upon a soul, a spirit corresponding 
4 


50 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


with a spirit, the divine counterpart of the human 
Psyche. All human Souls are sister-subjects 
of Radha. 


In her mild lights the starry spirits dance! 


The Vaishnava life grows apace in Shelley and 
his conception of Krishna and Radha gains both 
in definite concreteness and philosophical insight. 
Radha, this time not alone but with Krishna, 
descends to the earth as Cythna to love her 
Krishna as Laon and with him to minister to the 
wants of suffering humanity. Laon says of 
Cythna: | 


As mine own shadow was this child to me, 
A second half, far dearer and more fair. 


* * * * 


Her willing feet 

Wandereé with mine where earth and ocean meet: 

Beyond the aerial mountains * * * 

Through forest wide and old and lawny dells 

Where boughs of incense droop over the emerald walls. 

The last two lines may be taken as a short 

description of Brindaban, which means the green 
and flowery woodlands of the world in their eternal 
aspects. Cythna is equivalent to Chaitanya, which 
means supreme consciousness of divine love. In 
the Revolt of Islam Radha-as-Cythna with all her 
divinity and glory and depth of love moves on a 
human plane in the midst of human circumstances. 
In Prometheus Unbound, Asia who is Radha, that 
is, Hsha, which means the desired of all desires, is 
found on a divine plane, in brighter and purer 


KRISHNA IN THE WORLD'S LITERATURE 51 


circumstances and with a still greater manifesta- 
tion of glorious divinity and deeper dignity of love. 


Love like the atmosphere 

Of the sun’s fire filling the living world, 

Burst from thee, and illuminate earth and heaven, 
And the deep ocean, and the sunless caves ' 


* * * * 


Lamp of earth! Where’er thou movest 
Its dim shapes are clad with brightness, 
And the souls of whom thou lovest 
Walk upon the winds with lightness, 
Till they fail, as Iam failing, 

Dizzy, lost, yet unbewailing ! 


That is Asia and that is Radha, the splendour of 
whose face obscures the light of a million moons: 


aaaife aex Fatt ead Saree | 


Shelley thus describes the glowing and far- 
illuminating influence of the divine person of 
Prometheus which is the nam he here gives to 
his Krishna: 


Love * from his soft and flowing limbs 

And passion-parted lips, and keen faint eyes 
Streamed forth like vaporous fire ; an atmosphere 
Which wrapt me in its all-dissolving power 

As the warm ether of the morning sun. 


This is exactly in the manner of Rup-Goswami’s 


. afeearmeangf: saacePegarcararh: | 
aferinefedt carat frasiahr | 


Glory to him who is an immortal embodiment 
of all the purest and brightest sentiments of love 
known in human or celestial life, him the ever- 
expanding radiance of whose beauty enthral the 


D2 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


_ hearts of the damsels of Brindaban. His com- 
plexion is delicate blue. He is the Beloved of 
Radha. 

Bhaktirasamrita-Sindhu. 


Love from his soft and flowing limbs * 
Streamed forth like vaporous fire. 


A thorough study of Shelley’s Prometheus Un- 
bound will disclose many startling facts enhancing 
the wonder of all wonders how Shelley could 
illuminate all his mind and heart and soul with 
so many mysterious truths of the Lila-life of 
Krishna which even the deepest philosophical 
learning cannot reveal to any one. 

Lord Gouranga is called Krishna-Chaitanya, 
because his God-intoxicated life is a concrete 
realisation of the greatest ideal of huinan life, the 
complete awakening of the Krishna-Consciousness 
in the human mind in all its depth and intensity, 
that is the emancipation, the setting-free from all 
artificial super-impositions, the manifold bondages 
of the impure worldly life, the setting-free of the 
divine spirit in man whose nature is eternal 
yearning for union with God. This is exactly the 
meaning of the title Prometheus Unbound, Pro- 
metheus means forethinker, that is, super-consci- 
ousness, that is, of the deep-seated Divine in 
human life. Unbound, that is, how this Divine 
consciousness can be freed from the chains and 
shackles of the miserable life on earth. Therefore 
Prometheus Unbound translated into Sanskrit is 
Krishna-Chaitanya. 


KRISHNA IN THE WORLD’S LITERATURE 53 


Our proposition is that Krishna is the universal 
God of the universal Man, the God who is the 
basis, the soul, the central reconciliation of the 
Gods of the religions of the world. Krishna is 
that God who will spontaneously emerge on the 
perfectly pure heart of a man or an angel whose 
mind has undergone no modification through 
contact with the conventions of the religious 
thought of the world, will emerge, that is, when he 
will overflow with supersensuous love. Krishna is 
that God who will manifest himself when the Gods 
of the religions will put off the external wrappages 
of their formal differences, pass into one another 
and become One in a final and eternal synthesis. 
Shelley who repudiated Christianity and revolted 
from all other religions, and wrote the noblest and 
brightest of all religious poetry thou'zh the world 
is too blunt in its religious sen%e to recognise this, 
is a triumphant proof of this great truth, having 
been filled full of Krishna and Radha in his 
Spiritual life. 

The Song of Solomon is the very soul of the 
religious thought of the Old Testament, the fullest 
blown flower of the tree, and that is all Radha and 
Krishna. Christ’s life and all that about the 
prophecy, the miraculous conception, the lowly 
birth-place, the flight for fear of Herod, the child- 
slaughterer, are a milder repetition of the early life 
of Krishna as the Avatar. Two hundred passages 
can be culled out of the Gospels to show the 


o4 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


similarity of Christ’s teaching with those of Krishna 
in the Gita, though in its ethical aspect only. 

The wonderful philosophy of the Gita we could 
not expect in Palestine or anywhere in the world 
outside of India. The profound conception of 
divine love that is given in the Tenth Book of the 
Srimadbhagavat is beyond the comprehension of 
the abstract European philosophies and also of the 
conventional Christian theology. In Medizval 
Roman Catholic Christianity there grew up a 
delicate course of religious realisation in the line 
of ardent love, of that variety of it which may be 
called sex-love on the divine plane, that is, the 
love of man as a feminine spirit for God or Christ 
as a beautiful and loving youth. In this a sort of 
super-sensuous perception and a_super-sensual 
feeling takes place, not in fancy, but in vivid 
reality, in the acttal relation of the soul with God 
not as thought but as concrete Truth. All human 
experiences relating to this spiritual Fact go by the 
name of mysticism in the world. The existence of 
the word and its use is a proof of the absence of 
immediate experience of real spiritual life. 

There is no word in the world of Hindu thought 
corresponding with the English word mysticism 
which betrays the mysticism of the minds of them 
whom Wordsworth bas called the Jntellectual- 
all-in-dlls. This Christian mysticism so far as I 
know flourished in the Medieval ages among women 
mainly. The medizval convents for the nuns 


KRISHNA IN THE WORLD'S LITERATURE 55 


were the principal seats of this raganuga-bhakti 
called mysticism by the ignorant. There isa piece 
of prose-writing dated about A.D. 1210. It isin the 
first volume of Morris’ Specimens of Early English 
Literature. It is named The Wohunge of Ure 
Laverd,. The. Wooing of Our Lord,~ In it, 
Jesus is addressed as, ‘Jesu, my life’s love,’ ‘ Jesu, 
sweet Jesu,’ and ‘ Jesu, sweet Jesu, permit that the 
love of thee be all my pleasure’. And then we read: 

Ah! what shall Idonow! Now my heart breaks! 

ae eyes flow to flood! My beloved is destined to 

When Christianity came to a state when such 
feelings were actually felt in Christian minds it 
passed into the Religion of Krishna in essence. 
This will read like a translation ofthe following 
words of Sri-Chaitanya: 2 

Ah me! What shall I do? Where shall I find my 
beloved Krishna? Where is the Lord of my 
heart?—he who plays on his charming flute ? To 
whom shal} I confide—who will sympathise with 
my grief? My heart is being rent with the pang 
of his separation. 

The Greek Orpheus with his divine lyre, and 
enchantment of music could be no other than 
Krishna himself in one of his myriad-sided 
manifestations. He could plunge even the most 
worldly-minded men and women into ambrosial 
emotions of self-forgetful love and _ ecstasy. 
Attracted by the fascination of his music wild 
animals of the forest would gather round and fawn 


D6 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


on him and show their delight and affectionate 
feeling for him. He could startle stones and 
plants into consciousness of joy with his melting 
melodies. He turned the rigid heart of Pluto, the 
god of the Shades to gentle compassion and got his 
beloved Urydice back from death to love, by the 
magic of his song. When he played his flute in 
Hades the sufferings of the sinners were all changed — 
into sweet emotions of joy. It is thus because 
ges atta frat earax wea 
TaPAUAGH AAT APTA 
He intoxicates the heart even of Cupid: he 
fascinates not noly men and women, but also 


animals and plants. 
Chattanyacharitamrita ; 


and again 
AR ayeates Of SmaTAat GeaaeT opy ax aK 


On hearing the sounds of whose flute both 
Sentient and insensate things are delighted, 
tremble with emotion and melt into tears. 


Chaitanyacharitamrita. 


Dante saw a vision of Radha in Beatrice and his 
life flowed into an eternity of blissful love, Dante, 
the devoutest Christian of the age. Living so near 
to and also in the land of Krishna, the Maho- 
medans caught some reflection of the love-instinct 
influence of Krishna, and there sprang up a new 
sect among them, I mean, the Sufis of Persia. 
Scholars maintain that Sufism derived its inspira- 
tion from Vedanta. They speak a half-truth. 


KRISHNA IN THE WORLD’S LITERATURE 57 


Sufism bears on its very face an impression of 
Vaishnavism and carries in its heart a deep influ- 
ence of the same. Vedanta is not outside the 
province of Vaishnavism as nothing is. No 
Vedantism could produce such poets as Hafiz, Sadi 
and Jalaluddin Rumi who sang of the beauties of 
nature in their spiritual influences, of flowers, of 
birds and their songs, of the raptures of super- 
. sensuous love and of the wines not of grapes but of 
the spirit and in the midst of them the youthful 
and beautiful Beloved, the source of life and 
love and the enjoyment and sufferings of love, 
and God the beautiful and God as enamoured 
of the human soul can be no other than Krishna. 
The religious practices of the Sufis if carefully 
studied will disclose many a similarity between 
Sufism and the religion of Krishna. “It is a signi- 
ficant thing that a Persian lad¥ of the 9th century 
A.D. is reputed to be the founder of this astonish- 
ing Islamic Sect so inconsistent with the general 
religious practices of Islam. 

The central meaning which a thorough study of 
Wordsworth’s poetry yields is, to put it definitely, 
this: The whole of nature is pervaded by one 
living and loving spirit. He is always one and at 
the same time and through an inconceivable power 
of his, breaks himself up into, or, which is the 
same thing, sends out of his inexhaustible being 
as radiations, millions of individual spirits. These 
spirits live in close contact with him and forms 


— —— 


58 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


a vast community of the sweetest of relations. 
All their concern is to love him and adore him. 
They are always happy, joyous and bright. They 
play delicate and delicious pranks of love with 
their Beloved and are always eager to please him. 
The beauties and movements of nature which we 
see are external expressions of this internal play 


‘ of love. The true religion of man consists in 
purifying the heart from the spots of earthly desire 


by constant contemplation of the graces of nature 
in her changing phenomena and thus to enter her 


' blessed life of immortal happiness and love. This 


is the meaning of Wordsworth’s poetry and this is 
the meaning of Krishna-Lila in its general aspects. 
Here the indwelling spirit of nature is Krishna 
and nature in her essence is Radha who is called 
Adya-Prakriti, that is, Primal Nature. 

The countless other spirits of nature correspond 
to Radha’s attendants, her sisters, the Brajanganas 
and Gopis. The universe of nature is Brindaban 
which means this exactly, for Brinda as represented 
in Vaishnavism is that Power of nature which 


directs and arranges her creative processes. In 


one of Wordsworth’s poems, named Vernal Ode 
he says that he saw in a waking vision ; 


The form and rich habiliments of One 

Whose countenance bore resemblance to the sun 
Upon the apex of a lofty cone* 

The stranger stood alone * * * 

Beneath the shadow of his purple wings 

Rested a golden harp; he touched the strings 


KRISHNA IN THE WORLD’S LITERATURE 59 


And sang *** Mild pastoral Muse, 
Him rather suits it, side by side with thee, 
~ Wrapped in a fit of pleasing indolence, 
While thy tired lute hangs on the hawthorn tree 
To lie and listen * * * 
To the soft murmur of the vagrant Bee. 

This stranger may be thought to be a passing 
vision of Krishna playing on his flute and then 
sitting wrapped in a fit of love-Jonguor with Radha, 
a pastoral Muse sitting by. So Rabindranath 
Tagore sings: 

When the sunshine is sweet 
And the time is lazy, the trees 
Rustle and the shadows play. 

I know not what image of thine 


Flashes into my vision out of the 
Blue of the sky.’ 


Beneath the concave of an April sky, 
When all the fields with freshest green were 
dight. | 


So begins Wordsworth’s poem. Wordsworth 
visions Krishna-Lila in the inner recesses of nature, 
that is on the natural plane. Shelley celebrates it in 
a higher spiritual realm. Vaishnavism delineates 
the revelation of the same in the supreme divine 
sphere, 

Rabindranath Tagore is a Brahmo. As such he 
has no faith in the Krishna Cult. He does not 
believe in the existence of Krishna or any of the 
gods. But the deepest and the most beautiful parts 
of his poetry are all permeated by the spirit of 


' Literally translated from the original Bengali. 


60 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


Krishna, by the living influence of the bodily 
presence of Krishna as it were. When he sings 


grat gf wales ars oa | 
eT aaa ST Za 


Thou beautiful one, thou camest this morning 
with a scarlet parzjat in hand. 
His God becomes Krishna, the all-beautiful one, 
with a red parijat, an emblem of that love which 
fulfils all desires and gives immortality : 


afy afafe yararergacary eae 


When he writes: 


Have you, O Lord of my heart, finished 
enjoying all that was mine, all my beauty, my 
song, my love, my waking and sleep ? Do you 
find my embrace wanting in intensity of passion, 
my kisses devoid of intoxication? Are the nights 
of your secret visits to the flowery grove of my 
life over now?! « 


He assumes, perhaps unconsciously, the char- 
acter of a Gopi, one of Krishna’s darlings in the 
highest heaven of immortal love. When his 
Divinity appears, as it does so often, as a fascinat- 
ing Feminine, he becomes a worshipper of Radha. 
How wonderfully diverse art thou in the world, 
O damsel of myriad forms! Thou art sparkling 
with a million rays in the bright blue sky ! Thou 
art beaming with over-flowing joy in groves of 
flowers! Thou art sporting with restless feet in 


heaven and on earth, O thou ever-flitting goddess 
of brilliance and beauty ! ' 


1 Literally translated from the original Bengali. 


KRISHNA IN THE WORLD’S LITERATURE 61 


In the whole world of thought this conception of 
Divinity can mean nothing but Radha. Hundreds 
of instances of this type of conception can be 
found in the abundant poetry of Rabindranath 
Tagore. 

Maeterlinck is one of the most prominent world- 
figures of literature to-day and some of his best 
works happen to be suggested by some of the lesser 
aspects of Radha-Krishna-Lila of love, treated in the 
symbolical fashion, so that divested of their spirit- 
ual significance, they at once come downto a low 
sensual plane and become mere third-rate literature 
worse than the worst of the minor Elizabethan 
dramas. His Pelleas and Melisanda and Alladine 
and Pallomides are instances in question. The 
name Alladine seems to be the writer’s corruption 
of the Sanskrit Ahladini which is “the primary 
name of Radha, the power that enraptures the 
heart of Krishna. The heroines of these dramas 
as well as their lovers violently cut off all the 
moorings of their social life and fling themselves 
into the fierce whirlpools of frantic passions which 
drift them wildly into a bottomless pit of annihila- 
tion or an infinite ocean of ecstasy which, no one 
knows! If it is intended to indicate that supreme 
course of religious life which is sanctioned by such 
verses of the Gita: 


aaqaeaRasy Aas WT AS | 
ae cal aaa wrerhysarfa ar ae: th 


62 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


Fling away all your duties, all your forms of 
religion; surrender yourself entirely unto me; I 
will save you from all sins and make you 
immortal ; don’t regret. 


Gita, X VIII, 66: 


that is, passionate and all-sacrificing love for 
Krishna, then it is all right and that is the mean- 
ing. If that is not the meaning it is not worth 
the trouble of a serious reading. It is mere 
Byronism devoid of Byron’s splendour and first- 
hand realism. ) 

Every one endowed with a keen consciousness 
of beauty and feeling of love is in a sense a wor- 
shipper of Krishna. God as Krishna alone is the 
Divinity who is pervadingly and interpenetratingly 
existent in the life of mankind from the highest to 
the lowest grade of it. Every man, every woman, 
presents offerings of adoration to Krishna, distantly 
or mistakingly or unconsciously. Every poet is 
a worshipper of Krishna. Every lover’s life is a 
ceremony in the apotheosis of Krishna since the 
lover is a medium through whom Krishna has his 
intrigues of love with his Queen of Beauty repre- 
sented by the beloved. He is Krishna and can be 
none but Krishna, the supreme Lord of Love and 
hence of the Universe of which Love is the central 
soul: 


Love gives it energy, Love gave it birth. 


This brief account and this bird’s-eye view will 
show how in all ages and all countries and under 


KRISHNA IN THE WORLD’S LITERATURE 63 


the most diverse intellectual circumstances the 
human mind has spontaneously turned to Krishna, 
contemplated him, sung of him and adored him 
with the offerings of its highest treasures of 
thought. 


Walle 


KRISHNA AND THE MAHABHARAT 


THOUGH Krishna is of the whole universe and is 
wistfully looking up for favour of love to the face 
of every one in the world, he has been known, 
loved and consciously realised only in India for 
the last three thousand years at least. He appear- 
ed as an Incarnation, the greatest of all Incarna- 
tions, on the vast arena. of the Indian Aryan and 
non-Aryan life at the time when the struggle for 
settlement, establishment of political power, 
development of a moral and religious civilisation 
and the production of a wonderful philosophical 
literature, the Vedas and the Upanishads, was over 
and there arose the necessity of a new evolution, 
anew adjustment and organisation of the national 
elements which had been decentralised and hence 
fallen into disorder and set up a moral fermenta- 
tion. This state is referred to in the Puranas as 
the last epoch of the Dwapara Yuga. We may say 
that the momentous event of the advent of Krishna 
in Indian national life happened in that stage of 
transition when the first philosophic age was over 
and the epic age began. 


KRISHNA AND THE MAHABHARAT 65 


wal yar aaet werfdafa ara | 

AAMC] FIA TARE | 

I assume human form and come down to the 
world of man' whenever virtue and righteous- 


ness decline and vice and iniquity become 
predominant in society and state. 
CHLOE LN? 


Virtue and Righteousness failed and vice and ini- 
quity prevailed in India. Peace and repose broke 
away and disquiet and disturbance arose. The 
central suzerain Supremacy ceased to exist, the 
paramount power of control dissipated away and 
conflict for political authority ensued. The conde- 
scendence from on high of a supreme power to put 
things to rights was the crying need of the time. 
The voiceless call of the nation pierced the sky. 
God responded. Krishna appeared. air new era 
dawned on Indian History. ° When peace and 
prosperity reigned in India under a permanent 
government, arts and industries flourished, moral 
and intellectual culture progressed, pursuit of 
literary and philosophical] knowledge occupied a 
large portion of the time and energy of India, the 
devout religious practices of the tapobans, those 
Sweet and tranquil hermitages, went on uninter- 
rupted, the beneficent intervention of Krishna was 
not called for. When kings and emperors like 
Dushmanta, Bharat, Jajati, Puru, Prabir and Kuru, 
ruled in India, there was no internecine struggle 


' Literally create myself or shape a body for myself, 
5 


66 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


for power. The country kept her vast integrity 
intact. But when the integral unity of the country 
broke up, diverse isolated monarchies and petty 
principalities arose, and constant contention for 
supreme power became the common political 
phenomenon of the country, Krishna came forward 
and took his legitimate seat at the helm of affairs. 
The names of hundreds of kings and princes occur 
in the bead-roll of the warlike leaders of the vast 
and dreadful armaments of the great war of Kuruk- 
shetra. The Pandavas and the Kaurava-brothers 
were there of course in the front ranks. Beside 
them there were the Jadavas of the kingdom of 
Dwaraka. After them the prominent ruling chiefs 
were Virat, Somadatta, Karna, Valmik, Sakuni, 
Jaydratha, , Dhristadyumna, Drupad, Salya, the 
chiefs of Surasena, Magadha, Kashi, Kalinga, then 
Bhagadatta, Susharma, Bhurisrava, Jujudhan, 
Purujit, Kuntibhoji, Shaivya, Judhamanya and a 
hundred others. Besides there were Kansa, Sishu- 
pal, Jarasandha, Dantabakra, Jubanaswa, Anu- 
salwa, Niladhawaj, Manibhadra, Mauradhawaj, 
Vabrubahan and many others with whom Krishna 
or the Pandavas had to deal. Itis asad mistake to 
regard these as fictitious names. The Mahabharat 
is a historical epic. It is history, poetry, legend, 
scripture and philosophy all in one, but mainly 
history. 

History is a record of the principal movements 
and prominent incidents of human life in its 


KRISHNA AND THE MAHABHARAT 67 


worldly aspects. Puran is also history, but not of 
the outer social and political features of human 
life, but of man’s inner moral and spiritual experi- 
ences expressed in terms of fact and reason. He 
alone is able to comprehend the real and truthful 
meaning of the Purana who possesses a clear con- 
sciousness of the fact that there is a concrete 
spiritual universe corresponding with the world of 
the psychologico-physical facts of the ordinary 
human life, a universe, which is infinite. He who 
reads the Mahabharat and comes to the conclusion 
that it is all fable at once betrays his thickness of 
perception and obtuseness of understanding or 
purblindness due to prepossession of prejudice, 
The poetical idealisation, the imaginative over- 
growth of adornment and the under-current of 
moral and spiritual purpose are as distinctly 
intelligible as the substantial ‘course of historical 
action and the solid existence of historical fact. 
There is a mighty vibration of vivid and veritable 
human life, actually dived, not realistically conceived 
as in a drama of Shakespeare ora novel of Dickens, 
throughout the central narrative of the Mahabharat. 
No effort is needed to discover this, 

Krishna is undoubtedly the hero, the presiding 
power of the Mahabharat. As history it has 
Krishna, the matchless genius, as its central 
figure, its prime mover. As fiction it has frequently 
turned to Krishna, the divine ideal for its meaning 
and colour. As poetry it has drawn its inspiration 


68 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


from Krishna, the fountain-head of all beauty and 
truth. As scripture it has taught the religion of 
Krishna-bhakti. This is the relation between 
Krishna and the Mahabharat. Krishna as histori- 
cally manifested and then as a living ideal since 
his disappearance, is the all-influencing political, 
social and spiritual power of the Pauranic and the 
heroic age or the post-Pauranic and pre-Buddhistic 
age of India. Krishna is the mighty Protagonist 
of the splendid drama of the Aryan life between 
the end of the Upanishadic age and the beginning 
of chronological history. It was he who inter- 
connected and gave organic unity to the scattered 
forces of Indian life. 
afy aafae Nd aa afta 37 


All these are strung on Me as the pearls of a 
necklace are strung on its thread, 


is true of the life of the universe as well as of the 
ancient history of India. Krishna is the golden 
thread on which the widely diverse life of the 
ancient Indian Aryans is strung. He recognised 
and reconstructed Indian state and society and its 
political life after its break-down since the passing 
away of the glory of the Upanishadic consumma- 
tion. Since then all the courses of Indian life 
have moved either with Krishna as their centre or 
with various relations to him, in obedience to his 
supremacy or in wicked opposition to him. 

The age of the Mahabharat is the age of a great 
political revolution. Fierce internal dissensions 


KRISHNA AND THE MAHABHARAT 69 


are fretting away the national vitality. Dark 
thunder-clouds are gathering in grim and sullen 
procession from sky to sky. Terrible grumblings 
are bursting out of them at irregular intervals. 
The huge vessel of the gigantic life of the Aryan 
nation is trembling on the bottomless waters of the 
Indian ocean. Krishna is casting eagle-eyed 
glances sweeping far and wide and observing 
the conditions from every perspective. He is 
quiet, tranquil and firm. His face is glowing 
with the reflection of a deep intellectual illumina- 
tion. His heart is instinct with a hushed-up 
electric energy. He is resolute and full of the 
spirit of penetrating inquiry. He is scanning all 
affairs. There is nosymptom of haste. But he is 
_ keenly vigilant. He sees that the war is inevitable 
and imminent. He contemplates, forms decisions 
and draws up a mental programme of how to 
proceed, what to achieve, what efforts 
to make and how to direct them, what are 
the means to be adopted, whom to deal with and 
how to do that, what forces to be employed and to 
what purposes! The Kauravas, the Pandavas, the 
Jadavas and all the ruling powers of India are 
there ready for a bloody conflict, with their 
countless regiments of veteran fighters. The 
greatest hero of the world, the sharp-sighted states- 
man, the mightiest genius endowed with endless 
learning and all-accomplishing spiritual forces is 
there in the midst of this wilderness of armed and 


70 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


armoured men, directing their warlike move- 
ments with the movements of a finger. We find 
Krishna in this circumstance and in the midst of 
these conditions on the eve of the war of 
Kurukshetra. It is an inspiring vision. And then 
from the wedding of Draupadi to the destruction of 
the Jadavas on the sea-shore at Pravash, Krishna 
is everywhere and in everything inciting all the 
forces that work the complex scheme of the 
tumultuous national life. 


3) . 


IX 


KRISHNA AND THE PURANAS 


THERE are eighteen principal and eighteen minor 
Puranas and countless other scriptures of earlier 
and later origins like Haribansa, Gopal-Tapani 
Sruti, Brahma-Sanhita and Narada-Pancharatra. 
All these are pervaded by descriptions, narra- 
tions, philosophical discussions and references of 
Krishna and his Lila-life, his adventures, his per- 
formances, his virtues, his valour, his power, his 
glory, his divinity, his pbeatity, his love, his 
Mmagnanimity, his generosity, praises, prayers, 
hyms and songs dedicated to him and above all bis 
bhaktanugraha, his loving-kindness shown on 
hundreds of occasions to his worshippers. Krishna 
is the omnipresent presiding Deity of the Hindu 
Scriptures after the Vedas and the Upanishads. 
He is at the beginning, in the middleand at the 
end of almost every aspect of India’s religious life, 
He is the foundation as well as the subject of all 
these holy writs of the Hindus. He appears over 
and over again permeating the sacred writings in 
innumerable forms of beauty, sentiments, music, 


02 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


colour and song. Krishna is the one absorbing 
object of thought and meditation and desire. In 
sorrows and joys, in tears and smiles, in every 
occurrence of daily life, Krishna is there as the 
life-power of every process of life. Krishna fills 
with his vivifying influence all noble needs, great 
enterprises, admirable accomplishments, warlike 
undertakings, religious practices, spiritual con- 
templation, holy sacrifices and other rites and 
ceremonies, all endeavours of spiritual realisation 
of life, every form and every process of human 
energy in the Pauranic world. 

Sanak, Sanatan, Sananda, Sanat Kumar, Narada, 
Suka, Kasyap, Bhrigu, Atri, Angira, Vyas, Parasara, 
Vashishtha, Yajnabalka, Harit, all are occupied 
with the thought of Krishna. Who is Krishna ? 
What is Ktishna? Why is Krishna? How to 
realise Krishna in* life? These are the common 
questions. Krishna is Brahma. Krishna is 
the Oversoul. Krishna is supreme Divinity. 
Krishna is Man. Krishna is Superman. Krishna 
is the soul of man. Krishna is Narayan and the 
greatest of men. He alone is adorable. All 
worship is due to him. He is the greatest of all 
gods. All gods are in him. He is Kapil, he is 
Vadarayan, he is Patanjali. Heis Vasudev. He 
is the beloved son of Jasoda- Heis Nrisimha. He 
is Vamana. He is Parushu-Ram. He is the 
destroyer of Ravana. Such are the topics of 
Pauranic treatment. Such are the subjects of 


KRISHNA AND THE PURANAS 03 


poetical or philosophical delineation or discussion. 
The Rishis, the Munis, the dreamers and devotees, 
the scholars and poets, men, gods, giants, demons, 
all are contemplating Krishna, discussing him, 
studying him, understanding him, seeking him, 
shirking him, struggling with him, warring with 
him. The winds are scattering the music of his 
name far and near. The mountains are sending 
back the echoes of its melodious vibrations. The 
waves of the ocean are quivering in response 
to these ! 

That is the world of human life represented by 
the Puranas. He who does not know this fact 
may ignorantly affirm that Krishna is fable. He 
who will study the Puranas with open eyes and 
free hearts will see clearly that no such literature 
could grow up without a real life corresponding with 
them as its moral support. If is’impossible for such 
a huge literature, so earnest, so vivid, so definite and 
so deep, to come into existence without a counter- 
part of actual life behind it tosupply its inspiration. 
No literature of fiction like that of Victor Hugo or 
Sir Walter Scott was known or thought of in 
ancient times. The supernaturalness, the incredible 
exaggerations, the apparent fantasticities of the 
Hindu Scriptures are due to the fact, which is 
always ignored, that though in the world of physical 
and sensuous objects everything is subject to an 
imposition of limit and hence the mind having to 
deal exclusively with the material world gets 


74 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


accustomed to limitation at every step and has the 
character of its thought rigidly moulded by this 
poor limitedness of process, when the inspired and 
illuminated mind breaks asunder the Liliputian 
walls of limits and launches out into the boundless 
universe of spirit, it grows to inconceivably large 
dimensions of thought and its conceptions swell up 
to corresponding breadth of stature. If we 
remember this great psychological truth, we will 
have to wonder not at the fantastic magnification 
of the truths which seem to be wild fantasies and 
nothing else, but the extraordinary power of self- 
control with which the great writers must have 
kept their imagination within reasonable bounds of 
illuminated intelligibility. One thing more is to 
be borne in mind by the critic who will pass 
judgments on the Puranas. The logic of thought 
and action that will.hold good in the physical 
world, must be modified, supplemented and enlarged 
in its scope in order to be applicable in the spiritual 
sphere, and at times must be supplanted by a 
higher logic. The human _ intellect, however 
developed, is a poor instrument often impotent, in 
manipulating spiritual objects. 

The Puranas are not fables but histories of 
human experiences on the supersensuous plane. 
The life and works of Krishna delineated in the 
Puranas are facts appearing to the natural eye as 
magnified and coloured by rays not of imagination 
but of eternal spiritual truth refracted by physical 


KRISHNA AND THE PURANAS 79 


circumstances. We are considering the omni- 
presence of Krishna in the Pauranic world. Those 
who are inclined to suppose that Krishna is mere 
imagination should take this into consideration— 
this ubiquitous ministration of Krishna in the 
Pauranic world. King Prithu performs a great 
sacrifice. Krishna is the guardian-angel who 
saves him from the hostility of Indra, wards off the 
evils intended to him by Indra, sanctifies the 
sacrifice and blesses him with immortality. The 
angry Durbasa is about to blast with curses the 
pious life of king Ambarish. Krishna chastises 
the arrogant ascetic and glorifies the virtuous king. 
The little prince Dhruba is wounded in his feeling 
by the contemptuous treatment of a step-mother, 
goes to the forest in search of Krishna hearing 
that Krishna alone can console his aggrieved spirit, 
becomes rapt in meditation, and passes many a 
year insensible to the external world. Krishna is 
attracted by his powerful contemplation, intense, 
ardent and self-forgetful, fulfils his desire and 
raises him to an immortal position higher than that 
of the king of gods. Hiranyakashipu is a mighty 
demon. He wants to try his strength with 
Krishna whom he regards with virulent hostility. 
He has vanquished all other heroes in the world. 
He must achieve a victory over Krishna. His son 
Prahlad is a little boy with a heart full of love for 
Krishna. He is inhumanly persecuted by his father 
for his devotion to Krishna. Krishna incarnates 


76 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


himself as a man-formed Lion, kills Hiranyakashipu 
and grants Prahlad the supreme favour of 
immortal bliss and eternal love of the Lord. There 
is an indigent Brahman named Sudama. His life 
is devoid of everything but full of love for Krishna. 
He goes to Dwaraka to see Krishna with the poor 
present of a handful of fried and crushed paddy 
called chira. Krishna honours him in a princely 
way, accepts his present as if it were a priceless 
treasure because it is a_ present of love. 
When he comes back to his cottage he finds 
to his unutterable surprise that his little 
cottage has been transformed into a magnificent 
palace. Gayasura, the son of. Tripurasur, 
is a worshipper of Krishna. He has grown to 
indomitable power. He makes a conquest of the 
blessed country of the gods. The gods fall 
prostrate at the feet.of Krishna and pray that he 
may save them from the humiliation. Krishna 
tries Gayasur’s love and asks whether he can turn 
to stone at his request. Gayasura can do anything 
for Krishna. He agrees on condition that Krishna 
will forever stand upon him with his lotus-like 
feet planted on his head of stone. The ocean has 
been churned and amrita has arisen out of the 
depths. The devas and the asuras are contending 
with one another over the possession of the 
immortal drink. Krishna assumes the form of a 
charming goddess, deceives the Asuras and makes 
the devas the permanent owners of the ambrosial 


KRISHNA AND THE PURANAS v7 


liquor. King Vali is a munificent giver of gifts. 
His bounty is limitless. He proudly thinks that 
he has the power and the means to grant anything 
and everything that any one wili ask of him. 
Krishna comes to him asa dwarf and begs of him 
a little land to hold three steps of his tiny foot. 
Vali smiles and chides the little beggar for not 
praying for a more valuable boon, say a wider piece 
of land and gives him what he wants. But, behold! 
a miracle of miracles! The dwarf takes one step 
and it covers the whole of the earth and the 
heavens. He takes another step and his little foot 
occupies all the-nether regions. Where is the 
place for the third step? Vali begs that it should 
be on his own head. He leaves the earth and goes 
to the under-world ; but Krishna is compelled by 
his love to stand for ever at the door of his 
subterranean palace. Thus Bhagavan is conquered 
in conquering the Bhakta. Indra possesses the 
wonderful celestial flower called Parijat which can 
fulfil all the desires of its owner. Indra in his vain- 
glory thinks that no one has the power to enjoy 
this immortal flower except himself, not even 
Krishna. Satyabhama Krishna’s beloved queen 
wants the flower. Krishna fights with Indra and 
makes him understand whether there is any one in 
the world who deserves to have the flower. Indra 
surrenders the floral treasure and it blooms in 
the queen’s garden. Sisupal is a powerful tyrant 
and an invincible worker of iniquity. He has kept 


78 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


in prison as captives about a hundred ruling princes 
and wants to sacrifice them. He defies Krishna 
and denies his divinity. Krishna cuts off his head 
with his irresistible disc called Sudarshan and sets 
the princes free. The Puranas relate hundreds of 
events, incidents and adventures of diverse orders 
all in beautiful settings of profound spiritual 
significance and everywhere celebrates the infinite 
glory of Krishna’s divine life. The greatest, the 
deepest, the most poetical and the most philosophi- 
cal of the Puranas is the Srimad-Bhagavat. 


re 


x 


KRISHNA IN INDIVIDUAL LIVES 


BESIDES these we have got authentic records kept 
by saintly persons of actual events, anecdotes and 
incidents occurring in this modern age of general 
scepticism—-occurrences in which Krishna has 
appeared to men and women and boys and girls and 
favoured them and blessed them and severed their 
bonds of earthly life and made them eternally 
happy. There is absolutely no colouring of imagi- 
nation in these simple narratives. They are naked 
statements of facts made by men of holy lives and 
natures of pristine purity who could have no motives 
to perpetuate falsehoods. It is ‘impossible that 
such saints and philosophers as Sri-Rup and Sri- 
Sanatan, who held the highest positions at the 
court of Hussain Shah, the powerful sovereign of 
the greater Bengal in the 16th century, threw away 
their honours and wealth like tattered clothes and 
became sannyasis for love of Krishna and 
Chaitanya, it is impossible that such men whom 
even a Mahomedan emperor like Akbar was eager 
to honour with gifts which they refused, should tell 


80 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


us fables for truths about Krishna their beloved 
Lord and God. The accounts of Krishna’s personal 
manifestation often as a restless boy of a bright- 
blue complexion, most lovely and loving and of an 
exquisitely-formed figure and finely-chiselled limbs 
are too many to be mentioned here. I have 
referred to the wonderful story of Vilwamangal’s 
life. His Krishna-Karnamrita is perhaps the most 
passionate expression of divine love in the world. 
When he sees Krishna after a long wander- 
ing through forests from the Godavary to the 
Jamuna, in a wild quest for Krishna, he exclaims 


aR: 44 7 aRaVSG ¥ 

aaa F WalyATsd J 

afasig wa sfiffaazat a 

PUSH YA AT SAT | 
FOUNDA | 


Is this Cupid himself? Is this a charming 
sphere of radiance? Loveliness incarnate is it? 
Eternal delight for my heart and sight? My 
beloved Lord returned after long absence, the 
desired of my soul, I think! My own Krishna 
and no one else distinctly manifest to my eyes ! 


Krishna-Karnamrita. 


Krishna said, *I am he whom youseek. Iam yours 
for ever and you are mine. You have charmed me 
by your love and nothing is sweeter to me than 
your songs which are all love. Let the world call 
these immortal songs by the name Krishna-Karna- 
mrita, for they are as nectar to my ears.’ 


KRISHNA IN INDIVIDUAL LIVES 81 


Gopal Bhatta, a South Indian Brahman, one of 
the greatest disciples of Sri-Chaitanya, used to 
worship the sacred stone called Shalagram. He 
regretted that he could not adorn the image of his 
beloved Lord with ornaments, it being only a 
stone. Next morning he found to his extreme 
Surprise a fine stone-image of Krishna in the 
elegant posture of playing his flute with the 
Shalagram sticking to his back. The image is still 
in Brindaban. 

Arjun Misra an Oria Brahman, is a devout 
Vaishnava. His whole heart is set on Krishna. 
He is extremely poor. He passes many a day 
without having anything to eat. He reads in the 
Gita these words of Krishna: 


aaeaPaeaaed At YX Gat: yaa |e 
ast frarfagarat aaa TEACH 
wat 


They who have dedicated their lives to me and 
worship me with their hearts entirely given up to 
contemplation of me, have not to take any care 
for their livelihood. I give them every thing 
that they need. J bear the burden of their 
earthly life and livelihood. 


Gita, IX, 22. 
Misra thinks that these words are not true. 
Has he not dedicated his life to Krishna ? Has he 
not to starve every now and then? He cuts off 
with strokes of his pen the words; 
Aaa FETA 


I bear the burden of their life and livelihood. 
6 


82 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


Misra has gone out for begging a handful, the - 
next day. His wife is waiting for him. In the 
meantime two lovely boys come to his hut carry- 
ing two basketfuls of delicious viands on their 
head and lay them down at the feet of the astonish- 
ed lady. Her heart melts to see that both the 
boys have cruel cuts and streaks of blood all over 
their bodies. She asks—who has wounded you thus, 
my children? They reply: ‘Misra,’ and saying 
this they disappear. Misra returns home and 
hears and understands everything. His eyes over- 
flow with tears. His heart fills with pangs of 
remorse that he has rashly scored Krishna’s words. 
and has thereby inflicted wounds on his tender 
person. Over the strokes of pen he then writes 
thrice, 


eA TzIETSH | 


Jaydev is writting his Gita-Govinda. He has 
come up to 


eensared qa fata aren | 
and then he hesitates to write 


afe Taqeaaere 


Can he think, can he write that Krishna, the Highest 
and Holiest, is eager to touch the foot of Radha, 
to hold it on his head ? Will it not be sacrilege ? Is 
not Krishna the One adorable Ideal for all souls in 
the universe? He withholds his pen and goes to 
the river to bathe. In the meantime Krishna 


KRISHNA IN INDIVIDUAL LIVES 83 


* comes to his house in the disguise of the poet him- 
self, talks with his wife, eats the meal prepared for 
him, writes with his own hand the words 


afe Teqmaqarey 


and vanishes. Jaydev comes home and is astonish- 
ed to see the sport played by his beloved Lord. 

A never-ceasing inspiration of divine love took 
profound possession of Lord Chaitanya’s mind and 
heart. In this state he travelled, a solitary ascetic, 
for six years through the whole length and breadth 
of India. In course of his travels in Southern 
India, one day while bathing in the holy waters of 
the Godavary, he met Rai Ramananda, the chief 
minister of the renowned Pratap Rudra, King of 
Orissa, in the first quarter of the 16th century. 
Ramananda was deeply impresged by the remark- 
able appearance of Sri-Chaiténya illuminated with 
a supreme passion of celestial love. In compliance 
with Ramananda’s earnest request the divine saint 
consented to give him company for a few days and 
accordingly stayed in the house of a pious Brahman 
adjacent to the minister’s mansion. One afternoon 
as he was absorbed in a devout discourse with 
Sri-Chaitanya concerning the mysteries of the 
Vaishnava religion, Rai found, to his extreme 
surprise, that the natural brightness of Chaitanya’s 
fair complexion and finely-moulded form became a 
lambent sphere of light. The radiance gradually 
took a distinct shape and shone as a charming 


84. WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


damsel, a golden image of heavenly beauty. Chai- 
tanya was no longer his own self. What was 
beheld by Ramananda instead was a lovely cow- 
boy, of a delicate blue complexion bedecked with a 
garland of flowers. He was full of wonder. His 
mind wandered in a bewilderment of conflicting 
thoughts and feelings. And then again he noticed 
the Sannyasi’s figure of Chaitanya. He asked the 
saint why he saw that blissful vision. Chaitanya 
said it was an illusion and smiled. A sudden 
thought flashed through Rai’s mind. He felt an 
illumination within, and said with a tremulous 
voice, “ My lord, pray, don’t deceive me; tell me 
what it is.’ Then in full possession of his natural 
consciousness and in bright broad daylight he beheld 
—what? the eternal embodiment of Love and 
Beauty, the conjugate figure divine of Radha and 
Krishna, the soul of All the mysteries of Being, and 
fell into a swoon. 

There are thousands of reports of Krishna’s 
personal appearance, his gracious dealings, his 
plays and pranks, his gifts and boons, how he 
yields to the power of love, how he watches every 
movement of his worshipper, how he comes to 
people’s rescue when they are in perils and at times 
intervenes in their lives and raises them to heaven- 
ly fortunes, why no one knows. 

He blesses Karama Bai, a Marwari lady by 
actually eating every day a simple country dish of 
rice and pulse boiled with spices and one or two 


KRISHNA IN INDIVIDUAL LIVES 85 


chillis, a preparation of the lady’s own band. One 
day she was late in offering the dish. It was 
found that the face of Krishna’s image was smeared 
with traces of the food, the divine child having 
eaten it hastily on account of excessive hunger. 

He favours a man named Ali-Bhagaban by 
arousing in him the consciousness of a girl in love 
and shows him a ring-figured dance of celestial 
damsels with Krishna. He plays with a Brahman 
named Govinda Goswami as a wanton boy, runs 
races with him, quarrels with him and pelts him 
with the wild fruits of a forest-plant. 

There is no end to these accounts given and kept 
by earnest-minded men and women living perfectly 
holy lives. The best collection of them in simple 
but vivid verse is to be found in a Hindi Book 
named Bhaktamal-Grantha written bY a Hindu- 
sthani Sadhu of the 17th centary of which there 
is an excellent Bengali translation made not less 
than two hundred years ago by a Vaishnava poet 
named Krishnadas. 


XT 


LOVE AND WORSHIP 


GOD has two aspects: He is Majesty and He is 
Love and Loveliness. As Majesty he is the 
absolute ruling power of the universe. He is” 
[swar, the supreme Lord of Earth and Heaven. A 
great man has many relations. He has a dear wife 
who loves him. He has his children who are fond 
of him. He has his friends who regard him with 
affection and treat him as their equal. He has 
those who revere ‘him, look up to him with awe, 
sing lofty praises of his virtues and powers, show 
their high sense of honour by bendings of knees 
and bowings of heads from a great distance. 
Of these various dealings and feelings, which 
delights him, which attracts him most? Can his 
heart live on praises and honours only ? For how 
many days and nights will he like to sit on his high — 
chair in his outer chamber of state to receive 
reverent genuflectious, high-hearted encomiums, 
serene ceremonies of worship and fairly-framed 
flatteries. The religions of the world outside India 
have for thousands of years detained the Lord in 


LOVE AND WORSHIP 87 


his gorgeous presence-chamber, burdening him with 
heaps of conventional honours and sanctimonious 
ceremonies of adoration. This is the inhumanity 
of doctrinal religion so to say. God is dying. with 
impatience for the sweet company of his darlings, 
his beloved wife and children, is thirsting for their 
love and affection, is anxious to enjoy the con- 
fidences of his faithful friends. God cannot intend 
the whole of mankind to be his official employees 
and servants and menials or at best his children 
theologically constituted. Should he not have lady- 
loves, sweethearts, wives, parents, friends, comrades 
and children who are really children and not 
logical concepts.! 

The extra-Indian world of mankind with rare 
individual exceptions have always regarded them- 
selves in their relation to God as absttact or formal 
children or subjects or ,semvants or payers of 
compulsory tributes and Sree never dreamed of 
nearer or sweeter relations. The Hindus alone, 
and especially the Vaishnavas have sought to 
realise God and actually realised Him in all His 
aspects which it is possible for man to conceive. 
The Hindus through profound spiritual endeavours 
pursued for thousands of years forgetful of the 
advantages and amenities of the external physical 
world, have won religious positions nearest to God 


1a qar at sqaa aiedta AaTeTeA | 
Ha acataaae AACA: We Aaa: 


88 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


among mankind, have been face to face and heart 
to heart with Him and have made discoveries of 
such subtle aspects of the divine character as 
appear to be strange whimsicalities of a wondering 
mind, or confounding enigmas or mystical crypto- 
logies, if not frantic imaginings of a lunatic to the 
rest of mankind. 

The Hindu sages freed their minds absolutely 
from all encrustations of intellectual customs, all 
dirty cobwebs of spiritual prejudice, all distortions 
and delusions and disturbances of sense, mine 
deep down to the innermost recesses of ‘the soul 
shining in her eternal glory and sailed out with 
the illumination of this glory on the Atlantic ocean 
of spirit in quest of the enchanted island of God 
and found that God is Krishna and that all 
humanly-conteived Gods are fragmentary views of 
his infinite splendéur.. They came back to the 
world from their celestial voyage and declared to 
mankind the gospel of love called Premabhakti. I¢ 
is simply this: Love Krishna and have ineffable 
and immortal happiness, that happiness which will 
melt down the bonds of worldly life, bring you 
supreme knowledge and power and solve you the 
riddle of being. How to love Krishna? As the 
woman loves her husband or her paramour, as the 
the father or the mother loves his or her child, as 
the friend loves his friend. That is, love God 
humanly and you will love Krishna. You do not 
know what divine love is. But you know the love 


LOVE AND WORSHIP 89 


that an enamoured girl cherishes for her beloved. 
You have experience of the mother’s and the father’s 
love or the love of the friend. Offer this natural 
human love to Krishna. Do it sincerely that is 
with a whole heart. It will change its character : 
it will gain in strength and depth; it will clear 
itself of its sensuous dross; it will purify you; it 
will raise you to higher and higher planes of 
consciousness ; it will bring you illumination and at 
last free your spirit from the sensual wrappage which 
is the cause of your fleshly bondage called sansar. 
Thus you begin with natural love, and end in 
love divine. You begin by loving God as a human 
being not forgetting that he is God. You will 
gradually cease to reason whether he is God or not. 
You will only know that he is your beloved and 
you will be absorbed in him. The “consequence 
will be that you will. have, become an immortal 
angel glowing with divine love, and have not only 
realised but captivated God for ever, to love you 
and receive your love without end. This is 
Vaishnavism, but it is every one’s religion, the 
only religion of the human soul. If you don’t like 
to call Him by the name Krishna, give him any 
other name. There is no endtohis names. But 
Krishna is the best name for God. Every Hindu 
name of God has a deep philosophy behind it. Tf 
a Mussalman is attracted towards God, knows him 
to be beautiful and full of love, loves him passion- 
ately and dedicates his life to him, he becomes a 


90 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


Vaishnava, a worshipper of Krishna. Any Christian, 
any Jew, any Buddhist, if he adores God in this 
fashion will turn out to be a Vaishnava. The great 
Persian poets were al] Vaishnavas. Shelley has 
been the greatest Vaishnava in the world outside 
India up to this time beside the man who conceived 
the Song of Solomon. When Browning speaks of 
: The new wine’s foaming flow, 
The Master’s lips aglow, 

he speaks Vaishnavism. He whose thirst for man’s 
love is eternal and insatiable is Krishna. He 
seeks love and seeks to love with an ardent passion. 
This love is infinite in depth and immeasurable in 
breadth. Its intensity is inconceivable. Who is 
able to estimate the stupendous combustion that is 
eternally going on in the sun? That is the reflection 
of Krishna’s love on the physical plane. Radha 
is the burning embodiment of this mighty passion. 
She is an inexhaustible fund of supra-natural 
electricity. One arrow-like ray of her scintillating 
emotion can pierce and fuse a mountain in @ 
moment. Krishna sees that men love their 
relations but do not think of him for whom this 
love was brought into existence. Krishna’s heart 
lusteth for this love that is scattered among those 
who cannot receive it. He appropriates this love 
to himself. He steals it, and he steals everything 
that is due to him, but which you forget to offer 
him. Krishna is therefore called the Thief. The 
sages who could discover the truth that God is a 


LOVE AND WORSHIP 91 


Thief had a philosophy deeper than that of Hegel. 
This is the meaning of 


wg fe aaaarat ata a ka a 
aT 1 Si aw 


Everything is God’s in the universe. Everything 
naturally goes to him and rests in him. Both 
nature and arts are his; you use their products. 
You enjoy them. You enjoy? No; your souls. 
And your souls are immortal sparkles of Krishna’s 
superior nature : 


amafrcecseat sate fate & qe 
Hay Ararat FAS asa STL 
vita bois 


But Krishna is Love. He yearns for the least 
expression of love that is intended for him. All 
things physical, mental and spiritual are his. He 
has them and gets them spontaneously. But it 
makes all the difference if you offer his own things 
to him. Because that will mean nothing and this 
will mean love, which he desires. That is his only 
want. The flowers in the king’s garden all belong 
to the king. If some one plucks some of them, 
makes of them a wreath and offers it to the king, be 
is so happy to receive the present, because he finds 
a proof of love. The feelings of love that work 
within your mind are his. You give it to others. 
He receives it. But he is not happy in this. He 
wants that you give him this love and other things 


92 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


for this love, for love has a thousand ways of 
expression. Let everything that you use in life be 
an offering presented to God first and then take 
it back as his prasad, that is, his gift of grace. 
Krishna says: 


GF 989 GS qa al a wea sa=ahd | 
age waecqredaarfa aaa: I 
aT 1 VL REI 


It may be a leaf, a flower, a fruit, a spoonful of 
water: offer it to him owt of love. ‘I enjoy this 
offering of love,’ he says. This is the central 
principle of Hindu worship which is concrete and 
humanly divine, not blankly abstract or imagi- 
native. Love deepens and perfects itself by external 
expressions ef action. Otherwise it is apt to be 
vague and feeble. .« 


. 
aes Tearfa asserts sah Aa 
sereaha BWeay IHGA ASI 
aT 1 SL av 
Offer to me all that you accomplish, that which 
you enjoy, and that which you give in charity. 


Offer to me the religious rite that you perform 
and the pious austerity that you practise. 


_ Gita, Xe 27s 


This is the meaning of Hindu worship and this 
should be the ultimate purpose of every form of 
worship. According to the Hindu Scriptures there 
is no gulf of difference between life and worship. 


LOVE AND WORSHIP 93 


The programme of the Hindu’s daily life is a sort i 
of introduction to or the outer fringe of his divine 
worship. The Hindu worship is no extraneous 
duty super-added to the general course of his life. 
It is an organic part of his life, the central element, 
shaping and colouring the rest. 


XIT 


KRISHNA AND THE VEDAS 
AND UPANISHADS 


I WILL take up one more question and finish. It 
is maintained by many that there is no Krishna in 
the Vedas and the Upanishads. When this is 
taken for granted, it is easy to affirm that Krishna 
1Saha, poetical conception, an imaginative creation 
of the later Pauranic literature. It is a fact that 
the name of Krishna isenot mentioned in the earlier 
Upanishads, those commented on by Sankara- 
charyya. But in the Rigveda-Sanhita there is 
reference to Krishna being born of Devaki in prison 
and to some incidents of his life. Besides, in the 
Atharva-veda there is a mantra which tells us how 
Krishna as Vaman took three gigantic steps by 
which he covered the earth, heaven and the nether 
world. But we may not attach any importance to 
this. That the Vedas do not tell us anything of 
Krishna is, however, no justification for the state- 
ment that he is the creation of some poetical 
imagination. But let us admit that Krishna is 


KRISHNA, VEDAS AND UPANISHADS 95 


born of human imagination. What then? Krishna 

has a deeper and wider position in the Puranas, a 

more pervading influence in the Pauranic universe 

than Brahma in the Vedas and the Upanishads. 

The Krishna of the Puranas has a vast and concrete 

content of life. He fills a large space of the 

- external world besides his ever-expanding presence 

in the internal. He is absolute Brahma and divine 

Man both. The Brahma of the Upanishads be- 

coming more intimately and intensely realised 

appears as Krishna in the Puranas. ‘There is no 

room for a new creation of imagination. If 
Krishna be imagination, Brahma too is imagination 

in a greater degree. And what are the Gods of the 

Religions, of Christianity and Islam ? If Krishna 

be imagination, the Gods will fare no better, for 
Krishna in Hinduism is far more than what the 

Gods are in these religions, Tf God be no imagi- 

native creation in any religion, Krishna can never 

be such. But God is indeed imagination and | 
nothing but imagination, for imagination is illu-| 
mination or divine insight and the highest spiritual | 
life is of imagination all compact. In the higher 
planes of illuminated consciousness reason, in-: 
tellect, understanding, thought and perception all 

melt into imagination and imagination assumes 

the forms of all these. In these regions imagi- 

nation is supreme vision or Divyajnan. God 

becomes known and visible to the eye of this 

imagination. When Krishna says, 


96 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


aq ¢ Al ae7a asaada caTATT 
feey aaife & ae: Gey A alma 
aT 1 9d ca 
It is impossible for you to see Me with the 
eyes which are your own: I am endowing you 


j with a spiritual insight. You see my divine power 
_ | which is beyond the comprehension of all know- 


ma ledge. 
Gita, XI, 8. 


-This is the meaning of imagination. God is 
realised through supreme imagination and may be 
Said to be a creation of imagination in this sense. 
Krishna is imagination and he is God nevertheless. 
The Vedas and the Upanishads cannot give us God 
as Krishna. Krishna cannot manifest himself to 
that state of consciousness which underlies the 
Vedas and the Upanishads. It is a momentous 
consideration, and© will disperse the cloud of many 
a doubt overcasting the mind about the authenti- 
city, so to say, of Krishna’s existence, life 
and work. | 

Krishna is eternal divinity. Time and Space 
cannot confine him. He is above all conditions: 


aa Hee ae wa araeg | 


Krishna is transcendental: Maya can never 
touch him. 
Chattanyacharitamrita. 
He is the final basis of existence. As Air 
cannot exist without the sky, so the universe 
cannot exist without Krishna. The boundless 


KRISHNA, VEDAS AND UPANISHADS 97 


| blue sky that we see is a dim reflection of the 
living Blue called Krishna: 


AFAR FE AACA ATOURTAA 
Wal Aaeed Aled: TSA | 
afedttara farsa 


The Sky is the visible Body uf Brahma. He is 
Truth, he is Soul; he is Joy to the heart ; he 
delights the mind. He is Peace, he is Prosperity, 
he is Immortality. 

Tatitiriyopanishat. 
_/ The Blue of Krishna is Kternity. The question 

is about his manifestation or unmanifestation. 
To talk of the proof of his existence is childish. 
The Vedas and the Upanishads represent a state 
of human consciousness which cannot bring in 
the manifestation of Krishna. It is tite age of the 
living consciousness of Bratma, the infinite, ; 
eternal, formless, indistinguishable, incomprehen-. 
sible and immeasurable Divine Existence, which 
has no attribute and which cannot be spoken of in’ 
terms of human intelligence. Brahma is that 
stupendous and overflowing Aspect of God in 
which the oceans and the mountains and the 
worlds and the suns are fused and merged: 


q aa dat arfa a sega | 
aa fagat arfea settsaath: i 
q 
aaa AWedaaarfa gar 
aey arat aafae Rarfa aaprte 


- 


( 


98 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


There the Sun does never shine; nor the moon, 
nor brightest stars; The lightning flashes are 
never seen; The burning Fire is brought to nought; 
He alone does shine and all that shines, shineth 
in His shining rays. He illumines with His 
splendid Light all that we see on earth around. 


Kathopanishat. 
In the Upanishads we see that a universal 
endeavour is going on to realise Brahma in every- 
thing that exists, the elements, the stars, the sun, 
the moon, the seasons, the seas, mountains, lakes, 
rivers, clouds, winds, trees, plants, flowers, birds, 
insects, every human thought, every human 
feeling, every word, every action: 


fis: Tax? afta alfeaaeafiqara: Gaal: | 
wafanca faa aaa act stars waarfe far: 1 
. AAARATA: | 
Thou flutterest as the butterfly, blue and fair ; 


As ruddy -eyed green-feathered parrot thou fliest 


free ; 

In cloud thou flashest quick in restless lightn- 
ing glare ; 

Thou changest in the seasons, swinging as the 
blue-black sea ; 

Thou hast no end, no beginning, pervadest all 


that’s there ; 
The universe with its multiform worlds has 


sprung from thee. 
Swetaswataropantshat. 


There is the immeasurable ocean of Brahma, ever 
full, ever at the spring tide. Everything that exists 
is a tremor, a ripple of this ocean. Brahma is an 
endless expansion of Lightning-Light: 


drraraafaaraay | 


KRISHNA, VEDAS AND UPANISHADS 99 


All that exist are refracted rays of this boundless 
splendour. Brahma is an all-comprehensive con- 
sciousness of an ineffable profundity of Joy ever- 
lasting: 

Ut Aad Ta | 


The individual minds are atomic sparkles of this 


huge Consciousness. The differences of forms and . 
attributes, the Nam-rupé are due to an Illusion | 
which vanishes the moment that the fumeless flame _ 


of the soul is unfolded to shed its brilliance on it. 
‘The rishis are striking all things with the quivering 
rays of their enkindled spirits and thus transfusing 
them to their extreme substance which is Brahma. 


aang Tard areata 1 gfeeit feartsfi: searalseatter- 
aia arfea: sdtent aiferrafraay | ast sated araaredia 
aaa ag daft aratardia 1 wag afd aratoreta 1 orttg 
qafaa arate | 


SIAL ILIC LE 


The Vedas and the highest of them the Sam- 
Veda are to be worshipped as Brahma. This Veda- 
Brahma or the Word that is God is to be realised 
every where in the universe—in the Earth, in 
Fire, in the Sky, in the Sun, in the Heavens, in 
the Rains, in the Waters, in the Seasons, in the 
beasts and i in the five vital forces, the Pranas. 


Chhandogyopanishat. 
These wonderful men are knowing Brahma, feel- 


ing Brahma and willing nothing but Brahma in 
their life. Brahma is amrita, that is immortality, 


100 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


that is ambrosia or manna, eternal enjoyment for the 
soul. The sages discover that the universe is an 
ocean of amrita, a flowing flood of ambrosia. They 
not only drink it, but swim, sink and die in it to 
become immortal. 


aq Asey sepa BaIEA wavTey veal AAAS: 1 
araeada AIHA: | AAAS VA GST GT ABAT AT: 
SICAL ICES 
The western rays of the sun are its western 
veins and cells of honey. The Sam-mantras are 
the honey-bees. The rites enjoined by the 


Samveda are flowers and the sweet soma-liquors 
offered at sacrifice are amrita. 


Chhandogyopanishat. 


. 


This is about the Sun, and so everywhere. 


Faant seal AAT SAA | 
iN ° q 
Fala aad Teaey daayaarraar 
wat 1 wae 

The vessels used at sacrifice are Brahma ; the 
clarified butter is Brahma; the fire into which 
this is poured is Brahma; the priest who performs 
the sacrifice is Brahma; Karma or holy action is 


Brahma and he who is devoted to this passes 


into Brahma. 
Gita, IV, 24. 


All human consciousness in this age is illuminat- 
ed with divine light and inspired with divine 
ecstasy. The divine splendour is flowing in flooding 
tides over the endless world of man’s Mind. The 
heart is melting into the universe and the universe 


KRISHNA, VEDAS AND UPANISHADS 101 


is melting into the heart. The distinctions of the 
inner and the outer, of mental and material, of 
psychical and physical, are all obliterated. All is 
spirit, all is electricity. Everything is force and 
force is thought and thought is joy. Matter be- 
jcomes spirit and spirit becomes ‘matter. Inter- . 
transfusion is the universal order. Everything is 
flowing into every other thing. Streams of super- 
sensuous pleasures are all that exist. 


Ta HATA, ay ated feeaa:, aredt a; Tee: 
arma Tacha ta: waarAa zqCahe: 
ata 

The winds that blow areall honey. The rivers 
that flow are streams of honey. Let the herbs 
be nothing but honey for us. The night and the 
dawn are full of honey. The dust of the earth 
too is honey. The forest-trees aré made of 


honey.’ ° 
® 


The day dawns at the end of the night bringing 
in with it plenteous presents of ambrosial love and 
rapture and beauty. The bright-plumed birds do 
warble in the woodland and their sweet and soft 
melodies scatter showers of joy around. Liquid 
ripples of beauty and happiness quiver in every 
creeping plant, and every leaf and every flower as 
they toss at the touch of the amorous breeze. And 
all this is there not in poetical imagination 
but in easy and spontaneous perception. Indra, 
Agni, Mitra, Varuna, Vayu, Rudra, the Vasus, the 


' Honey = Ambrosial emotion of celestial joy. 


102 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


Viswa-devas, Vrihaspati, Aryyama, Twashta, Pusha 
and other gods are floating about like wandering 
islands on the vast and ever-expanding Brahma- 
consciousness and vanishing and coming into view 
again. They are both arup and sarup, with visible 
forms and invisible too. 

This is the universe of Brahma realised univer- 
sally only once and in one country alone in the 
history of human life. No manifestation of Krishna 
is possible in this circumstance. Buta time came 
when this overflooding tide of divine Consciousness 
slowly ebbed away. Mist and fog arose and mixed 
with the rapturous Illumination. The liquidly 
flowing minds passed through a process of harden- 
ing and became isolated individuals with the sense 
of mine and thine and aware of selfish purposes. 
The supreme feeling of 


& 

I have no sorrow,eno pleasure of my own; [ 
- belong to others: I become whatsoever I look at. 
The sun shines, and the stars shine and I shine 
with them. My songs are theirs and theirs are 
mine. We are travelling to the same country. 
I bloom with the flower and dance with the 
creeper. With the breeze I hover about the 

fragrant flower. 


Rabindranath Tagore. 
was no more. The domination of Maya began. 
Selfish thought, selfish feeling, and selfish action 
eradually directed the workings of the mind into 
fixed and narrowly limited lines. Sorrows and 
sufferings multiplied. Universal love gave way to. 


1 Literally translated from the original Bengali. 


KRISHNA, VEDAS AND UPANISHADS 103 


personal love of individual relations. Passions and 
sentiments came into prominence. Mists and 
clouds overhung the sky but there was of course the 
sunshiny influence of the pure spirit divine in Man, 
the essential character of which is love. 


Since then has there been often seen, 
The murky mist or sunny sheen.! 


Yea, and on rare occasions and at auspicious 
moments, who knows by what law it was, the cloud 
came into intimate connection with the sunshine 
and lo! the resplendent rainbow is shining there ! 
The white radiance of the sun has assumed the 
seven-coloured loveliness of the beautiful Iris. 
That is Krishna. The unthinkable and unimagin- 
able Brahma thus assumes form and figure and 
beauty and colour and grace and we have Krishna. 
When the soul is selfish and sensish there is no 
Brahma, no Krishna, no Gpd.* When the illusory 
mould of self falls away and an access of impersonal 
joy divine suffuses and fuses her and resolves her 
into the Infinite, there is Brahma. When the soul 
retains her distinct personality intact, knows no 
one but a personal Deity of infinite attraction and 
burns with an irresistible desire to embrace him 
and gives herself up to him with a glowing outflow 
of passion, there is Krishna. When the natural 
human love in its highest degree of intensity 
transcends its sensuous ring of muffling fume and 
is elevated to a divine plane Krishna is compelled 


' Translated from the original Bengali. 


104 WHO IS. KRISHNA ? 


and also enraptured to yield himself to the embrace 
of the soul. 

The Upanishads make up one extreme, that of 
impersonal, indefinable, divine consciousness. There 
is no Krishna in it. The other extreme is the 
so-called natural literature, that is the sensuous 
literature of the modern world in its three divisions 
of (1) the sensuous proper like the poems of 
Byron, (2) the moral like Pope’s Hssay on Man and 
Dr. Johnson’s Vanity of Human Wishes, and (3) the 
spiritual like many of the poems of Browning, and 
especially the works of men like Tolstoy, Maeterlinck 
and Roman Roland, the so called spiritual writers of 
Europe. There is no Krishna, no Brahma, no God 
in these, unless we regard the intellectual or 
imaginative mass of adumbrations and the seem- 
ingly serious sentimentalities which are the 
common features ofthe present day spiritualists of 
Europe, as divinity or divine love. Between these 
two extremes are the Puranas which represent the 
personal divine consciousness of humanity with love 
(ananda-chinmaya-rasa) as its dominant character, 
as struggling through hostile forces of sense and the 
sense-created world and rising up to and entering 
into the infinite universe of divine love and beauty. 
Krishna is here and therefore Brahma and God 
and spirit and all. Thus we understand why 
Krishna is absent from the realm of the Upanishads 
and lives and moves and loves men and women and 
boys and girls in the world of the Puranas. 


KRISHNA, VEDAS AND UPANISHADS 105 


Let us contemplate and vision a living picture of 
Krishna and bring our discourse to a close: 


Tare Hera ASTAAT | 
WAC Tet BU TTS AITT |) 
PREC sarea ASS 
FALTAGSTAT SATA | 
TWSHVSaaA Aa AAGISTA | 
PJSIMI ASIANA AAT AT | 
efaclsgaruecaahra eae: | 
wagfearanaered AeA: | 
FIIPTATAASTRSS 
Mash Ge feat Tai | 
aed feareay faafeqaedtad | : 
= 
farang fears atfeary aay ta: | 
aa aaTeTT TWaTaeaefATy 
Bory mara aaa aa aa: | 
Glory to thee, Krishna, whose complexion is 
fresh deep-blue like that of the bluest cloud and 
whose eyes are like two tender petals of a bright- 
blue lotus. It has been thy pleasure to assume 
the form of a playful cow-boy, the beloved child 
of a loving milkmaid, the child that tends millions 
of cows. The black curling locks of thy shapely 
head are done up into a handsome crest nicely 
bound with a diadem of bright peacock-plumes. 
Thou hast gracefully swinging on thine emerald 


breast a garland of fresh-blown forest-flowers of 
various hues. Exquisite ornaments of the best 


106 


WHO IS KRISHNA? 


pearls and diamonds and other rich jewels are 
sparkling on thy person reflecting its lambent 
radiance. There is a fine flute gently touching 
thy finely-chiselled lips. Thou art playing on it 
sweet melodious tunes and fascinating the loving 
hearts of the lovely milk-maidens and making 
them forget their homes and themselves. Thou 
art engaged in sports of the sweetest love ona 
delightful dale redolent with perfumes of delicate- 
petalled flowers blooming around at the touch of 
the amorous spring and maddening the winds 
with their fragrant breath. Let us bow down to 
thee, Krishna! The universe is a shadow of thine. 
Thou art the cause of the birth and the life and 
the death of the universe. Thou art the Lord of 
the universe. Thou art the All and the Whole. 
Thou pervadest the earth and the heavens and 
all celestial spheres. Thou art perfect Intelligence 
and supreme Happiness everlasting. Thou art 
Krishna, Thou art the Master of the Souls. 
Thy name is Krishna. Glory be to thee and to 
thy name for ever and ever. 


« 


APPENDIX 


THE barest outline of Krishna’s eventful avatar- 
life on earth is this: } 

Krishna was born in a prison-house in Mathura. 
Here his parents Vasudev and Devaki were kept. in 
captivity by Kansa, Devaki’s own brother, a tyrant 
king. An Oracle told him that he would be killed 
by a Son of Devaki. Devaki gave birth to seven 
children in succession. They were all slain by the 
cruel king as soon as they were born. It was a 
dark night. A violent storm was raging. Light- 
ning flashed and thunder roared. A terrible tumult 
took the earth and sky. Krishna was born in the. 
prison in the midst of these. A deep sleep over- 
powered the sentinels. The heavy iron-doors 
opened of themselves. Vasudev took the radiant 
child in his arms, crossed the Jamuna ata ford, 
went to Gokul, left the child in the care of Nanda, 
a cousin of his, and a rich landholder, to be nursed 
by Jasoda, his wife, and came back to his captivity. 

Krishna’s early life was spent here. As he grew 
up he became an object of love, a source of joy, and 
a centre of attraction to the boys and girls and the 
young and old of Brindaban, Kansa thought that 


108 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


some deception must have been practised upon him, 
when he was informed by a mysterious voice that 
his enemy was living in Brindaban. He would 
have no rest until he could destroy the enemy. 
Many a design, many a guile and many a trick he 
tried to put an end to the existence of Krishna. As 
a consequence his life became a continuous series 
of perilous adventures and astonishing incidents. 
Krishna’s wonderful heroism stands forth brilliant- 
ly in the performance of these enterprises both in 
a human and divine way. He killed, one after 
another, many demons who came as Kansa’s agents 
to do him harm or take his life. They sought to 
execute their wicked end in many uncanny ways, 
in many incomprehensible shapes and disguises, 
as a mad bull, as a horrible heron, as a furious 
whirlwind, as a forest-fire. On one occasion he 
forbade the people of Brindaban to hold an annual 
festival, a religious ceremony in honour of Indra. 
The mighty god took offence and wanted to chastise 
them by sending in upon the country a destructive 
tempest. Krishna broke the force of the tempest 
and dispersed it with an exertion of his indo- 
mitable will and made the people see him holding 
Mount Gobardhan up as an umbrella over the 
country and thus giving protection to all against 
the elemental rage. There was a huge hydra- 
headed Reptile in a deep and dismal pit not far 
from the Jamuna. One day Krishna bounded down 
into the pit, stood on the angry head of the serpent, 


APPENDIX 109 


crushed it with kicks and robbed it of its deleteri- 
OuSs power. 

This is one aspect of his life, Krishna as power. 
He is love and beauty as much as he is power. He 
turned the country into a land of love, friendship, 
beauty, joy and play. All hearts moved round and 
round about him as bees about a honeyed flower. 
Every blooming maiden found in him the fulfilment 
of all her desire. Boys felt that nothing was 
happier than to play with him. With them as his 
beloved companions he used to ramble through the 
flowery groves of Brindaban leaving his cows and 
calves to pasture at large on extensive plains of 
grass. Hndless were their sports and pranks and 
the woodland resounded with their ringing shouts 
of joy. No one knew what magic was there in the 
flute that Krishna ever carried about him and 
played on whenever he pleased. The delightful 
notes which flowed from it charmed man and beast 
and plant alike. Krishna made the whole of 
Brindaban and the pastoral country round about 
into a land of everlasting joy and jubilance, and of 
love and loveliness. 

But still it did not last for ever so far as it was 
a human state though divine and hence eternal 
beyond the view. A call came from King Kansa. 
Krishna would not decline it. He went to Mathura 
where they were holding a grand tournament in 
which Krishna was to show his skill and courage. 
The brilliant light of joy all disappeared from the 


110 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


face of Brindaban and saddening shadows took 
its place. The darling of the damsels of Gokul 
appeared as an undaunted hero in Mathura, one 
who could kill a terrible elephant with a blow 
dealt with an easy fist. He slew two generals 
of Kansa in wrestling matches. Kansa could not 
contain his wrath and wanted to teach the crafty 
Boy a capital lesson. Krishna was forced to 
fight a duel with the raging tyrant. With his 
gigantic figure and huge limbs as of adamant 
he looked like a mountain, while Krishna was yet 
a boy growing to youthfulness with a tender body — 
made as if of delicate flowers. The heart of every 
spectator was tense with a quivering emotion 
which was keen curiosity as much as affectionate 
pity for the daring youth. But to the utter 
amazement of all Krishna threw the storming King 
down in no time, planted his knee on his breast 
and clutched his throat with such crushing force 
that when he rose from him it was all over with 
the King. 

He hastened to the prison where his parents were 
pining for years and years, released them and really 
restored them to life and joy. He placed on the 
throne Ugrasen, his maternal grandfather, whom 
his son Kansa maltreated forlong. He established 
order and peace in the kingdom and the subjects 
were happy after a long time. At Mathura 
he found himself glared at by many enemies 
the ruling princes of provinces far and near. 


APPENDIX 111 


Jarasandha, the King of Magadha, was the most 
powerful of these adversaries. For the time being 
he left them to their malicious designs and proceed- 
ed to Dwaraka, the residential seat of his nearest 
kinsmen. There he founded a kingdom and 
built a splendidly fortified palace commanding a 
beautiful sea-side prospect. The princess of 
Bidarva wrote him a letter offering him her love 
and herself and beseeching him to rescue her 
from the grasp of the prince chosen to be her 
husband against her will. Krishna brought her 
to Dwaraka after having defeated a host of ruling 
chiefs who closed round him as he was lifting 
her up on a chariot. Her name was Rukmini, 
the most loving and the most beloved of Krishna’s 
queens. Krishna was multifariously active and peer- 
lessly powerful about this time. He “fought with 
Indra and forced him to syrrénder the celestial 
flower, Parijat. He slew a mighty demon named 
Narak, He entered into fierce hostilities with Bana, 
the King of Sonitpur, in connection with a secret 
amour of Aniruddha, Krishna’s grandson, with the 
King’s daughter, for which he was made a captive. 
Krishna subdued Bana and set Aniruddha free to 
whom Usha the King’s daughter was given in 
marriage. 

Now it was time for Krishna to turn his attention 
to Hastinapur and to interfere in the affairs of the 
Pandavas who were his cousins. Their disputes 
with the Kauravas concerning the title to the 


112 WHO IS KRISHNA? 


throne were becoming darker day by day. Krishna 
tried some sort of amicable settlement, but the sons 
of Dhritarashtra were inexorable. He took a broad 
survey of the political conditions of India, and 
found nothing but strife and struggle, and iniquity 
and vice. The disease was not on the surface. It 
rankled deep within. A thirst for blood showed 
itself everywhere. War was inevitable. Krishna 
scanned everything and thought it best to concen- 
trate the belligerent forces instead of allowing 
them to break up into any number of bloody con- 
flicts causing thereby the greater harm to the 
afflicted country. With this end in view he managed 
the matters so that the ruling powers all got them- 
selves arrayed on either of the two sides, Pandavas 
and Kauravas, who formed the central core of 
contest and then there commenced the tremendous 
conflict in which destguction of human life assumed 
such indescribable magnitudes as have never been 
equalled in the history of mankind. Evil set against 
evil destroyed one another. Vice eradicated vice. 
Passion murdered passion. It was thus that the 
wide-spread disease was cured. 

Before this Titanic strife Krishna defeated and 
killed either with his own hand or through the 
agency of some of the Pandavas such inveterate 
enemies to truth and justice as Jarasandha and 
Sisupal. A few more that still remained were 
sacrificed on the occasion of the Aswamedha cere- 
mony of the Pandavas. On the pretext of teaching 


APPENDIX 113 


Arjun Krishna taught all mankind the deepest mys- 
teries of religion and the highest of human philo- 
sophy showing how to work every life out to the 
greatest consummation, how to attain to eternal 
happiness and how to turn any profession, any 
occupation to a divine account. He paved the way 
thus for the establishment of a kingdom of truth 
and righteousness with Judhisthira, the most 
virtuous of men, at its centre. | 

In the midst of these tumultuous troubles of 
politics and war Krishna did not forget his beloved: 
Brindaban, the sweet reminiscences of which would 
often blow through his mind like fragrant breezes 
of spring filling it with restless longings for a return 
to that blissful life. But in his deep consciousness 
of the spiritual esthetics of human life he felt that 
it was not tobe. In the meantime internal troubles 
arose in his own court at Dwaraka. His numerous 
sons and grandsons fell away from the paths of 
truth and virtue and betook themselves to unseemly 
contentions among themselves which reached such 
an ungainly state that at last they drifted into bloody 
feuds and destroyed one another. A great sorrow 
fell on his heart eclipsing all the rays of his life. 
He thought it was time for the wind-up of his Lila- 
life, the termination of his ministrations. One day 
he sat, sunk in reverie, on a low branch of a big 
banyan tree, with his finely-formed legs fairly 
suspending a little above the ground. A pro- 
fessional hunter caught a glimpse of a foot 


114 WHO IS KRISHNA ? 


from a distance through a straggling thicket, 
thought it to be the ear of a stag and shot an 
arrow which gave it a mortal wound. Th:2 
unfortunate hunter came nearer and was struck 
with unspeakable grief when he found what he had 
done. Krishna consoled the man who dealt him 
the death-wound saying, ‘You need not regret. 
It was destined that you should do this. I killed 
your father in another life.’ His voice faltered, 
he put off his human garb and resumed his 
Divinity. 


Priated by ‘A. K. Sitarama Shastri, at the Vasanta Press, Adyar, Madras. 


‘y ah 


ae 


7: 
° 
; 
5) 
Fa 
7 


iy > 
— 


sb] ae 


? 
f 
ve 


