===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.170080.Yatindra-Mata-Dipika-Or-The-Light-Of-The-School-Of-Ramanuja_djvu.txt =====








YATiNBlA^MATA-DiPiKA 

OR 

THE LIGHT OF THE SCHOOL OF sm RAMANUJA 

A CiOMFEKBrOM 

VISISHTA-^DVAil'A 



Warks^ by the same Author— English. 


Es. A. P. 

1. Bhagavad'gita with Ramanuja’s com- 

mentaries... 500 

2. Lives of the Dravida Saints (Azhvars). i 8 0 

3. Lives of R^anuja and other Sages 

(with frontispiece etc.)... 2 12 o 

4. Divine Wisdom of the Dravida Saints. 200 

5. Vade-Mecum of Vedanta ... i o o 

6. Artha-PaS9aka or Five Truths (jras) 0 12 o 

7. Vedanta and Theosophy ... o 4 6 

8. Three Parts: Lectures on Inspira- 

tion, Intuition and Ecstacy... 100 

9. Ideals of Ind, in Two Parts ... 0 12 o 

10. Yatindra-Mata-Dipika (or a Com- 

pendium of Visishtadvaita Philo- 
sophy and Religion 

11. Other Contributions to the Journal 

of the Royal Asiatic Society, Indian 
Antiquary, Siddhanta Dipika etc., 
etc., ... 

^ lOhfaifiablc at V eda-Gf ham, 1050, Viccvoy Road, 
Mysore, South India orfromtht^ Publisher, the ^^Sid- 
dkdnta Dipika ” Choolai, Madras, iV.C.] 

D 







CONTENTS. 


Frontispiece A. GovindAc 5 rya Svamin. 

Advent. Subject-matter. Pages, 

Works by the Author ... d 
Memorial to Their Imperial 
Majesties ... ... e 

Preface ... ... i — xxi 

Corrigenda ... ... xxiii — xxiv 

I. [Instruments of Knowledge 

{PramdnQf\ Perception 
{Pratyaksha) ... ... i — 28 

II. Inference {Anumdna) ... 29 — 47 

III. The Word {Sabda) ... 48 — 61 

IV. [Objects of Knowledge [Pra- 

meyaj] Matter (Prakrti). 62 — 85 

V. Time (Kdla) ... ... 86 — 89 

VI. Spiritual Universe {Nitya- 

Vibhuti) ... ... 90 — 97 

VII. Attributive Consciousness 

{Dharma-bhuta-Jnana)... 98 — 116 

VIII. The Soul {Jiva) ... 117 — 137 

IX. God {Isvara) ... ... 138 — 155 

X. Non-Substance 156 — 169 

Conclusion ... ... 170 — 175 

N. B . — ^The Scheme of Transliteration is that adopt- 
ed by the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain 
and Ireland QRAS,) except Brahma-sutras= 
Vedanta-sutras. It or He are both used for God 
and Soul. And She also, were it used, would, for 
Saihskrt, mean the same. The gender is incon- 
sequential. 




PREFACE. 


THE appearance of this work was adumbrated 
in the Artha-Pancaka or The “ Five Truths ”, 
in the pages of the JRAS (Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society), p. 565, July 1910. It was to 
have appeared in the same Journal, but for paucity 
of space for a work extending over more than 
45 pages. It was decided therefore to bring out 
an independent edition in India, which, as a book 
of reference for all time on the Visishti-*dvaita 
Philosophy and Religion, is expected to be more 
accommodating to the- general reader than if it 
appeared in an academic Journal inaccessible to all. 
Being an academic work itself, the printing of it in 
pvopviafovma demanded by the exigencies of Sarhskrta 
orthography, was made possible by the Meyka^idan 
Press, under the supervision of its intelligent pro- 
prietor Mr. J. N. Ramanathan, of Madras, under- 
taking to meet all the requirements incidental to 
such a work. It is hoped the readers will find the 
justness of my remarks when they may come to 
examine it for themselves. 

2. In the shape of introduction to the work, 
very little need be written, it seems:, to me, inasmuch 



ii YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA 

as scholars are more in need of original matter than 
attempts made at theses for which there seems at 
present no warranty. But if a popular introduction 
were yet deemed necessary, my work called the Vade 
Mecum of VedanU affords an appropriate pourparler to 
the Yafindm-Mata-Dipikd , — ^the work which, with this 
preface, makes its debut into the arena of IndOlogy. 
The necessity also for such preliminaries is as far 
as possible obviated by the copious foot-notes which 
will be found sprinkled in sufficient profusion, in 
almost every page, not only to elucidate the abstruse 
subject-matter but as well to reduce to the utmost 
minimum the jejune nature which is a sine qtta non 
of all academic studies, — ^the Oriental in a large 
measure. The desideratum for a separate glossary 
of technical terms which by necessity teem in all 
works of an academic nature, is met by the scheme, 
adopted in this wcwrk, of inditing ail such terms side 
by side their English, in brackets or otherwise. 
Facilities for comprehension are better afforded, I 
trust, by this mode than if they had to be procured 
by constant references to a glossary at the sacrifice 
of time, with mental poise liable to be ruffled by 
such a process of glossarial interference, at every 
step of a perusal. Strictest fidelity to the original 
Samskrta might, it is feared, have led to the English 
rendering being found stiff and in places lacking, 
peradventure, in clarity. But this is due more to the 



PREFACE 


iii 

technical nature of the subject than to any 'perfunc- 
toriness on the part of the translator, who is conscious 
of having done his best. The subject itself is rigid, 
and invites the mental concentration of the student, 
not the surface-skimming of the light reader. 

3. With regard to the author of YaUndm-Mata'^ 
^rinivSsa, we learn from the invocatory 
verses (left untranslated), where mention of Maha- 
^’carya in the preliminary of Advent I, synonymously 
referred to again as Ghana-guru-vara in the Colophon 
is made, that he, (viz., Srinivasa) is the immediate 
disciple of Dodday-arya, which is the colloquial of 
Maha-^arya which is the same as Mah^-’*carya. 
There is a succession of apostles of the Ramanuja 
School beginning from Dasarathi or Mudaliy-andan, 
Sri-Ramanuja’s sister’s son famed as of the 
Kmdadai descent To this stem belong all the 
Mahi-”caryas, a branch — an important one — settl- 
ing down at Ghatik^-’cala, otherwise known as 
Chola-Siiiihapuram (vulgarised as Sholinghur, — a 
station on the Railway track linking Bangaiur and 
Madras), which- is referred to by Srinivasa, the 
author of Yatlndra-Mata*Dipika, as Ghatik^-”dri, 
in his invocatory verse to the work. This place 
is a noted shrine, very ancient as having been 
sung by the archaic Azhvars or Dravicja . Saints 

See (my) Life of Ramannj a etc. 



iv YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKS 

in their Tamil Works the Pralmdhas * ^Nrsirhha, 
one of the Ten Avataras of Vishnu being the presid- 
ing Deity of the place. One of the Mahi-”caryas 
is noted in history as Caij^a-maruta Mahi-”carya 
by reason of a great polemical work called Caijda- 
maruta ( = hurricane) having been written by him on 
an anterior work the §ata-dushani of a similar charact- 
er, composed by the great Vedant^-”carya [1268 a.c. 
bom], who is the contemporary of Madhava or Vidya- 
ra^a [1331 a.c. elected for Srfigeri pontificate, in the 
now Mysore State]. The author mentions (in the Con- 
clusion-Chapter) both these works among others as 
those on which he bases his compendium of ViSshti- 
'dvaita Vedanta, viz., the YaUndm-Maia-Di^iM. 
Hence it may be reasonably conjectured that 
Srinivasa is the immediate disciple of Ghatiki-’cala 
Candamaruta Maha-”carya. This Mahfl-”carya is a 
contemporary of Appaya-Dikshita, who is a com- 
mentator on Vedant 4 -”carya’s works. A tradition in 
currency further confirms this contemporaneity, which 
may be cited here, in almost the words kindly 
supplied me by my valued friend Sri M. T.. Nara- 
siihha-iyangar, b.a., m.r.a.s., Professor in the Central 
College, Bangalur: — 

“These two authors, Maha-”carya and Appaya- 

Dikshita were close friends, both being the 

* Vide (my) Lives of Saints. 



PREFACE 


V 


unparalleled Vidvans of the age ; and they used 
to discuss philosophical questions very often, 
with a view to try their own skill in argument. 
Both were admirers of Vedanti-”carya, whose 
works they commented largely. Appaya-Dik- 
shita, as is well-known to all Sarhskrt scholars, 
was a staunch devotee of Siva,* in spite of his 
having devoted his time to writing commentaries 
on the Visishti-”dvaitic works of Ved^ta-^’carya, 
and he wanted to construe the term Narayana as 
applicable to his favourite deity Siva. Maha- 
”carya, seeing that his friend attempted a point 
(for argument) that could not at all be maintain- 
ed on grammatical basis (at most) waited for 
an opportunity to test the truth of his friend’s 
conviction on the point in question. Once when 
they were both getting up the Alagar-malai about 
eight miles from Madura, (on which the temple 
of Simdarorbahu or Atagar is situate, and where 

* Cp, the verse which he is alleged to have been 
uttered by him in a meeting of Pandits at Kancipura: 
MaheSvare vdjagatam adhUvare 
Jandrdane va jagad-antay-atmani 
Na vasfu-bheda-pyatipattir astu me 
Tathd-pi hhabtis Tarun-endii-Wkhare* 

The gist of the verse is that he saw no distinction 
between Siva and Vishnu, yet he had a penchant, 
for §iva. See foot-note 238, page 116. [A. G.] 



VI 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKl 


the famous Nupura-ganga rill runs), Maha- 
”carya took advantage of a position when he 
could extract the truth of his friend’s conviction 
on the disputed point from his own mouth. 
Among the initial steps leading to the temple 
of Sunda/ya-lahu^ the eighteenth step from the 
bottom is regarded as presided over by a hhuta 
(spirit) named in Tamil Kayappdn ; and the 
belief was that whoever speaks untruth (or 
proves false) while on this step, would suffer 
instantaneous death. (It is for this reason that 
the temple-keys used to be left, during nights, 
on this step, without any fear of thieves touch- 
ing them). (Here) Mah^-”carya took hold of 
his friend’s hand and making him stand there, 
questioned him thus: — “Tell me, my dear friend! 
are you really convinced that the term Narayaua 
can be construed as a name of Siva ? I ask 
you now because you cannot speak untruth h$ve, 
for the sake of argument 1 ” Then Appaya- 
Dikshita is said to have spoken out his own 
conviction to this effect ; — ^ The letter N (’^) in 
the term Naraya^a is in the way of such con- 
struction. This is my conviction/ ^ ” 


^ Appaya-Dikshita accedes to this confession, be- 
yond grammatical reasons merely, in his com- 
mentary on verse 35 of Anmidadahan [Pp. 64-65.] 



PREFACE 


vii 

This great Appaya-Dikshita’s date is correctly 
known as 1552 — 1624 a, c. as proved by various 
evidences such as (i) his living at Vellore, under the 
patronage of Chinna Bomma Bhupala, (2) his being 
invited to the court of the Penukonda ruler Venkata- 
deva (1586 — 1613 A.c); (3) his being the Vedanta 
teacher of the great grammarian Bhattoji-Dikshita, 

edited by R. Halasyanatha Sastrin, igo8. {Vam-vilasa 
Press, Srirahgam] thus : — ■ 

‘ Veda-vibhag^-’rtham eva ’vatirijena sakala-Veda- 
tatparya-’bhijiiena sarvajna-sikhamanina bhagavata 
Veda«Vyasena, Pulastya-vara-dana-labdha-devata- 
param-arthya-vedanena Sri-Parasareiji, ’nyais ca 
maharshibhir Ved-opa-brhman^-’rtham pra^iteshu 
§ri ‘Mahabharata-Vish^iu-Puran^-”dishu, niscita - 
Parabrahma-bhavasya, sadbhis sarvair apy avibha- 
gena Para-Brahm-ety eva pujitasya Sn-Nardyanasya, 
kvacit-kone-nivishta-mantra-” rthavada- purana- vaca- 
ni-”dilesam avalambya jivabhavam vaktum nk 
’smaj-jihva pravartate, tatha cen murdha ca satadha 
bhavati ; Veda-Vaidika-droho, Devata-drohas ca 
jayate. Ato Ndrayana^ Para-Brahma-kotir ity eva 
’asmakam siddhantah.’ 

The gist of this passage is that his head will 
shatter into hundreds of fragments if he dared to 
gainsay the verdict of all the great Sages Vyasa, 
Parasara etc., about Narayana being the Great God, 
in all their authoritative works; that he dare not 
commit such heresy and blasphemy. [A. G.] 



YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA 


viii 

(4) his antagonism with the famous poet Jagannatha 
Pandita or Pandita-raya, the author of CUva-mmamsa- 
khandma, etc. 

We can therefore conclude that Mah 4 -”carya 
(who by tradition was equally old with Appaya- 
Dikshita, while the Alagar-malai incident took place, 
as chronicled above) lived in the latter part of the 
i6th and the beginning of the 17th centuries. Our 
author Srinivasa therefore, who is the son of Svami- 
pushkarini Govindi-”rya, — servitor at the Holy Hill 
Venkata-giri (Tirupati)— and disciple of Mahl- 
”carya, may be placed at the beginning of the 17th 
century. 

4, This author of Yatindra-Mata-Dipika had, 
according to the invocatory verse, a vision where 
he saw Venkatesa (the God of Tirupati), Devaraja 
(the God of Karisaila=Kanci), Nrsiihha (the God 
of Ghatika-”dri), along with Krshna (=Yamuna- 
”carya) and Yatiraja (= Ramanuja), and that seems 
to be the inspiration quickening him to the com- 
position of an authoritative text-book, embod^ng 
in it all the qmntessence of the doctrines of Visishta- 
dvaita Philosophy and Religion promulgated by Sri 
Ranmuja, which he fitly titles as the; Yatindra 
MATA-D iPiKA or The Light of the School of Ramanuja. 

5, As works original, then commentaries, and 
then theses, over against these, became multiplied, 



PREFACE 


IX 


and so vast as to be beyond the range of a clear 
conspectus of the subject-matter, necessity for com- 
pendia arose. Of such is the Yatlndm-Mata-Dlpiha^ 
which purports to be a manual devised in order 
to present a lucid outline of the Visishta-’dvaita 
Philosophy and Religion, based on the voluminous 
literature extant, most of which the author Srini- 
vasa, mentions by name in the Conclusion'Chapter. 
I have inserted in brackets against these works, 
the names of these authors.^ 

6. As handbooks were thus desiderated for original 
works, English renderings of such seem to be in 
requisition in these modern days of acute oriental 
research. The East and West are daily being 
brought into closer bonds. A memorable epoch of 
this process has just transpired in King George V 
of Britain having crowned himself with his august 
consort Queen Mary, on Indian soil in Dehli. Rshi 
Parasara, in giving an account of the kings of the 
future in his Vishnu-Purana who would hold sway 
over India, wrote thus : — 

^ Teshu’tsanneshu punah Kainhild 
Yavam bhupatayo bhavishyanty 
a-murdhd’hhishikidh, [iv. 24. 55]. 

The word Kainhila has never been noticed as 
another variant by the learned editor of Wilson’s 

^ Some of these were kindly traced out for me by 
my friend Prof. M. T. Narasirhhiehgar, Bangalur. 

B 



X 


YkTiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKS 


Vishiiu-Purana, Mr. F. Hall To my mind it sounds 
very much like {Angila). KainUla-YoNOHdiS then (to us) 
are the English people. They would rule, he further 
tells us, znthotit zueanng the ommis (a-mmdhd~bhi- 
skiliU). This is considered by the Hindus as 
unorthodox or un-normaL George V. coronating 
himself in India then is an event which restores to 
the Hindus its own notions and sentiments of what 
properly constituted sovereigns ought to be (i. e., 
mufdhd-hUshilta], May not the Rshi’s prophecy point 
to the necessity of real crowned heads establishing 
themselves in India, instead of mcroimed vicegerents 
being permitted to fulfil royal functions? No literary 
work written during this Coronation epoch should 
hence launch out into the world without chronicling 
this world-event, — an event conspiring to unite East 
and yV^est in closer bonds of love for co-operative 
work-in future. This is fostered by literary works of 
the East presented to the West in western garb. My 
present attempt is one more of this description.'* 

* ‘ Our task is to translate ancient knowledge into 
modern equivalents. We have to clothe the old 
strength in a new form. The new form without that 
old strength is nothing but a mockery ; almost equal- 
ly foolish is the savage anachronism of an old- 
time power without fit expression. Spiritually, intel- 
lectually, there is no undertaking, but we must 
attempt it. [Sister Nivedita alias Margaret E. Noble], 



PREFACE 


XI 


Also it is significant to note that as this work 
is being sent out on its career, the Government of 
India has resolved to take practical steps to en- 
courage Oriental Learning, judging from the Blue 
Book just published of the transactions of the Con- 
ference of Orientalists held in Simla, last July, under 
the presidentship of Sir S. Harcourt Butler, c.sj., 
CJ.E., Member of Council for Education. 

7. Three Editions of the Yatlndra-Mata-Dlpiha 
have come to my knowledge r — 

(1) Published by the Vedanta- Vidya-Vilasa Press, 
Madras, 1868, inTeUigit characters. 

(2) Published by the Vidya-tarahgini Press, 
Mysore, 1896, in Tehigu characters. 

(3) Puna Ananda-”srama Series, No. 50. 1906, with 
a commentary by Vasudeva Gastrin, in Devandgari, 
Vari0 leciiones is almost nil, but a good editon along 
with English translation seems a future contin- 
gency.^ The author has divided the work into Ten 
Avafdms, i.e.. Incarnations, in allusion to the fact 
of Vishnu’s (Narayana’s) Ten Incarnations. Con- 
forming with this sentiment, have I adopted the 
equivalent term Advent to mean Sections or Chapters. 

^ There are two Kdrilids (versified works) treating 
of the same subject-matter (come to my notice), 
(i) V eddnta-l^arikd-'vall by Venkatarya, (2) Yatlndm- 
siddhmta-smgmha by Sri-saila-”carya. \yidyd~ 
tamngim PnsSyMaisuy,'\ 



YATlNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA 


xii 

As I stated above, the work, being academic, is 
rather rigid. I would therefore recommend the read- 
er to begin from the Fourth Advent to the End 
{pmmeya part), and then turn back to the First 
Three Advents {pmmana part). In any case the 
copious notes supplied will, it is hoped, lead to 
a clear comprehension of the otherwise intricate 
windings of the Visishta-’dvaita Philosophy and 
Religion. 

8. Finally, I have to note that this addition to 
the Orientalia was finished on the 2nd of February 
1912, the auspicious day on which a great festival 
is held in Meikote Hill (Tiru-Narayajja-puram), thirty 
miles north from Maisur (Mysore), in honour of 
Sri Ramanuja having discovered the Holy Image 
of Narayana overgrowm with jungle and ant-hills, 
under the asterism Pmawasu (pollox)."^ By acci- 
dent or providence, it is difficult for the small 
wits of man to divine, Rev. J. N. Farquhar of 
the Y. M, C. A. Calcutta, came just now for the 
first time to Maisur and in his address to the 
public in the Wesleyan Mission School hall, began 
with the preliminary that what attracted him to 
the place was neither woodland nor river-scene, 
neither Darya-Daulats nor Tippu’s Tombs, but 
that great Ram^uja who appeared ten centuries 
ago on this land giving to me n a great spiritual 

^ See (my) Life of Ramanuja, Ch. xxix; 



PREFACE 


Xlll 


message.^ On the day referred to (2nd February.) 
the Reverend gentleman, true to his announcement, 
was closeted with me for nearly two hours, in con- 
versation connected with Sri Ramanuja, and he inci- 
dentally referred to the lack of the ethical conception 
of God in the Vedanta, but I told him that the key-note 
of Ramanuja’s teachings was pre-eminently that. 
This was the very point also, as I discovered, he had 
already put in print in his Primer of Hinduism, 
(p. 42), where he says that ‘ in the Vedanta Philosophy 
there is one fatal omission that Brahman is not con- 
ceived as holy ; we are nowhere told that Brahman is 

righteousness Hinduism remains from first to 

last crippled, because the idea of God was never 
moralised.’ It is unfortunate Rev. Farquhar com- 
mitted himself thus too soon ; for he would have 
made quite a contrary statement if he had written 
his Primer after his -South Indian tour ; for close 

^ Combining this event with the coronation event 
and the swelling body of the Orientalia, read what 
Justice M. G- Ranade prophesied in 1901, viz., ‘The 
hand of God in History is but dimly seen by those 
who cannot recognize in the contact of European 
with Eastern thought a higher possibility for the 
future of both races. Already the morning dawn is 
upon us and we can see glimpses of the bright future 
reflected in our ability to know and appreciate each 
other’s strength and excellence. [Philosophy of Theism,} 



XIV 


YATlNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA 


acquaintance with Ramanuja would have startled him 
by his exposition of a most ethical and loving as 
w’^eli as sublime and exalted, God as surpasseth all 
notions of similar character that may be found en- 
shrined in other Scriptures of Earth. Unfortunately 
such appellations of Deity connoting His highly 
ethical character, seem to have escaped his the Revd's 
notice, viz., dhama, satya, punya, pavana^ pavitvd^ puta, 
stichi, kcddha^ Hva,han, halyana^ amala^ apahata-pdpmd^ 
heya-pyatyamka^ nish-hcilanka antavymil,^ Bhagavanlf 
etc. This ethical concept is in fact the cardinal, 
salient, momentous feature of the Vedanta that con- 
stitutes Ramanuja’s evangel to mankind. 

9. Christianity no doubt derives its conception of 
God from the Semitic Judaism, but it ought not to 
forget Its fons et oylgo remote in the mists of ages, viz,, 
the Aryan (or Vedic) Brahmanism. In the light of 
ethnographic, philologic, geologic and archseologic 

^ This means God, immanent in nature and man, 
meaning thereby the Holy Guide (or Gto, if that 
word is more endearing), who, as Justice Ranade 
puts it, * is the Divine Reality regulating the purposes 
of law and order, beauty and benevolence, power 
and wisdom 

t See the significations of this last term discussed 
in the pages of JRAS, for 1910, 1911, 1912, one 
scholar Dr. Schrader firmly holding that it means 
essentially hoh\ 



PREFACE 


XV 


knowledge, made available by Orientalists in this 
age of enlightenment and enlarged horizon, neither 
to gain nor glory does it redound to ignore the 
world-old traditions common to the Indo-European 
race. The outlook is now so wide that it is time the 
narrow bounds of Hebraism to which Christianity 
tenaciously clings itself, should be overleaped. The 
East invites ail men to unite. Even as George V 
was crowned in India, the Universal Religion of all 
humanity is destined to be crowned here."^ The 
Science of Religions by Emile Burnouf is a bracing 
revelation on this theme. Dr. Deussen, even without 
his reaching as far as Ramanuja, says ‘ that there is 
not in the Bible (this venerable book being not yet 
quite free from Semitic realism) f ; but it is in tht 

It is here meet to recall Sri Parthasarathi Yogi’s 
proposal to Dr. Miller of Madras to call his College, 
not Christian, but Universal Religious, College ; but 
Dr. Miller could only heave a sigh, and no more. 

t See his Indian Reminiscences, Max Muller in his 
Lectures on the Vedanta has shown the high ethical 
standard of the Vedanta, implicated in the doctrine 
of havma^ which the Christian Church impugns to the 
detriment of ail ethics, reducing God to the sorry 
predicament of a capricious, partial and cruel tyrant, 
violating as such all essentials of ethics. The 
Vedantic Deity, on the other hand, Max Muller 
shows, embraces the deities of any other religion. 



XVI 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA 


Veda’ ; and that ‘the Vedanta in its unfalsified form, 
is the strongest support of pure movality' Unless 
God were ethical, Vedanta could not as it doth, sermon 
on morality I Vain again were its teachings of the 
immanency of Spirit, did it not mean a life of holiness 
to have to spring from it 1 ! Any other opinion betok- 
ens shortness of insight and slenderness of scholar- 
ship in South Indian lore. Even if the ethical idea 
were germinal in the Veda, it receives its complete 
expression in Ramanuja.* Even the stage to which 

Even the cold light of logical Tyndall confessed to 
P. C. Mozoomdar that ‘ life came from the East once 
before, and it must come again.’ (1874 a.d.) 

* That such a world-wide Book of Ethics, the 
Bhagavad-Gita should have escaped the notice of such 
an earnest and sympathetic missionary as Rev. J. N* 
Farquhar — a fault venial in the bygone centuries, 
but not in this 20th century — passeth our under- 
standing. Nor will Hinduism in the least counten- 
ance such ethics (?) of the Christian Church as 
eternal damnation for petty sin or eternal salvation 
for petty virtue; both determined, indeed, by the 
infinitesimal life-span of man on earth, and projecting 
him for the nonce, into eternity for good or worse 
heedless of the ends of justice! The soul (ego) itself 
is an ethical entity to Vedanta (not sinful as 
Christiany insists, though God Himself breathed it!) ; 
a fortiori, God in Vedanta is essentially, primarily 
and exaltedly ethical. Unless God were so, He could 



PREFACE 


XVll 


the idea developed in Jesus the Christ’s days, is 
still by ten centuries green. It is scientific to con- 
ceive the Kosmos as ceaselessly progressive ; and 
therefore evolution need not be imagined as making 
an exception in the case of Religion and Philosophy. 
Their progress therefore cannot be arrested at the 
Near East, Palestine. If the conservative of Christ 
be combined with the progressive of Ramanuja, in 
whom the germinal of the Veda finds its finale, the 
world is all the more a gainer. The collective reason 
of all religions so transmitted in history becomes the 
common heritage of all mankind. 

10, As the man of the Near East (Palestine) Jesus 
the Christ, was found ready to direct construction 
when northern barbarians pounced upon and destroy- 
ed the classical Roman Empire, the sun of Ramanuja 
rose on the horizon of the Middle East (India) to 
direct construction when trans-, as well as cis, -Hima- 
layan influences such as the Persian (Assyrian also 
it is said), Semitic and Buddhistic, and all their con- 
geners had well-nigh sublimated the classic Vedic 
Brahmanism. In this constructive work, Ramanuja 
had also to contend against absolute monism and 
ergo consequential non-ethical character liable to 
be imputed to Godhood, into which Vedism had 
been volatilized, landing it in nihilism; and he had also 

not be an object worthy of Love ; forasmuch as He 
is characterized as Anania in the Vedanta, 
c 



xviii yatindra-mata-dIpikA 

to establish the Personality of the Godhead as stand- 
ing in the most intimate relationship to the Ego (soul), 
for the redemption of which Divinity maketh repeat- 
ed loving sacrifices : Ajaya?^iano hahudha vijdyaie, i. e., 
Incarnations^; and in order to prepare the same Ego 
for sweet eternal service comporting with Its WilL 

n. Ramanuja also found that men in his days 
had swerved from the Unitarian conception of God, 
hidden under poetry, mythe or trope in the Archaic 
Vedas ; and it was therefore his evangel to converge 
on to this Unitarian focus the divergent lines of 
thought which had emerged from the Vedic source, 
directing them to a conception of Divinity neither 
polytheistic nor pantheistic, f neither deistic nor 
theistic, neither monistic nor dualistic, but a happy 
synthesis of all the essential features that gave these 
their names, into a monotheistic Unity (^BMgavata 
Dhama\ philosophic cum religious, intellectual cum 
emotional, — a Unity of Godhood, in short, necessarily 
ethical and sufficient unto salvation. J Also in 

* Cardinal Newman held t^t the Christian Church 
borrowed this doctrine from India. God is Ananda = 
Love (Anando-Bycihma)f and therefore incarnates to 
give and evoke Love (Esha hy evd-''nandayafi). 
Incarnation implies vicarious suffering. Read Puvusha- 
Suhfa and the Tandy a-Mahd-bmhmam, 

t Read Advent IX. on ‘ God.’ 

J Read pmanuja’s Brahrna’smm-Bhdshya, Gadya- 
tmya &c. 



PREFACE 


XIX 


Ramanuja may already be discovered the latest evo- 
iution of theistic inquiry embodied in such works, for 
instance, as Prof. C. Fraser’s Philosophy of Theism, 
in which the Three Primary Data: Ego (soul), Matter, 
and God are elaborately considered, — which is no 
other than Ramanuja’s Three Postulates of Existence, 
the TaUva-Tmya^ articulately epitomised in the Fa^- 
indfa-Mata-Dlpiha. Ranade writes ; — ‘ As a matter 
of fact, both before Sankari-”carya’s time, and after 
his death, the modified {Advaita) system of Ramanuja 
had played a great part in Indian Philosophy, and to 
it may be traced the rise and progress of Vaish^ava 
Sects throughout India, which sects have attained to 
a higher and truer conception of Theism than any of 
the other prevailing systems’. Again he says : — ‘ The 
three-fold postulates of existence acit^ ISvata of 
Ramanuja) are thus seen to be distinct and yet 
harmonized together. All attempts to assimilate 
and reduce them into one absolute existence fail 
because they are bound to fail. At the same time 
they are not distinct in the sense of being disjoined 
parts of a mechanical whole. They are one and yet 
they are many.’ (i. e. Visishta-”dvaita). 

12. Christianity is a happy combination of Semitic 
and Aryan culture ^ in the direction of religion : but 

^ (i) ‘Hebraism and Hellenism’, in a restricted 
sense, according to Mathew Arnold. Semitic com- 
prises Islamic, Chaldic, Accadian, Egyptian, Judaic 



XX 


YATlNDRA-MATA-DiPlKA 


Rtoanuja later came to unify the Dravidian ^ also 
including the Bhagavata credo, which is par excelUnce 

and Christian faiths. _ Dravidian comprises all the 
Turanian branches. Aryan includes Persic, Medic, 
Greecian, Roman, Celtic, Teutonic, Slavonic, Christ- 
ian. All the three, Aryan, Semitic and Turanian 
thus engirdle the World. Chaldic (Assyrian) is sus- 
pected to be Aryan, and Judaism also, when traced 
through the Essenes and Ebionites. Dr, Deussen 
is thus justified, [see p: xv. preface.] 

(2) J.M. Kennedy in his Religions and Philosophies 
of iJu East p: 6, observes thus; — ^‘One cannot but 
marvel at the impudence and conceit of the Christian 
missionary who goes to, say India, after a short 
course of training and straightway proceeds to con- 
fute with specially prepared arguments the doctrines 
of a belief devised by a much superior class of men 
— a belief indeed to which Christianity itself can 
easily be traced.’ 

(3) Revd. Dr. Miller of Madras asked the British 
Christians to bear in mind that God was at work in 
India long before any missionary, Catholic or Protest- 
ant, set his foot there, 

^ Dmvi^ian includes the two branches Vaishnavg^ 
and Saiva. The Dramida- or Dravida-Bhashya or 
the Brahma-Sutras, referred to both by Sankara anc 
Ramanuja, seems to be an ancient commentary, bj 
its very name Drami^a of Drami<J^-”carya. Anterio 
to Ramanuja and posterior to Sankara;,; procrusteai 



PREFACE 


XXI 


concerned with the closest personality of Divinity. 
There is thus a Holy Trinity realiseddn Ramanuja, 
which fuses ail the world- faiths into a Universal 
system. The Theosophical Society also, which sits en- 
throned in India, in Madras too, where Ram^uja’s 
work largely lay, — stript of all its occultism and 
esotericism — coupled with other Vedantic movements, 
may be taken as the most obvious evidence proving the 
fulfilment of Ramanuja’s work. Ramanuja’s work is 
like what Bacon wrote : — ‘All partitions of knowledge 
should be accepted, rather for lines to mark and 
distinguish than for sections to divide and separate, 
so that the continuance and entirety of knowledge 
be preserved.’ 

13. Under such auspices, the riches are presented 
to the world, contained in the Compendium, — the 
Y atindra-Mata-Dipika. 


Veda-Grham, 
Maisur (Mysore), 
South India. 
2nd Fehry,, 1912, 


Alkondavilli 

Govinda-'’carya SvAmin, 

M.R.A.S, M.R.S.A, ETC. 


methods seem to have been prevalent ; but Ramanuja 
gave true proportions by showing how the radical 
conceptions of God involved in such terms as §iva, 
Hirapyagarbha, Indra, Agni etc., were all implicated 
in the comprehensive term Naraya^a. See Advent 
IX on ‘ God.’ 




CORRIGENDA 


xmi 


CORRIGENDA. 


PA(iE 

Link, 

For 

Bead 

V 

20 

he is 

is 

V 

24 

astic 

asti 

viii 

17 

Karisaila 

Karisaila 

xi 

17 

editon 

edition 

8 

12 

(the further 

(the further). 

H 

19 

Inference, 

Inference 

H 

21 

Samkara 

Samsham 

15 

9 

dor-mant 

dormant 

18 

I 

perception 

perception, 

23 

22 

differences 

differences 

28 

23 

— Sangmha 

— Samgraha 

36 

add after line 16 

Because antithe- 



sis is wanting 

36 

17-18-19 

because. . .wanting 

(because...- want- 


ing) 

41 

25 

Kalatyaydya., 

Kaldtyaydpa 

42 

8 

Kvatu^ 

Kratu \ 

47 

21 

intended, 

intended. 

53 

20 

pavisaphhyd 

pafisamkhya 

53 

24 

Jyotish fomam 

Jyotishtomam 

54 

24 

or 

of 

59 

23 

Pankaja 

Pankaja 

63 heading 

...knowledge 

knowledge; Matter 



XXIV 


CORRIGENDA 


Page 

Line 

For 

Read 

88 

I 

Four- 7?/^^5 

Each Manu has 




for his time-rneas- 




are 7 1 Four-Yf^g^js 

91 

25 

hoti 

hoti 

no 

23 

sangamam 

samgamam 

III 

14 

Udgita 

Udgitha 

II5 

26 

Mayavadins 

Mayavadins 

II6 

3 

Bhaskara 

Bhaskara 

II6 

25 

Saivacaryas 

Saivacaryas 

II8 

21 

Soul, 

Soul 

123 

23 

etc 

ete 

125 

20 

Jaimini nolya 

Jaiminiya... 5 ^<x«o 

126 

II 

&c. 

&c\ 

128 

I 

abide 

abides 

129 

25 

mantras ray as 

mantra^* sr ay 

130 

9 

Sriman — 

Sriman — 

133 

21 

delvered 

delivered 

145 

19 

cognizer 

cognized 

I5I 

2 

hypostatize 

hypostatizes 

154 

13 

(Easternal 

(as Eternal 

156 

5 

non-substance 

Non-substance 

157 

I 

Isvara 

Uvara 

158 

15 

aad 

and 

162 

18 

(gallnut) 

(gallnut), 

167 

19 

Sixteen 

Twenty-four 



CLORY TO RAMANUJA 


YATiNDRA*-MATA-DiPIKA 

OR 

THE LIGHT OF RAIMNUJA'S SCHOOL. 


ADVENT* I— PERCEPTION {Pratyaksha). 

INVOCATORY VERSES. 

1. Sri-Vefikate§am Kari-saila-natham 
Sri-Devarajam Ghatik-adri-simham 
Krshnena sakam Yatirajam ide 
Svapne ca dfshtan mama Desik-endran. 

2. Yatlsvaram pra'ijamya 'ham 
Vedant-aryam Maha-gurum 
Karomi bala-bodhartham 
Yatindra-mata-dipikam. 

The Blessed Lord {Sriman^Narayana) ® 
alone is the Truth {tattva), adjectivated by soul 

^ The ‘King of Yatis’ or ascetics = Ramanuja. 

I have adopted ‘Advent’ for the Samskrt word 
Avatdra. 

* Sn means Blessed, metaphorically She is Lakshim 
or the Mediatrix, the Mother. Ndfdyam is the AU- 



YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [Advent 


7 


and non-soul/ and secondless. By Love 
(Bhakti) and Resignation {Prapatti,) propitiated, 
He alone is the Means;® and He alone is the 
Goal, adjectivated by the Spiritual Universe. 
I'hus, by means of the texts (or passages) of 
the Ved^ta, do they establish— viz., Vyasa, 
Bodhayana, Guhadeva, Bharuci, Brahmanandi, 
Dramidacarya, Sri Parahkusa,® Natha/ Yamu- 
namuni,® Yatisvara® and others. According to 
their School, I proclaim, by the grace of Maha- 
carya (my Guru or Spiritual Preceptor), the 

God, and metaphorically He is the Father. Thus 
Sriman-Nihaya5a= The Universe’s Mother-Father 
Principle = God. 

* The original expression is Chi^-achid-visishta. 
Chit = conscious entity = Soul ; and Achit = Non-cons- 
cious entity = Non-soul. Narayapa is thus the Soul- 
and-Non-soul-bodied-Spirit = God. 

^ That is Means to Salvation or Deliverance from 
the Material State, and for attaining the Spiritual 
State. 

® This is Sathagopa or St. Nammazhvar [vide our 
Lives of Saints], 

'' Or Nathamuni [Me our Life of Ramanuja], 

* Or AJavandar [vide Op. cit]. 

Or Ramanuja [vide Op. cit]. 



PERCEPTION. 


D 


!•] 

Sariraka-Paribhasha/® named Yatindra-mata- 
Dipika (or the Light of Ramanuja’s School) — 
which follows the Vedanta— for the instruction 
of students. 

All the sum of things are divisible into two 
Divisions, ( i) Pramana, Authority, or Measurer 
or Means (of knowledge), and Prameya or the 
Measured or Object (or Objective) (of know- 
ledge). 

The Means (of knowledge) is only threefold. 

The Object (of knowledge) is twofold, Dravya 
or the Thing (or Substance), and A-dravya or 
the Non-Thing (or Non-Substance). 

Dravya or Substance is of two kinds,/a(^a or 
the Non-sentient “ and A-jada or the Sentient 

Literally. Bodied-Technology ; ora technology, 
terminology or phraseolo^ pertaining to the Cor- 
poreated. The Corporeatei is the All-bodied God 
(Naiayana) and that treatise which discusses, or 
discourses on. Him, is also called the ^Urivaka, or the 
Philosophy of the Corporeated or The Philosophy 
and Religion of the Vedas. 

Non-cmtscient and Conscient would perhaps be 
more appropriate. Literally is inert, and a^jada 
is then its opposite : ert at non-inert. Non-intdligmt 
and Intelligent : is another useful pair of terms. 



4 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPiKS [Advent 


Jada or the Non-sentient is twofold, viz., 
Prakrti or Matter and Kdla or Time. 

Prakrti or Matter is composed of twenty- 
four (sub-) principles [tattva). 

Kola or Time is, by reason of limitation or 
condition {upadhi), threefold. 

A-jada or the Sentient is twofold; Pardk 
or outward (objective) and Pratyak or Inward 
(subjective). 

Par&k or Outward is also twofold : the Nitya- 
vibhuti or Eternal Estate, and the Dharma- 
bhuta-jndna or attributive (or adjectival) con- 
sciousness or cognition. 

Pratyak or Inward is also twofold : Jiva 
or the Individual Soul and Isvara or Ruling 
(Universal) Soul (God). 

Jiva or Individual Soul is threefold : (i) Bud- 
dha or the Bound, (2) Mukta or the Freed, and 
(3) Nitya or the Eternal (or Free).*® 

TIk; Baddha or bound soul is also twofold ; 

■* Cf: Pp. —Artha-Pancaia or 

“The Five Truths”, 



PERCEPTION. 


I-] 


5 


Bubhukshu or Pleasure-desirer,” and Murnu- 
kshu or Freedom-desira".’* 

The Bubhukshu or Pleasure-desirer is two- 
fold : the addicted to Artha or wealth, and 
Kama " or gratifications ; and the devoted to 
Dharma'^^ or Duties. 

The devoted to Dharma or duties are two- 
fold : the devoted to godlings, and the devoted 
to Bhagavan “ (God). 

The Mumukshu or Freedom-desirer is two- 
fold: the addicted to Kaivalya or Isolation,'' 
and the devoted to Moksha or Salvation.'® 

The Moksha or Salvation-seeker is twofold ; 

*® Pleasure here is meant for material enjoyments 
or sense-delights, either on earth or transmundane 
spheres such as Svarga ; or what may be called the 
material paradise. 

Freedom here is meant liberation or emancipa- 
tion from all material associations or pleasures. It 
means salvation, or bliss in spiritual estate. 

“C/. Pp: 577/. A.5. t^iV °r<^gtails. 

'• See Op. cit. Pp : 86i /. (passim). 

” Soul-bliss or Self-abstraction, See Op. cit. Pp: 
577 / 

God-bliss or Conscious God-union, See Ope cit* 
Pp:577/ 



6 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPiKS [Advent 


the Bhakta^^ or God-lover, and the Prapannd^'^ 
or God-resigned. 

The Prapanna or God-resigned is twofold : 
the Ekunti or the One-pointed, and the Para- 
mdikdnfi or the One-only-pointed. 

Th&Paramaikdnti is twofold: the Drptd^' or 
The Postulant-Patient, and the Arta'^^ or The 
Postulant-Impatient. 

Isvara or God Supreme is (hypostatically) 
existent in five modes, viz., (i) Para or the 
Transcendant, (2} Vyuha or the Grouped, (3) 
Vibhava or the Bicamational (4) Antarydml or 
the In-Ruler, and (5) Area or the Worship- 
pable.*** 

Para or the Transcendant is Uniform (or 
the Immutable Spirit-Unit). 

Vyuha or the Grouped is fourfold: (i) Vasu- 
deva, (2) Safikarshana, (3) Pradyumna, and (4) 
Aniruddha. Kesava and others are derivative 

See Op. cit. Pp ; 581/1 

See Op, cit. Pp. 585/. Supplicant may be used 
for Pcstulaut and Votary for popular use. 

See Op. cit. Pp. 576/. Variant terms are used, 
that Western minds may apprehend the ideas involved 
in the Sarhskrt terms. 




PERCEPTION. 


7 


!•] 

(Xo^a/) groups. The Matsya or the Fish and 
other Incarnations are innumerable^" 

Antaryami or \he. In-Ruler dwells in every 
body. 

Area or the Worshippable are those unique 
Images presented to the eyes of all men in such 
Holy Shrines as Srirahgam."* 

An examination will now be conducted in 
order of this specification (or enunciation) above 
made (of the categories). 

Of those, Pramana or Means of Imowledge 
is the producer (or maker or giver) of Pramd 
or knowledge. ‘ Means ’ is what is to be defined; 
the definition of it is that ‘it is the producer 
of Pramd, knowledge’. Pramd is jndna or 
‘knowledge consonant with experience in its 
exactitude ’. Pramd or knowledge is the thing 
to be defined. The definition is ‘that which 

■*’ See Tattvatraya of Lokacarya (No. 2, in the list, 
P. 570. Of. cit.,) for an explanation of the functions 
performed by what may be called the Logoi derived 
from the One Spirit, Para. Also read Pp. 82-83 of 
our Vade Mecum of Vedanta, 

Near Trichinopoly, South India. Rahga or 
Narayapa is here figured as recumbent on the coils 



8 


YATINDRA-M ATA-DiPIKA [ Ad V ent 


has the quality of knowledge consonant with 
experience in its exactitude ^ Supposing the 
definition of Prama was simply ' knowledge , 
the knowledge which sees silver in a pearl-oyster 
would be a definition overlapping its bounds 
{at{-vyapti)p (or over-pervading its legitimate 
limits;. Hence the definition of Pramd takes the 
form: 'knowledge consonant with experience'. 
Even then the fault of over-pervasion {ati-vyapti) 
remains, inasmuch as one in a moment of illusion 
(or delusion} may mistake the pearl-oyster for 
silver. Hence (the further qualificatoiy clause 
to the definition : ' in its exactitude [yathavas- 
thita) \ By this expression, samsaya^ anya- 

of ^esha or the Serpent* For symbology see Introd ; 
to our Livc^ of Saints, , See note 49 infra, 

Ati-vyapti is one of the threei faults to which a 
definition is exposed. The fault ati-vyapti or Inclusion 
would include things beyond the scope of the defini- 
tion. The other fault is a^vyapti or Exclusion of things 
which ought to fall within the definition intended. The 
third fault is a-sambhava, or Non-existence^ or Negation, 
example: the definition of a sky-flower. See infm P. 9. 

Naturalness, or Naturality would be apt. 
Another expression which may be employed is 
reality, or actuality. The whole definition may 
stand thus as an alternative: 'Knowledge exact to, 



I.J 


PERCEPTION 


9 


thd-jmna and viparlta-jndna are avoided (which 
would) otherwise vitiate the definition. 

Sams ay a or Doubt is the apperception of 
mutually contradicting attributes in a thing 
(dharmi) to be apprehended.. For example, 
the doubt whether a long-looking or erect object 
is post or person. 

Anyathd-jndna or Wrong Apprehension is 
the mistaken apperception of one attribute, for 
another. For example, the proposition v/hich 
ascribes the agency in the real agent, soul, as 
due to illusion. (This is dharma-viparyasa). 

Viparlta-jMna or Reversed Apprehension is 
the mistaken apperception of one thing itself for 
another. (For example the mistaking of the 
post itself for the person). (This is dharmi- 
viparydsa). 

A definition (or sign of a thing) has three 
faults, (i) a~vydpti, (2) ati-vydpti and (3) a-sam- 
bhava A-vydpti or non-pervasion is the non- 
existence of the sign**® (or definition) in the 
thing signified®® (or to be defined). Ati-vydpti 

or with, practicality’; ‘ the reality of empirical know- 
ledge’ will perhaps better help our readers. 

See note 25. Lahshaya. Lakshya. 



10 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKS [Advcnt 

or over-pervasion is the existence of the sign (or 
definition) in things other than the things to be 
signified. A-sambhava is the non-existence of 
the sign (or definition) anywhere. For example 
the statement (or assertion) that Jiva or the 
Individual Soul is an object of perception by 
the eye. 

As therefore these faults are absent in the 
definition given of PramUna or Means of know- 
ledge, that definition is well Established. 

(Now in the proposition, Pramd-karana = 
Pramdfia, i.e., the producer of knowledge, is the 
Means of knowledge, what is meant by Karana, 
producer, maker or effecter?). Karana or 
producer is that which is the best instrument 
(by which knowledge is obtained). The best 
instrument is the instrument than which there is 
none better. Hence it is evident that Pramdna 
or the Means of Knowledge is that instrument 
than which there is none better by which to 
obtain (that) knowledge. 

There is a definition of Pramdna as that 
which makes known what is unknown. But 
those who propose this definition have them- 
selves refuted it. Hence it is not acceptable. 



PERCEPTION 


ir 


I-] 


The Pramanas or the Means of knowledge 
are three — (i) Pratyaksha or Perception,™ 
Anumana or Inference, and Sabda or Word. 

Of these. Perception is the Means which 
renders knowledge actually sensible (or made 
manifest to the senses). ‘ Manifest to the sen- 
ses ’ is (a necessary clause) to show its “ 
variety from Inference. Pramd or knowledge 
is to show its character different from what 
it would be to the vitiated (unsound, defeccive 
or diseased) sense. 

This Perception is twofold : Sa-^ikalpaka or 
collective, and Nir-vikalpaka or general. 
Nir-vikalpaka or general, is superficial Know- 
ledge of a thing consisting in its attributes, 
form etc., obtained at first sight. Sa-vikalpaka, 
general or particular, is thorough Knowledge 
of a thing consisting in its attributes, form etc., 
obtained on deep reflexion (or meditation). 


I.e., Sense-perceptioD, or sensuous perception. 
Perception by senses, 
thorough, in popular language. 

I.e., superficial, in popular language. 

Thus Nir-vikalpaka wOuld be shallow, whereas 
Sa-vikalpaka would be deep, knowledge. 



12 yatindra-mata-dipikA [Advent 

In both cases, attributes, form etc,, are an- 
cillary sine qua non ; for if these ancillaries 
(or auxiliaries) were absent, the knowledge (of 
a thing) is neither present nor known. 

The process of perception is thus: (i) the 
soul's contact with the mind, (2) the mind 
with the sense, and (3) the sense with the 
object. The invariable function of the senses 
is to illuminate the object to be perceived. (For 
example), the contiguity of the sense, eye etc., 
with the object, pot etc,, causes the ocular 
knowledge : '' This is the pot Thus also are 
the tactual and other perceptions. In the per- 
ception of a thing, contact is the connexion. In 
the perception of the form etc., of a thing, (the 
relation or connection called) Samavclya*^ or 
An-upalambha is the scientific term. It means 
that a thing devoid of attributes, form etc,, is beyond 
recognition or perception. 

An-upapatti. Upapatti is known by conclusive 
reasoning. Hence An-upapatti is not so known ; i.e., 
inconclusive; or what fails to be. 

The technical term is Atma, 

The technical term is Manas. 

The technical term is Indriya. 

The technical term is Avtha, 
Niiya-sambandhasisamvdyah: The invariable or 



PERCEPTION 


13 


r.] 

inherence is inadmissible, for the connection is 
one of dependence on the thing depended upon. 

The perceptions Nir-vikalpaka (or general) 
and Sa-vikalpaka (particular) are twofold: 
ArvUcina or memonsl*^ {lit. recent) and An- 
arvUclna or non-memorial (= ancient or primal 
lit, remote). The memorial again is twofold : 
sense-helped and sense-unhelped. 

The sense-unhelped is twofold : Svayam- 
siddha or self-ascertained, and Divya dr divine. 
Self-ascertained is what is engendered by Yoga 
or deep meditation. Divine is what is caused 
by Bhagavan's (God’s) Grace. 

The non-memorial is sense-unhelped, or the 
knowledge possessed by the Niiyas^^ or the 
Eternals and the Muktas or the Emancipated. 

inseparable relation of a thing or substance with its 
attributes or vice versa. 

Alternative terms used for better elucidating the 
ideas. 

Caused or Mediate, or sense-vehicular, 
subject to time and space. 

I,e. Uncaused or Immediate, i.e., intuitional, not 
subject to time and space. 

See Arfha-Pancaha, Pp. 573#. - 



14 YATiNDRA-MATA-DlPIKA [Acjv^nt 

This non-memorial (perception) is passingly re- 
ferred to. 

I'hus Pratyaksha or Sense-Perception is that 
which generates Sakshatkara, or knowledge^ 
sense-evident. 

But an objection may be put forward thus : — 
Pramd or knowledge has been defined to be 
knowledge as is actually consonant (or consistent) 
with experience. This condition is also found 
present in Smrti or memory ; hence memory or 
recollection must also be counted as a Means of 
knowledge. How then are such Means {pra^ 
mdms) stated to be only Three ? '' 

To this objection it is said ; Even if memory 
be admited as a Means, it is dependent on Sams- 
kdra, or residua left of previous experiences, 
and these residua are dependent on (sense-) 
perception. Hence memory is included (or 

Le,, Perception, Inference, or Inductive Reason- 
ing, and Word or Revelation. 

Bhasha-panccheda says : “Sdfji$kamf called think- 
ing (bhavana)^ resides in sentient beings; and is 
imperceptible to the senses. Certainty, devoid of 
inattention in its constituent,, is its cause. It is 
also described to be the cause of memory and rfecog- 
nition. See also p. 95, Dr. Morell’s Mental Philosophy. 



PERCEPTION 


15 


I-] 

involved) in perception, and there is no need to 
constitute it into a distinct Means or Authority. 

Hence the Means (or Authorities or Instru- 
ments of knowledge) become determined as 
Three (only.) 

Memory or Recollection is Knowledge derived 
from the residua or impressions left of a pre- 
vious (or past) esperience. The excitants (that 
rouse the dor- mant residua into remembrance) 
are as per verse : 

Sadrs d'drshta-cinfa’dyaih 
Smrti-bljasya badhakah. 

Sometimes the excitant is the sight of some- 
thing similar (previously sensed) ; sometimes an 
unseen (or unexpected) fate (adrshta); some- 
times deep musing. Similarity is thus (exempli- 
fied): (i) If two (individuals) Devadatta and 
Yajnadatta had once been seen together, the 
sight of Devadatta excites the remembrance of 
Yajnadatta. (2) The second is the unexpected 
(i. e., unconscious cerebration) leaping into 

The three causes that excite or stimulate 
recollection are exemplified infra. Lit : the causes 
that excite the seed of memory into development or 
unfoldment, which is remembrance or recollection. 



i6 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPiKA [Advent 

memory, of what has previously been experienc- 
ed (sensed), such as the Holy Place Srirangam.*® 
(3) The Third is the calling into memory (cons- 
cious cerebration) such as the bewitching divine 
Image of Vehkatesa®® (before sensed). What 
is welt experienced engenders constant remem- 
brance. Forgetfulness is caused by much time 
elapsing (after the prior experience) or by 
sickness etc,y which weaken the residua {Sams- 
karas),^^ As remembrance (Smrti) is (thus), 
included in Perception or Sense-evidence, 

This is the Holy Shrine near Trichinopoly, 
Madras Presidency, The traditions say that the 
Holy Image therein came from KsMrabdhi or 
Milky Ocean, to Ikshvaku of the Solar Race 
and bestowed by &i-Raina on Vibishatia,and install- 
ed in §rirangam. For Symbology, see our Lives of 
Saints and note 24 sufra. 

Or Srinivasa, the Holy Image On the Hill 

Tirupati (or Tirumalai), North Arcot District, Madras 

Presidency. For traditions see Venkatd'calaMahatmya* 

These are the Ana Forms, vide Pp. 576/1 Aftha- 

Ti T j, J. R. A. S. , , . 

Famaha, j gio a d * connection, read: Rg^ 

Veda X. 155-1 : Ardyi kdne Vikafe givim gaccha saddnve 
Sirint-bithasya satvabhis tebhish tvd cdtayamasi ” 

Or render the impressions faded. 




PERCEPTION 


17 


I-] 

Tecollection {PratyabhijnS.) also is Jncluded 
therein such as : ‘ this Devadatta is that 

AbhUva or non-existence ” is also in our 
School included in Perception inasmuch as non- 
existence (of a thing) implies (its) existence (at 
some other place or time), (thus illustrated) 
The non-existence of the pot implies clay — 
(its, i.e. pot’s) pre-existence. The destruction 
of the pot implies potsherds. 

Dha or Conjecture is the probability: that 
a certain person, a certain thing, might happen 
to be. 

Sahtsaya car Doubt is the uncertainty: as 
to what sign (name) {e.g.') a tree, seen, is 
known by. 

These also (Oha and Saihsaya) are included 
in Perception. 

Also genius (or extraordinary illumination or 
inspiration) discovered in blessed or holy, per- 
sons (such as sages, seers, saints, and prophets) 
Can be classed under Perception. 

Or absence or non-being or negation. 

Or disappearance. 

3 



1 8 YATiNDRA-MATA-DipiKA [Advent 

(But there may be erroneous ek., perception. 
Bhrama ?). Even Erroneous Perception is of 
the real, for: — 

‘The School of the Vedantins, holds all 
knovpledge (or all cognition) to be of the 
rear..®* For, to the rejection of A-khyati 
or ‘Non-cognition’-,'* Atma-khyati or ‘self- 
cognition’-,'® Anirvacanlya-khyati or ‘ inexpli- 
cable cognition-,’" Anyatha-khyati or ‘rever- 
sed (or perverted) cognition,-’ Schools, the 
School of Sat-khyati or ‘right cognition’” is 

'* The full verse occurs in Sn-Bhashya thus : 
Yathartham sarva-vijnmam 
Iti veda-vidam matam 
Sruti-smrtibhyas saroasya 
Sarvdtmatva-pratititali. [L 1. 1. Atha etc.]. 

” The attribute of one thing appearing as that of 
another (Mimdmsakas). 

” The self appearing as a thing (YogScara-Ba.ud- 
dhas). 

” Appearing neither real nor unreal— hence in- 
explicable {Advaitins), 

The form of a thing assuming another form 
(Naiyayikas), 

” The real view or the realistic view that the 
thing is what it really is (V isishtadvaitinsj. 



I.] PERCEPTION. 19 

accepted ™ Sat-khydti or right cognition is the 
reality of the object of percepticsi (or object of 
consciousness). 

What then is to be erroneous or illusory (in 
the Perception)? Illusoriness {Bhrama) is the 
absence {Bddha) or hindrance to any action, 
arising on a correct apprehension of a thing. 
We shall discuss it. Thus : — 

By virtue of the quintuplicatory combination 
(or process) of the elements ( 5 ^Mfas),“ allthe 
elements are present in all the (compoimds), 
such as Earth®* etc. Hence silver must be 
present in the pearl-oyster, causing realness (or 
reality) of the cognition thereof. But when a 
pearl-oyster is apprehended as such, it is so 
because the silver-portion is very minute (and 
eludes notice). In this consists the illusoriness 
{Bhrama) of the cognition. The illusion dis- 

®® There is one more view, the Asai-lthayati or un- 
real view (Mw^^nwiAa-Bauddhas). 

®* Called Bhutas, because effected, from the previous 
simple substances. The compounded or admixed 
substances are called elements. They are Five: (ij 
AhaSa (ether), (2) Vdyu, (air), (3) Agni (fire), (4) Aj^as 
(water), (5) Prftet (earth). 



YATiNDR A-MATA-DiPI K A 


20 


[Advent 


appears because of the major portion (of the. 
oyster) being shell. 

The dream-cognition (or consciousness) is also 
real. For from the Sruti, we learn (or know) 
that the Supreme Lord {Parama-Purusha) 
creates carriages'’ etc., of temporary duration, 
proportioned to the (merits of the) several 
persons who have to experience (the same in 
dreams). 

When a (white) conch-shell is seen as yellow 
and so forth, (the explanation is that) the 
bilious®* rays proceeding from the eye unite 
with the conch-shell etc., and the yellow of the 
bile“ (in the eye) overpowering the white of the 
shell, is not cognized. Hence a yellow shell is 

< What is heard,’ lit,=theH.dly Word, Scriptures 
or Revelations. 

“ Referring to the passage: “ Natatra mfhS, m 
mtha-yoga, na panthano hhavanty atha rathan mtha- 
yogUn pathas srjak”. [Brihad-aranyakopanishat, 
VI. 3. 10]. 

** Owing to certain diseases like jaundice, the eye 
becomes colc«:-Hind, and sees all white things as 
yellow. This is called pitta in Saijrskrt supposed to 
be caused by bile ch: biliousnessi 



PERCEPTION-^ 


2-1 


I-] 


visualised like a shell gold-plated (or gold-gilt). 
The yellowness, because it is subtle and issues 
from the eye, is perceivable by that eye (alone). 

The ciystal-stone placed in juxtaposition to a 
China-rose is perceived as red. This perception 
is also of the real. 

As observed already, by reason of the quin- 
tuplication of elements, the cognition of water in 
the mirage is also valid. 

The process, (known as) the elemental quin- 
tupliCation {Pancl-Karand) will be described 
further on. 

Mistaking the direction [Dig-bhrama) is also 
of the same character, for one direction (or point 
of the compass) is involved in another ; for all 
such distinctions of direction cannot be except 
by division; else no such thing as direction 
{DiU) is admissible. 

In the circle described by a fire-brand etc., 
the cognition (as circle instead of point) arises 
from the rapidity of the revolution which sets 

As when a person thinks the West to be 
where the East is. 




22 XATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKit [AdveCt 

the point at every part of the circle. That is 
also of the real. “ 

The reflexion of one’s face in the mirror etc.^ 
is also of a fact; for the eye-rays are intercepted 
by the mirror, and the eye sees along with the 
mirror etc., its own face etc., Even in this case 
the process is so rapid as to prevent the per^ 
ception of all that may intervene between (the 
eye and the mirror). 

In such cases as the cognition of a double 
moon (instead of one) it is caused through the 
pressure of the finger (on the eye), or owing to 
eye-affections (timira) etc., when the visual 
rays stream in different directions. The appara- 
tus being thus duplicated, independent of each 
other, causes the double-moon vision.'® The 

** This is the fiery wheel caused by a brand swung 
rapidly round, so rapidly that the intervals between 
any two points are not apprehended by the eye. 

Etc., stands for similar reflecting surfaces, 

*® The phenomenon of refraction is known, and 
where refraction is fmther influenced by obliquity of 
vision by any of the aforesaid causes, objects become 
duplicated at difierent foci so createdi 



I-] PERCEPTION. 23 

duplication of the apparatus being a fact, the 
double-moon cognition takes place. 

Hence all cognitions are of the real, and their 
contents (are provided by) concrete (i.e. attri- 
butived) objects ; for an attribute-less (or 
quality-less) object is never cognizable. 

Perception then as enunciated (above), appre- 
hends difference alone. When difference {Bheda) 
is posited, it (always) implies a coimter-entity, 
but never (when viewed) as in itself. Hence 
the two faults are absent, viz., An-avastha or 
infinite regress, and Anyo'nyd'^sraya or mutual 

Such a thing therefore as abstract conscious- 
ness, in other words cognition of object without 
any attribute, is a non-entity to the ViHshiMvaita 
philosophers. 

This would appear to mean that when a jar is 
cognised, it is so cognised as different from a counter- 
entity which is not a jar, but say a club. Difference 
thereof is of different objects, not in the same object 
itself, i.e., difference, inherent. In other words, every 
transaction necessarily involves differences, and 
implies counter-entities, which are inadmissible in 
the province of essentiality. The jarness of a jar is 
its essentiality. Its jdistinction from a rod is it$ 
difference. 



24 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPiKA [Advent 


dependence. ” An-avastha is the (fault of) de- 
manding further and further.''^ Anyo'nya”sraya 
is (the fault of) mutual dependence 
It may be asked why; ‘thou art the tenth’/’’ 
should not also be classed under Perception? 
We say ‘ no for though ‘ Thou ’ is certainly a 
sensuous fact (Pratyaksha), ‘the tenth thou 
art ’ is a cognition which has arisen from (an 
uttered) sentence. But if it be contended that : 

? thou art the tenth’ ought to fall under Sensuous 
Perception, then (by parity of reasoning) : ‘ thou 

Known as the circular argument, or begging the 
question (peiitio pnnoipii). 

Le., Absence of finality. 

Le., To prove a cause, effect is needed. To 
prove an effect, cause is needed. A mutual neces- 
sitation. 

The illustration here is by a story. Ten men 
crossed a stream. They wished to be assured that 
all the ten had arrived safe. One amongst them 
counted the others from one to nine, but forgot him- 
self. Every one did the same but the result was 
no better, and they began to cry, one and all, for the 
tenth man as lost ! A wise man now came, and 
learning the cause of* their grief, placed them in a 
row, and counting from one to nine, declared to their 
joy the tenth man as ^Thou art the tenth’. 



I-] 


PERCEPTION 


25 


art good ’ must also become (or be treated) as a 
case of Perception. But if that be insisted (or 
admitted), then it becomes an ‘ unwarrantable 
stretch of a principle ' {Ati-prasangd). Hence 
cognition (or knowledge) derived from such pas- 
sages as : “ That Thou art ”, is not Perceptive 
From all this the position created by (or 
predications fancied by) mistaken men {ku-drshh 
ayah), viz., ‘ PramUna or Means is that which 
engenders perception (Prafyaksha) or know^ 
ledge ; — knowledge so meant is none other than 
Intelligence; — Intelligence {Chaitanyd) is three- 
fold : i^Anfahkarand-vacchinna or that which 
is conditioned by the Inner Instrument, 2^Vrtty- 
avacchinna or that which is conditioned by Act 
(or state), ^^Vishayd-vacchinna or that which is 

Cp. with Ati-vyapti or over- pervasion of a given 
definition, vide note 25. 

That is, it is Anumana or Inferentially known, 
not (sense-) Perceptively. ‘That thou art’ is a 
passage from the Chhandogya*Upanishat [VI. 8. 7] 

= Brahman or Paramatman, ^/iOM=Soul or Jivat- 
man. The sentence literally means : • God thou art 

/.d., Spirit or God considered as the Abstract,— 
quality-less. 

4 



26 YAT'iNDRA-MATA-DipiKA [Advent 

conditioned by object ; — When all the three 
combine into one, that is actual realisation 
{Sdkshdtkdra) (i. e., prafyaksha or real kno\v- 
ledge) and that realisation is of the objectless 
(or a thing devoid of attributes), and of the non- 
dual (or non-difference)’ is refuted 
The School of the Naiyayikas^® also, viz., 
‘Nir-v^alpaka or general (unqualified) know- 
ledge is cognition .which but apprehends the 
mere thing as dissociated from all such (attributes) 
as Jdti or class (or genus) etc.,’ is also refuted. 
But it may be asked how such a School as that 

Intelligence enwrapped becomes the hiowev (i).^ 
This is soul. Wrapped by the mediate apparatus, 
it becomes the of Knowledge (2)^, This is 

mind and the senses. Wrapped again it becomes the 
hiown (3)^, This is object. Thus the Abstract or 
Essence or the Substrate, the ‘thing in itself’, the 
Brahman, which is of the nature of Intelligence, is 
the Subjective, This by limitation becomes the Subject 
or Soul ; by further limitation becomes the Instrument 
or Mind, etc., and by yet another limitation, the 
Objective. Ail the three must merge into one, and 
that is realisation or ultimate knowledge realised, 
which is no other than perception itself {fvatyahha). 
This is the Advaita position. 



I-] PERCEPTION 27 

of Gautama'® is so lightly refutable when there 
exist such (authoritative) texts as : — 

‘ Kaijada and Paniniya are helpful to 
all sciences (Sastra)’ ? 

To this it is replied: no School is m toto 
refuted. Whatever stands to reason is accepted, 
like water in a reservoir constructed by others, 
but surely never the mire in it 
Hence we do not accept such postulations as : 
The Causation by atoms, — 

The Human origin of the Vedas (Revela- 
tions), — 

The Inferential Proof for God-hood {Isvara\- 
The Infiniteness of Soul (-essence) (Jiva),-— 
The adoption as cat^ories {Padartha ) : — 

(i) Samanya or univ ersality (what constitutes 

The School of Gautama or Gotama, — ^the Indian 
School of Logic. 

Kariada is the Expounder of a System of Cate- 
gories known as the Vaiseshika^ a variety of Nyaya, 
The distinguishing feature of this philosophy is the 
theory of atoms (Anus)^ Kana means atom. 

I.e,, The Aphorisms of Panini on Grammar, or 
properly The Science of Language. 

The original is Panintyafi^a- 

savvaSUstfOpaMmham. 



2S YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [Advent 

a genus), (2) Visesha or Particularity (what 
constitutes a species or the Individual), (3) 
Samavaya or Inhesion (or Inherence), — 

The constituting Upamana or comparison into 
a (distinct) Means (of knowledge— Prawawa), — 
The treatment as attributes (or qualities) ; (i) 
Number [Saukhyd), (2) Extension or Quantity 
or (Parimdna), (3) Severalty {Prthaktva), (4) 
Priority or Anteriority {Paratva), (5) Posterio- 
rity (Aparatva), ( 6 ) Solidity {Gurutvd), (7) 
Viscidity or Fluidity {Dravatua), etc ., — 

The assumption that direction {Dik) is a 
substance {dravya),—mA so forth * 

That we accept what is not opposed to reason 
is (hence) not objectionable. 

Thus ends Advent I, 

The Treatment of Perception {Pratyakska) 
in the 

“ Light of the School of Ramanuja ” 


* These matters are further noticed in the follow- 
ing Advents (or Chapters). Also read such works 
as Tityka-Sairigrahci, Nyaya4>odhini, Tavka^angraha- 
DipikS, PrahSSika, Timpani, BkdshS-Paricckeda 



ADVENT 11— INFERENCE (Anumam) 

Now, Anumana or Inference will be ex- 
pounded : 

That knowledge {Pramiti} is Inferential 
loiowledge {Anumiti), which is the particular 
knowledge of the pervading {Vyapaka\ 
obtained from the consideration of the pervaded- 
ness of the pervaded [Vyapakd] The 
Instrument or Means by which such knowledge 
is obtained is Inference {Anumana). (Illustra- 
tion): Knowing that smoke is pervaded by fire^ 
the knowledge of the pervading is obtained, i.e., 
fire. 

The Pervaded {Vyapya) is ruled by limit- 
edness of space and time. The Pawading 
{Vydpaka) has the Characteristic {vrtti) of 

Vyayya and Vyapaka are technical terms of 
Hindu Noetics. In the sentence ; ‘ smoke is pervaded 
by fire it means that the one is invariably found 
with the other. Vyapti would be the invariable or 
universal concomitance of two things ; or the insepa- 
rable • connection of the one with the other, • sine 
qud non. In the illustration, smoke is the Pervaded, 



30 


yatindra-mata-dIpikA [Advent 


non-limited space and time. The Pervaded 
is even in inseparable conjunction (with the 
Pervading). The Pervading is the correlate (or 
Co-ordinate to the Pervaded). The invariable 
fixed relation subsisting between the two is 
Pervasion {Vyapti), This Pervasion, stated as : 
Where there is smoke, there is fire ’ is admitted, 
from frequent (or repeated) observation. 

Pervasion is twofold : Positive [Anvaya) and 
Negative [Vyatireka), Where by an Inferrant 
{Sadhaiia) the Inferred {Sadhya) is attempted, 
that Pervasion is called Positive, for example : 
^ Whatever is smoky is fiery ' where, by the 
denial of the Inferred {Sadhya)j the denial of 

fire the Pervading^ element. Vyapti may perhaps be 
rendered by c&-concmY&ncs of two or more facts. 

This means that fire is a more universal term 
than smoke, for there may be fire where there 
is no smoke, but where there is smoke there is fire. 
Cp. this with the major term and middle term of logic, 
the mifwr term being the place where fire is found 
(say mountain). VyU^pya is thus the Particular, and 
Vydpaka the Universal. 

That is to say, the general statement is by 
induction from several particular instances. 

That is, wherever smoke is observed, there is 
fire (as in sl hill) — (by Agreements^ in other words)* 



II.] 


INFERENCE 


31 


the Inferrant (5ai//2a«a) is attempted, that Per- 
vasion {Vyapti) is Negative, for example : 'What 
is non-fiery is non-smolgr «« Both these kinds 
of Pervasion is affected or circumscribed by 
conditions {Upadhi). Condition {Upadhi) means 
where the Inferred {Sadhya) pervades, the In- 
ferrant (Sadhana) does not pervade. For 
example, where, by fire, smoke is intended to be 
inferred, the condition (required) is conjunction 
with moist firewood ;* or where brownness is 
intended to be inferred by being the son (or 
sonness) of Maitri, the condition is the circum- 
stance of such birth (caused) by (eating) cooked 
greens. 


That is, when the hil! has no fire in it, it has no 
smoke, (hy Differences, in other words). 

* Such a condition is absent in a heated iron 
ball. Upadhi, in other words is that which always 
co-exists with the majov term, and not always so 
with the middle term. See note on ‘ Upadhi ’ p. 275. 
Appendix to Madhavacarya’s Sarva-DarSana-Sadi- 
grahd [by E. B. Cowell &c., Trubner & Co;, 
London]. 

. That is ; where the cause of brownness of a son 
is intended to be inferred because of his birth from 
his mother Maitri, a circumscribing condition for 



32 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPlKl [AdvCnt 

Condition or Limitation {Upadhi) is twofold : 

v 

Settled {NScita) and Doubted {Sankita), 

The Settled is thus : — 

{Assertion) * The disputed service is woe- 
ful^ ( = Conclusion) 

{Reason) Because it partakes of servitude, 

{Instance) Like service to a king.* 

In this (syllogism), the condition Upadhi) (of 
serving a king, which is distasteful to the 
servitor) is provided by (one’s) sin being the 
determinant. But this does not exist in the ser- 
vice to God. This therefore is called the Settled 
condition.®® 

The Doubted is thus : — 

{Assertion) * The disputed soul, after the 
term of this body, attains Release {Mukti) 
( = Conclusion). 

such a fact may suggest the cause to be due to his 
eating of green vegetables. The inference of a cause 
from an effect is thus affected by some condition. 

That is, that soul is to serve God is a condition 
of a nature.: 

Disputed means a disputed point,— a questioned 
assertion. That is, God-service may, or not, be a 
fact Such an entity as soul may, or not, exist. A 
moot-point 



IL] INFERENCE 33 

(Reason) Because, meditation is ripe, 
(Instance) Like Suka.®® 

In this (syllogism), the condition (required) is 
the starceasal of all actions or works (Karma). 
As it is doubtful whether such a condition 
exists or no in a problematical soul, — meditation- 
ripe — that condition is called the doubted. 
Hence, where a connection (or relation) exists 
unaffected by condition [Nir-upMhika), that 
which is so connected is the Pervaded (Vya- 

pya). 

Pervaded {Vyapya), Means or Instrument 
(Sadhana), Sign {Lifiga), are not of different 
import®’. This has two forms, which are limbs 
(i.e., factors or elements) to Inferential know- 
ledge {Anumiti): — (i) Pervasion (Vyapti),^' and 

The great sage, the son of Vyasa.. 

Le.^ they are synonymous terms^ 

The definition of Vyapti is Yatm dhmtas 
iaitA ""gnif iti mhamfya-niyamc VY AFJIH' i. e, 
where, invariable attendedness or con-comitance 
holds, such as ‘ where smoke is, there is fire 
Vydpti or Pervasion (a technical term) thus means 
the indiscerptible co-existent relation between two 
things. 


5 



34 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPiKA [Advent 

(2) Subject-attributiveness “ {Paksha-dhar- 
mataT- 

It has also five forms. They are; — 

(1) The being attributive to subject {Paksha- 
dharmata), 

(2) The presence in right place {Sa-Paksha- 
tva), 

(3) The absence from wrong place (Fi- 
p aksha-vyavHH), 

(4) Not annulled by, or inexceptionable 
{A-badhita-vishayatva), 

(5) Absence of equal antithesis {A-sat-prati- 
paksha). 

Paksha (Subject) is the substance {Dharmi) 
in which the inferrable attribute {Dharma) 

” Subject nnnof (smoking mountain), 
Predicate=#«*'MJtBtts major (smokiness), 

Middle iscm— terminus medius (fieriness). 

Smoke found in the mountain, and smoke 
always accompanying fire, are thus the two signs or 
reasons by which to infer fire in the mountain. 

•* The definition of Paksha-dhamm is. — ‘Vyap- 
yasya parvatddi-vrtiifvam’, i.e., the existence of the 
Pawaded in mountain etc., such as, ‘ the smoke seen 
is found to exist in the mountain’. 



II.] INFERENCE 35 

exists ; such as the mountain etc., in which the 
fieriness (Predicate) is to be established. 

Sa-^paksha (Right Subject or Place) is the 
similarity to that where an attribute is to be 
established ; such as the kitchen-hearth etc. 

Vi-paksha (Wrong Subject or Place) is the 
dissimilarity to where an attribute is to be esta- 
blished ; such as the lake etc. 

Badhita-vishayatva (annulled thing) is the 
absence of what is to be surely established in 
the subject by strong reasons (to the contraiy) ; 
such as : " the lake is fiery ^ ^ Not so annulled' is 
A-badhifa-vishayatva. 

Asaf-pratipakshafva is the non-annulment 
by an equally strong reason. 

The Vyapya (or Inferential instrument) so 
described is two-fold : (i) Anvaya^vyatireki 

A negative instance, or an instance on the 
opposite side, or that in which the Sadhya the 
Inferred or the termimts major (predicate, i.e., fieriness) 
is not found ; such as the negation of fieriness in a 
lake (of water), as its assertion can be made in a 
hearth. Ef seq, 

Saf-pratipaksha means that where a reason exists to 
disprove what is to be proved : — Yasya sadhyabhava^ 
sudhakam hetv-anfaram vidyaU $a saf-pratipakshab* 



36 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [AdvCIlt 


(Present-Absent), {2) Kemla-mayi (Present 
only). 

The aforesaid five-formed Pervasion (i.e., 
Vyapti or Instrument) is of the Present-Absent. 
Thus : — 




I' 

+ 

. I 


93 ^ ^ 

iK. } 


The same without the Vipaksha (antithesis) 
is the Kevalanvayi (Present only, form). Thus: — 
5? f * Brahman is Word-®® 

“S Because It is a thing, 

^ ^ L Like the jar.' 


^ The mountain is fiery, ") 

Because it is smoky. 

For whatever is smoky is fiery, 

I As the kitchen-hearth, 
r Whatever is non-fiery is non-smoky, 1 g 
Like the lake.' 




I 

J< 


1,'“ 


expressible, '] -g 

f S § 

jO. 

Hence the Kevala-nvayi is four-formed, be- 
cause the fifth, the antithesis {Vipaksha) is 
wanting. 

A Kevala-vyatireki (Absent only) form, is 
inconceivable inasmuch as Sadhya (predicate 


" Kevelational or Scriptural Word. It means, 
Scrijjtnres alone can speak of God. This is in con- 
trast to Natural Theism. 



INFERENCE 


II.] 


37 


or major term) is nowhere. Hence a purely 
Vyatireki is excluded (or inadmissible). 

That either the Kevala-nvayi or the Amaya-- 
vyatireki concerns only the supersensuous 
objects is (thus) repudiated.* 

The aforesaid Anumana (Inference), say some, 
is divisible into two kinds: (i) Svdrtha orSelf- 
benefit, (2 J Pararz'Aa or Others' benefit. Others 
(opine): it is of the ^self character alone, 
inasmuch as all inferences are ensuant on the 
power of one's own reflection, and hence useful 
for one's own procedure. 

The syllogism that establishes an Inference 
consists of five members : 

1. Pratijnd — Assertion, 

2. Hetu — Reason, 

3. Uddharana — Instance, 

4. Upanaya — Application (or Deduction), 

*That is, the opinion that inferential ‘Mean$' estabii-* 
shes only objects beyond the cognition of the senses, 
is not admitted. This position is that of the Natural 
Theologians as contrasted with the Orthodox or 
Scriptural Theologians. The Naiyayikas think that 
God can be proved by Inference ; but the Ved^tins 
afi&rm that such a proof is unstable ; whereas proof 
by Scriptures (Word) is unshakable. 



38 yatindra-mata-dIpika [Advent 

S- Nigamana — Conclusion.®^ 

In this, Pratijnd or Assertion is the sentence 
indicating the Paksha (Subject), thus : — 

‘ The mountain is fieiy'. 

Hetu or Reason indicates the Linga (Sign), 
thus : — 

* Because it is smoky'. 

Uddkarana or Instance is indicating an ex- 
ample where concomitance or co-existence 
{Vydpti) obtains, and this is twofold; Anvaya 
or Affirmation, and Vyatireka or Negation, 
thus : — 

^Whatever is smoky is fiery’ is a case of 
Affirmative Instance. 

" Whatever is non-fiery is non-smoky ’ is a 
case of N^ative Instance. 

Upanaya or Application is the sentence 
which refers the Reason to the subject by a 

The equivalent Vaiseshika synonyms are : 

I* Pratijna. 

2. Apadesa, Linga, Pmmana, Karana, 

3. NidarSana, 

4. Anusandhana, 

5. Pfotydmmya, 



IL] 


INFERENCE 


39 


consideration of the Instance. This also is 
two-fold : Affirmative and Negative ; thus : — 

‘ The mountain is smoky,’ is of the Affirmative. 

‘ The mountain is not non-smoky ’ is of the 
Negative. 

Nigamana or Conclusion is the sentence, 
which conclusively locates what is to be Infer- 
red {Sadhya) in the Subject (Paksha), by means 
of the Reason (Hefu). This is also twofold, 
thus : — 

(1) ‘ Therefore the mountain is fiery’, 

(2) ‘ Therefore the mountain is non-fiery.’ 

This five-membered syllogism is of the School 

of the Naiyayikas or the Logicians. 

The Mlmamsakas uphold a three-mem- 
bered syllogism, viz., Assertion {PratijM), 
Reason [Hetu), and Example or Instance {Uda- 
harana). 

The Saugafas ** hold to a two-membered 
syllogism, viz.. Example (Udakara^a) and 
Application {Upanaya). 

®*The Vaidikas of the two Schools Pwva and Uttam; 
or the Vedantins, as may both of them be styled. 

The School of the Buddhists divided into 
Smtmntiha, VaibhdsMha, Yogdpdm, and Madhymtiia, 



40 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [Advent 


For some it may be five members; for some 
three, and two for some, but for us there is no 
restriction. By Example and Application alone, 
Pervasion (Vydpyafva) md Location {Paksha- 
dharmata) are established, and Inference is 
possible from this much alone. That amplificat- 
ions and abridgements may (severally) Suit the 
(different) dispositions of minds, lowly, middling 
or lofty, place us under no restrictions whatever 
(as to number). 

Thus a well-reasoned five-membered syllo- 
gism provides the proof for the fire (in the 
mountain). 'Well-reasoned’ is (advisedly) used 
in order to guard against an inferential know- 
ledge of fire being attainable by a smoke- 
resembling volume of dust. 

There are specious arguments seemingly valid, 
called : Hetv-dbhdsasJ^ They are : — 

1. Asiddha (Impossible), 

2. Viruddha (Reverse), 

3. An-aikantikd (or Sa-^yabhicdra) (Super- 
fluous), 


L Paralogisms and Sophisms, or Fallacies. 



IL] INFERENCE 4 1 

4. Prakarana-sama (or Sat-prati-paksha) 

(equi-loquent). 

5. Kalafyayapadishta^ (or BadhUa) (Mis- 

timed). 

Of these, Asiddha or Impossible is three- 
fold 

(i) Svarupd' siddha or Natural Impossibility, 

{2) Asraycdsiddha or Local Impossibility, and 

(3} Vyapyatvd'siddha or Pervasive Impossi- 
bility. 

(1) Natural Impossibility is thus (illustra- 
ted): — 

‘ The Jiva (soul) is eternal, 

Because it is visible, 

Like the jar/ 

(2) Local Impossibility thus : — 

' The sky-lotus is fragrant, 

For it is of the lotus (species), 

Like the pond-lotus.' 

Sky-lotus is the locus and this is non-ens. 

(3) Pervasive Impossibility is of two kinds: 
The one is that where the Means for pervasion 
is absent, the other where a condition [Upadhi] 

^ Also called Kalatlta \yid& Gotama-Satras, 

50] ; ‘ KUldtyaydyadkkt^h 
6 



42 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKl [AdvCIlt 

is present. The First is thus : — ^ Whatever is is 
momentary’. In this the Means whereby to 
establish an induction betvreen the ‘ is ’ness and 
momentariness is absent. The Second is thus : — 

' The Agni-shomlya -immolation determi- 
nes demerit, 

For it is of the killing (kind), 

Like killing, out of the pale of Kratu, 
Here the conditioning comes from the prohi- 
bitioning. 

Flence the reason of killing is conditioned. 

2. The Virtiddha or reverse-fallacy is that in 
which the reason is vitiated by the reverse. 
Thus 

' Matter {Prakrti) is eternal. 

Because it is efFected, 

Like time.’ 

Here the reason of ' efFected ’ is pervaded by 
the negation of the Inferrable. 

A sacrifice (Vedic) prescribed to the Deities 
Agni and Soma, 

Here what is intended to be proved is the 
etemaJity of matter ; but in the reason given, a non- 
etemal element (mz,., effectedness) occurs. Hence 
what Is to be proved is negated. 



IL] INFERENCE 43 

3. The Anaikdnfika is Savyabhicdra or 
Superfluous : — 

This is twofold : (i) Sadhdrana or Ordinary, 
(2) Asddharana or Extraordinary. The ' Ordi- 
nary ' is of the Paksha (Subject), Sa- 
pakshd (Co-Subject). Vi-paksha ^®^ (Ex- 
Subject). Thus: — 

' Sound is eternal. 

Because it is ‘ object ’ 

Like time.’ 

The ' Extraordinary ’ is what is absent from 
(or non-existent in) Sa-paksha (Co-Subject), and 
Vi-paksha (Ex-Subject). Thus : — 

^ The Earth is eternal 
Because it is odorous." 

4. Prakarana-sama ^®’' or Equi-loquent is 
that where a reason exists which proves (or 
infers) the negative of that which is to be proved: 

Ix.i the terminus minor ^ — the mountain. 

The kitchen-hearth* 

The lake. 

‘Object’ is to p:z.nsl‘aXePrameya or that which 
is cognised by a Pramana or Means of Knowledge. 

Whichi tells equally on both sides. 



44 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [Adveut 

^ God is eternal, 

For He is devoid of non-etemality, 

God is not eternal, 

For He is devoid of etemality.’ 

This is the same as Sat-prati-paksha}"^^ 

5. Kalaiyayapudishia or Mis-timed is thtis: 

< Fire is non-warm, 

For it is a substance, 

Like water/ 

But as fire is actually associated with warmth, 
the ar^ment is debarred. 

Having thus expounded Inference {AmtmanaP) 
the others Comparison {Upamana) etc./^® are 
included in Inference. F or example, Comparison 
is said to arise thus: — One, remembering the 
meaning of an analogous sentence, sees a form 

« Yasya hadhyubhava-sMhaham heiv-antamm 
pratipakshah ’ [Tarka-Samgraha. II]. 

See mark * p. 41, lit : ‘ precluded by time.’ 

Others consider the Means of Knowledge to be 
more than the three which theVedantins consider 
can cover all. The other Means (Pmmanas) are such 
as : — Upamana or Comparison, Afthapatii or Assump- 
tion, Sambhava or Probability, Aitihya or Tradition ; 
Ctshta or Gestine, AhJmm <a: ISEcm-existence. 



IL] INFERENCE 45 

similar to that associated with cow. Then arises 
the knowledge of the form (or the new object, 
the Cow-like Gavaya), so associated, aided by 
the remembrance of the meaning of the senteice 
(before heard). Assortable thus with remem- 
brance (memory). Comparison is classable under 
Perception. Or it is classable under Inference 
as there is evidence of a process of induction 
(Vydptiy^^ Or it may be surmised as falling 
under the class ' Word ’, for it is derived from a 
sentence (heard). 

Arthdpatti or Assumption is thus: — A 
person is observed not eating in the day time, 
yet looks plump. The assumption is made that 
he eats in the night. This is classifiable under 
Inference. 

Tarka or argument is the bringing about a 
non-desire (or negation) of the Pervading (Z^a- 
paka) by admitting the Pervaded {Vydpya\ 
thus : — Supposing an Inference were stated : 

‘ The mountain is fiery 
Because it is smoky ’ ; 

See Pages 14, 15, 16, 17 antt. 

I. e., Analogical reasoning. 



46 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA 


[Advent 


and it were objected Let there be smoke, 
but no fire the argument would be : ' If there 
were no fire, let there be no smoke as well.’ 
The Means [Pramanas) promote this.^^* 
Niscaya (Nirnaya) or Ascertainment, is the 
ascertainment of a truth by the employment of 
Means, favoured by argumentation {Tarka)P^ 
Vada or Debate is unbiassed discussion, (or 
fair discussion by people free from prejudice)/'® 
Jalpa or Wrangling is the discussion with the 
main view of (gaining) victory on either side/'^ 
Vitanda or Cavilling, is the being devoid of 
(good reason for) establishing an opinion/'® 
Chala or Quibbling is the ascription of a 
different than the intended sense to an ex- 
pression.^^® 

A feductio ad ahsuvdum. 

Read Goianta-Sutva': I. i. 40 : Avigndta-Scc. 

n „ L I. 41 : VimvSya &c, 

116 T * 

” » J- 2. 42 : Fmmdm &c. 

» ji » L 2, 43 : YaikoMo &c. 

118 y 

” ” J- 2. 44 : Sa-patipahha See. 

119 T o y 

” ” » *»•» 2, 54 ; Samhhavato Scc^ 



INFERENCE 


47 


n.] 

Jdti or Futility is either reviling which will 
re-act on oneself, or a self-contradictory reply 7 ‘® 

Nigrahasthdna or that which courts one’s 
own defeat.' 

All these are but limbs of Inference; hence 
included in Inference. 

We adopt the methods of the Ndiydyikas 
wherever feasible. Hence such a course is not 
(to be thought) erroneous. 

Thus has Inference been expounded. 


Thus ends Advent II, 

The Treatment of Inference {Anumdna) 
in the 

Light of the School of Ramanuja. 


Read Gotama-Suim ; I. 2. 56 : Sacihaymya 

„ I. .2. 60; ViymtipaUi &c, 

Nigmhasthma^ literally means ‘ Occasion for 
rebuke^ ‘Unfitness for argument’ is the sense 
intended. 



ADVENT III— THE WORD {Sabda). 


After the exposition oilrdtrtnct {Anumana\ 
the word {Sabdaf^^^ will be expounded. 

Sabda-Pramdna or the Instrument (or Means) 
viz, ' Word is that which produces the know- 
ledge obtained from sentences non-uttered by the 
non-trustworthy (men) {An-apid)P^ 'Non-uttered 
by the Non-trustworthy ' is (a characterisation 
advisedly) employed to controvert the opinion 
that 'the Word’ [Vedas) is of human origin. 
Or ' the Word ’ is that which is exempt from 
the sense-errors [Karana-doshaJ^^ and con- 
trarieties [Badhaka-pratyaya)P^ 

s3»<Word’ means ‘Holy’ Word, Revelations or 
The Scriptures ; or traditionary lore handed down by 
agents worthy of confidence = Vedas. Vide, Aptopa- 
ddas Sabdali ’ [S^khya-Sutras. 1. loi]. 

J. e.j errors arising from the defects of percep- 
tive and active senses in persons, — the ‘Personal 
cquaticws’. 

L Opposing elements, such as intrinsic, 
extrinsic and commonsense contradictions. 



III.] 


THE WORD 


49 


At the outset of a Creation, God {Bhaga- 
van,] evolved out of His Consciousness what 
past order of the Vedas had there lain, and 
taught them to Catur-mukha.’-®. When this is 
granted, etemality and non-human-ness are 
assured. Then are absent the errors of sense 
and contrarieties. 

But it may be asked how the Vedas can be 
authoritative {Prdmdnyam), inasmuch as the 
Mimamsakas^’^^ admit them only as concerned 
with Kdrya or Effects, and that Texts concern- 
ing the Self-evident (Sidd/^a) Brahman (God), 

Personal God. See J. R. A. S. for July 1910 
for a discussion of the term Bhagavm. 

The Demiurge or the Four-faced First Lord of 
Creation. The four faces uttered the Four Vedas. 

The School of the Vedas who contend that 
work is Deity, and work done generates Effects, or 
whatever Fruits are desired by mankind. Hence 
these are said to belong to the * Effects ’ faction. 
Per contra are the Vedantins who posit Brahman or 
God as the ‘ Effective ’ or ready, or what is Self- 
Evident (Siddha), and that Holy Vedic Texts need 
not necessarily be with reference to ‘ Effects ’ but 
they as well educate or instruct mankind as to God, 
a self-evident fact, or a fact not ‘effectible’ or "creat- 
able ’ as the Mimamsakas would contend. 

7 



YATlNDRA-MATA-DlPIKA [Advent 


SO 

do not ' convey instruction. This (objection) is 
met by showing that ( i ) these Texts which are 
concerned with the Self-evident Brahman are 
employable for purposes of contemplation 
(Upas ana), partaking of the nature of effects 
(Kdrya); (2) that even sentences employed in 
wordly affairs, such as: 'Thy father is doing 
well,’ do convey instruction (or sense) ; and (3} 
that in the world it is seen that children, gradually 
and repeatedly taught by their mothers, fathers 
efc., by employing words connoting mother, 
father, uncle, moon efc., (at same time) indicating 
these with their fingers, come to understand the 
meanings thereof: Hence, in the (case of the) 
Vedas also, words convey instruction (or know- 
ledge) of things self-evident. Hence there is no 
room for questioning the authoritativeness of the 
Vedas. 

(Also) it need not be doubted how that part 
(of the Vedas) which treats of Abhimra 
can be authoritative, for by their means visible 

'-® Spells, Incantations and such other thaumatur- 
gical work employed for malevolent purposes, such 

as for killing an enemy 



LfCJ 


\\ 


the WORfi-^ , ; 51 

results are demonstrated that thu§j-:.aa:i^6^ 
tive for engaging in works fructescent of 
invisible results, such as Svarga etc.^'^ may be 
provided. 

Such texts as : " Post-Sun ” are construable 
as meaning that the Post is as shining as the 
Sun. 

Hence in their totality are the Vedas authori- 
tative. 

This Veda is twofold: (i) the Pre-Division 
{Purva) treating of Works {Karma), { 2 ) the Post- 
Division {Uttar a) treating of God {Brahman). 

I'he Pre-Division treats of Works, which is 
Worship (of God) ; and the Post-Division treats 
of Brahman (God), the Worshippable. Hence 
both the mlmamsas, or Vedic Discourses consti- 
tute one Science {Sas(ra). 


Paradise, material heavens. 

Post is the ^crificial Post fixed in the Sacri- 
ficial Yard (Yaga-§ala) for tying the victims. ‘ Post- 
Sun’ is a metaphor meaning that the Post is as 
bright as the Sun, not the Sun itself, which would be 
absurd, and therefore Veda itself absurd. [Vide 
Jaiminiya-Nyaya-Mdla. I. 4. 15, 

Brahmana. I. 2. 5}., 



52 YATiNDRA-MATA-nsPIKA [Adveht 

Comprised of the Two Divisions, (the Vedas) 
are made up of Rg, Yajus, Sama and Atharvana. 

These again branch out innumerable. 

The diversified Rg. e^c.,-Veda is three-fold, 
such as Mantra^ Arthavada and Vidhi. 

Mantra explains the Purpose {artha) of action, 
(or shows the motive for act). 

Arthavada constitutes passages intended to 
stimulate effort conformable to Injunctions 
{Vidhi). 

Vidhi is ‘ text ’ which enjoins what is good 
(for one to do). Vidhi (Injunction) is again 
threefold ; — 

(i)ApUrva, {2} Parisahkhya and {'^Niyama. 
-Again is it divisible into many classes; such as : 
Nitya, Naimittika, Kdmya &c. 

Aptirva-Vidhi comprises such injunctions as : 

‘ Sprinkles paddy 

Visishta-Vidhi (falling under Apurva) is medi- 
tative injunctions such as mam-may 

*** ‘Vrihin prokshati’ : 

'Mind-apprehensible', one of the attributes of 
God to be meditated on. This attribute is mentioned 
along with others. Vide Chhandogya-Upanishat: III. 
14. 2, and Vedanta-Sutras; I. 2. iff. 



IILJ THE WORD 53 

Parisankhyd'-Vidhi comprises such injunc- 
tions as : — 

' Holding this rope 

Niyama-Vidhi comprises such injunctions 
as require (a disciple) approaching the holy pre- 
ceptor. 

Nitya-Vidhi comprises such injunctions as the 
twilight meditations {Sandhyd-Vandana\ 

Naimittika-Vidhi comprises such injunctions 
as the /sA/r^®-performances consequent on 
birth. 

Kamya-Vidhi comprises such injunctions as 
the performances of Jyotishtoma etc. 

Thus the Veda comprised of Vidhi^ Artha- 
vdda and Mantra j has the limbs, (r) Chhandas, 

^Imam agvhhnan mianamC . [Krsh^a-Yajus-Sam- 
hita: V. i. 2]. 

This verse may be of use : — Vidhit aniyaniam 
apvapto niyamcdi pdkshike sati^ taira cd'nyaira ca 
prdptau parisapJihya vidMyaU*^ 

A sacrifice where butter &c. are oblated, anci 
neither animal nor the 5 o?«<j-plant. 

A Soma-Sacrifice typical of a whole class of 
Vedic ceremonies. Read ^^JyoUsh tomam pvathamcm 
upaymti [Krsh^a-Yajus-Samhita : VII. 4. ii]. 



54 


YATlNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [Advent 


{ 2 )Kalpa (3} Siksha, (4) Nirukta^ (5) Jyoiisha^ 
and (6) Vyakarana. 

Chhandas is the exposition (oi metres) such as 
Annshiup^ Trishtup &c. (Metrics). 

Kalpa is the exposition of the modus operandi 
of Srauta'®^ and Smarta'®® ritual. Sikshd is what 
concerns itself with the syntactical collocation of 
letters (Phonetics). 

Nirukta is what concerns itself with the ex- 
planation of rare meanings (of words) (Etymo- 
logical lexicography), 

Jyotisha is w^hat determines the time for 
undertaking Adhyayana and its precepts 
(Astronomy and Astrology). 

Vyakarana is known to be that which deter- 
mines the pure word-formation and intonation 
(Grammar). 

Thus, the authoritativeness of the Veda with 
its limbs is evident (or established). 

Smr^i is authoritative, for it is not opposed 
to expounds (the Law of) Acdra or 

What belongs to SvuU or Vedas (what is heard), 
J3 „ Smrti or Dharma-Sastras 

(what is remembered or what is heard. Hence the 
SmHis have their roots in the SruU), 



III.] 


THE WORD 


55 


conduct, Vyavahdra or Transactions, P7%iyas^ 
citta or Penances, etc,, and instituted by our 
Aptas or Elderly 'well-wishers. 

Though Hiranyagarbha"®® and others are all 
well-meaning [apt a), they are subject to the 
influences of the Three Gun as. Hence those 
portions of their works: Yoga ’®® Kapila"*" etc,, 
are alone authoritative which do not conflict 
with the Smrtis of Manu and others ; only those 
portions w'hich contradict true tenets {tattva) 
are discarded. 

The authoritativeness of Itihdsas and Purd- 
nas are self-evident by reason of their Exegetic 
character on the Vedas. 

As regards (Maha-)Bharata and Ramayana 

Same as CatmmuMia or the four -faced Demiurge. 
The first authorship belongs to him of the Yoga- 
Sastra. Patanjala and other works are based upon 
that Original. 

The Satva (pure). Rajas (mixed) and Tamas 
(impure) properties of matter, which affect the mind 
as they happen to be each in the ascendant. See 
V edanta-Siitms II, i. xffi 

I. e. the Saiikhya System by Kapila. 

Means Old Chronicles. 

These works come under Itihdsa, 



56 


YATlNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [i\dvent 


{ItihUsas), any passages or tenets which may 
seem objectionable must be duly interpreted 
in the same manner as the Vedanta-passages 
are. 

The Pur anas also, treating of the Five 
(Topics) : creation etc.^ are divisible into the (three) 
groups: Sdtvika (pure), Rdjdsa (mixed) and 
Tdmasa (impure) ; and where they conflict with 
true tenet {tattva)y they are no authority. The 
rest is authoritative. 

The Pasupata etc.,^^* Agamas are likewise 
(to be considered). 

The Pancaratra-Agamas viz: Agama-, Divya- 
fantra-j Tantrdntara'-, Siddhantas, are in their 
totality authoritative, for nowhere do they 
conflict with the Vedas. Likewise is the Vaikha- 
mssL-Agama. 

Read Veddnta-Sut: 11 . 2. 35. Patyicr &c. 

„ n. 2. 8. Utpatti &c. And also 
see our Article on Pancaratm in J. R. A. S. for 
October 1911. Pauskkara-Samhita enumerates four 
divisions : Agama, Mantra^ . Tantya and Tantymtava^ 
all of them being Doctrine (SiddhdntaX Read 
Vedantacarya’s Work: The PmardtraRakskd for 
details. 



THE WORD 


57 


III.] 

Likewise are the Dharma-Sastras. * The 
Law-Makers are Sandilya, Para§ara, Bharadvaja, 
Vasishtha, HSrita and others. 

Likewise, where requisite, are the Silpa 
(Architectonics), Ayur-Veda (Life-knowledge, 
i. e. Medicine), Gandharva (Music) etc. 

Silpa is the treatise on the subject of found- 
ation, construction of turrets, enclosures etc, 
Ayur-Veda is medicine; Gandharva treats of 
music etc. Of this the Bharata-’^gama deals 
wdth (the art of) dancing. 

Also amongst the sixty-four Crafts,'*® what- 
ever is useful for Tattva (Truth), Upaya (Means) 
dead Purusharf ha (Goal), is authoritative. 

More authoritative are the Blessed Utterances 
of such saints as Vakula-'^bharana. 

^ Social, legal and religious polity of the Hindus. 

For an enumeration of these Crafts (Kailas), see 
Vasudeva’s commentary on Yatindra-mata-Dipika, 
called [Anandasrama Series, Puna. No. 50]. 

Lit., the Vaku] 3 .-{Mimusops Elengi) -decked, a 
name of St. Nammazhvar, for whose life, see our 
Lives of Dmvida Saints. An enumeration of his 
works is also there to be found. These Treatises are 
all in Tamil poetry, called Pmhmdhas. 

8 



5S YATiNDRA-MATA-DipiKA [Advent 

Most authoritative are the works composed 
by Blessed Teachers (Acdryas) such as Rama- 
nuja, viz., Sri-Bhashya etc. 

Paurusheya or of * hum^ origin’ are works 
characterised by their dependence on the free-will 
of man and by (merit of) singular composition. 
In this definition is included all such works as 
Kdvya or poetics, Ndtaka or Histrionics, 
Alankdra or Rhetorics. 

i\s authoritative likewise are worldly utter- 
ances by (our) well -wishers {dpta) which possess 
(the features ofj {i) Akdnkshd, (2) Yogyatd 
and (3) Asatti'y for example when it is said : 

The Great Commentary on the Vedanta-Sutras, 
expounding the ViHshtd-dvaita philosophy and reli- 
gion. For Ramanuja’s History and his works, see 
our Life Ramanuja, 

Lit.^ ‘ desiring’, or that which desires a word or 
words, by the supply of which a sense desired to be 
conveyed is made complete. ‘ Horse if uttered 
singly, desires for other words; 

Lit., ‘ fitness or that which conveys a reason- 
able sense, * Horse talks ’ for example would be 
absurd. 

Asatti or Sannidhi is lit,. Proximity or Juxta- 
position. Where ‘Horse ’is uttered at one time, 



III.] THE WORD 59 

‘The river-side abounds with five kinds of 
fruit.’ 

Thus (also) both the Vedic as well as the (Lau- 
kik) worldly utterances have a property common 
to them again, which is twofold : (x) Mukhya- 
vrtti or Primary force, and (2} Gauna-vrtti or 
Secondary force. 

Mukhya-vrtti or Primary force is the A bliidha- 
or denotative power, for example (the 
word) ‘ Lion denoting (or meaning) the ‘ King 
of the Forest' (only). The Primary power f of 
words) is further resolvable into many varieties 
such as: Yoga or Radical (or etymological), 
Riidha or Conventional, and Yoga-rudha or 
Radical-Conventional,* etc. 

Where the Primaty force is affected, the 
next nearest sense becomes the metaphorical 
[Upacdra). 

and ‘ neighs ’ after a long interval, it would be want- 
ing in that Proximity which would convey the sense : 
‘ Horse neighs.’ [See Tcwka-Samgraha, Dipiha &c]. 

See Sahitya-Darpana ; KWvya-prak&Sa &c. 

* The word “ Pankaja ” for example, which means 
lotus, for it grows up from mire. 


6o 


YATiNDRA-M ATA-DIPIKA [A dvCIlt 


The Metaphorical is again divisible into: 
(i) Lakshana or Indirect and (2) Gavma or 
Secondar}^ The First {Lakshana] is thus : ^ A 
hamlet in the Ganga ' means a hamlet on its 
bank, as, for a hamlet directly located (in the 
river itself of Ganga) is a violation (of sense); 
hence indirectly the bank (of Ganga) is meant. 
The second [Gauna] is thus : — ' A lion is Deva- 
datta is to indicate that Devadatta is endowed 
with strength etc,y (like the lion). 

Thus a]] utterances, Vedic and of the world, 
have reference to objects with attributes, and 
import duality.^®" 

As in the manner that terms denoting " body * 
have their final connotation for the 'embodied,' 

The author here alludes to the Advaitic or 
monistic doctrine which disproves duality or all dis- 
tinctions or differences actually discernible in Nature. 

I. e., the Possessor of the body, or the living 
spirit or soul in the body. When I say ‘ P, pointing 
to my body, the term ‘ I ’ means eventually the soul 
in the body. By parity of reasoning, all terms which 
denote the Kosmos refer finally to the Substrate or 
Noumenon which sustains it, without which Kosmos 
can have no existence. Hence Kosmos is * Body ’ to 
God, and God is therefore the ‘ Embodied’. 



III.] THE WORD 6r 

SO all ‘Soul -terms denoting Brahma, Rudra, 
Agni, Indra &c., constituting the ‘ Body ’ of God 
{Bhagavan), and similarly ‘ Non-soul ’ terms 
daioting Matter {Prakrti), Time {Kdla), Ether 
{Akdsa), Life {Prana) etc., all have their final 
connotation in the ‘ Embodied The Supreme 
Spirit [Paramdtman), Narayapa. Thus do 
the Teachers {Acaryas) propound. The ultimate 
import of all Vedantic Sentences is understood 
as thus interpreted. 

We shall in the Advent (IX) on iSvara (God), 
discourse on (the topic of) Narayapa,'®* as the 
Ultimate Connotee of all terms, His All-bodied 
Character etc. 

Thus ends Advent III. 

The Treatment of Word {^abda) 
in the 

“ Light of the School of Ramanuja”. 

The conception of God as conveyed by this 
term is elaborately treated in the ‘ Rahasyas * of the 
Visishtadvaitins. Our own works in English explain 
it in diverse places. Briefly the sense may be gather- 
ed from the passage in the Narayan-opanishaf : ^^Antar 
bahis ca tat sarvam vyapya Naraya^as sthitah.” 



ADVENT IV. 

OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE 
[Prameya). 


MATTER {Prakrti.) 

After the treatment of Pramana (or Means of 
knowledge) Prameya or Object of knowledge 
will be treated. Prameya (literally) means what 
is well {-pra), measured {meya). 

It (Object) is twofold : Dravya or Substance, 
and A-dravya or Non-Substance. Substance is 
the Updddna or Substrate, Base or Receptacle ; 
and the Receptacle is the Abode of States or 
Modes {Avastha-’Sraya). 

How, it may be asked, is this twofold division : 
Substance and Non-Substance to be maintained, 
when other schools enumerate a six-fold divi- 
sion : — Dravya or Substance, Guna or Quality, 
Karma or action, Sdmdnya or Genus 

Measure (i. e. Proof or Demon- 
stration). Pj'<i»«ya= Measured (i. e. the Proved or 
Demonstrated). 

According to the Categories of Nyaya Philo- 
sophy. The others are : Viitsha or Particularity, 



IV.] OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE 63 

We reply : 

To consider Karma or Action (for example), 
as comprised of Ut-kshepana or Throwing up, 
Apa-kshepana or Throwing down, Akuncana or 
Contraction, Prasdrana or Expansion, and 
Gamana or Movement,^ is cumbrous, for it is 
reducible to the simple proposition ; " Action (or 
Energy) is what is inherent with motion/ And 
this may be shown as caused by conjunction 
{Samyoga)P^ 

As to Sdmdnya, Genus or Generality, such 
(a category) is redundant by the fact that the 
form (of any substance) is itself the class {Jdfi). 

One Samavdya or Inhesion (or Co-inherence), 
admitted in another Inhesion, leads to infinite 
regress. Hence it is resolvable into conjunction 
(or quality of two things conjoined).’®® 

It is also cumbrous to admit (another 
Category) : Pisesha or Particularity, in order to 

Samavaya or Inhesion and Ahhava or Non-existence. 
With the last the number becomes seven ; et seq. 
Vide, Tarha-Samgfaha &c, 

‘Conjunction’ is one of the 24 Qualities of the 
Category Gt^na [Vide. op. cit]. 

The ‘Cohesion/ mechanical, chemical or mole- 


cular. 



64 YATiNDRA-MATA-DipiKA [Advent 

account for such differences of attributes as 
those of Atomicity (Aiuitva) and Infinitude 
{VibhHtva)j characterising (respectively) Soul 
iJlva) and God {Isvara). 

Hence, as distinct (Categories), Action (Karma), 
Generality (Samanya), Particularity (Viseska) 
and Inhesion {Samavaya) are not admitted, the 
twofold Division: Substance (Dravya), and 
Non-Substance (A-dravya), answers well. 

By this, it is also refuted that Abhava (Non- 
existence) is a seventh Categoiy ; for Non-exis- 
tence always implies its correlative. Existence 
(Bhava). 

Prag-abhava or antecedent Non-existence 
is previous condition ; Dhvamsa or (post- 
cedent) destruction is the after-condition, 
Atyantd-'bhava or Absolute Non-existence, 
and Anyonyd-'bhava or Mutual Non-existence, 
(simply) refer to particular features in a Sub- 
stance (Dharmi). Hence the inclusion of this 

(category, viz., Abhava) under (Pratyaksha 
or) Perception. 

It was said that Dravya (Substance) is the 
Updidna (or Abode of States: Avasthd-'sraya), 



[IV OBJECT OF knowledge: matter 6s 

The general definition also holds good that 
Substance is the Abode of Attributes {Guna- 
''s-raya). 

The Substances (then) are Six: — (i) Prakrit 
or Matter, (2) Kala or Time, (3) Sudda-satva 
or Pure Matter, (4) Dharmabhuta-Jndna or 
attributive consciousness, (5) Jiva or Soul, and 
(6) Isvara or God.^®® 

These (Six Substances) are divisible into 
two classes, Jada or Inert, and A-jada or 
non-inert (i.e., Self-luminous). 

The nature of the " InerP is described as that 
which is devoid of Non-mixed Matter.’®^ And 

Of these (i) and (2) may be called Objective 
St^stmce ; and (5) and (6) Subjective Substance, (3) and 
(4) linking the two sets. (3) may be called Subjective 
Matter, (i) being called Objective Matter ; and (4) 
may be called Consciotts Substance. Science has made 
a distinction between Ponderable matter and Imponder-. 
Me matter ; but the latter is still Objective. Hence (3) 
Sttddha-Satva, a matter which is of the celestial or 
heavenly order, is thus best conceivable by the ex- 
pression Subjective-matter. 

Objective Matter is Mixed Matter ; Pure Matter 
is Subjective Matter. That which is not the latter is 
the former which is Inert or that which is not Self- 
luminous. 


9 



66 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPiKS [Advent 


this is of two kinds: Prakrti or (objective) 
Matter, and Kala or Time. 

Prakrti or (Objective or Mixed) Matter is 
the Abode of the Three Gums or Properties 
viz., Satva (Light), Rajas (Motive) and Tamas 
(Dark). It is Nitya or Eternal, called by 
such names as Akshara or the Imperishable, 
Avidya or the Nescient, Maya or the Illusory 
etc. 

By reason of oddness produced in it 
(Matter) by the will of God {Bhagavdn), it 
acquires a kinetic {Kdry-onmukha) state, which 
is called Avyakta or Indiscreet. From this, 
Mahan or ‘ Great ’ is produced. Mahan is in a 
threefold state, characterised by Satva, Rajas 
and Tamas. From Mahat, Ahamkara or the 
‘Individualising’ is generated. TJiis also is 
in three divisions : Satvika'hamkdra, Rajasa‘- 
hamkara and Tdmasd' hdmkdra. These are 
otherwise also named as Vaikarika, Taijasa and 
Bhutadi (respectively). Being known as Vai- 
kdrika or the Modifying, the Sdtvika' hathkara 

‘Energies' may be a better term to suit the 
scientific sense of the age. 



IVJ OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE : MATTER 67 

aided by the Taijasa, named Rajasd^hamkara^ 
engenders the Eleven Indriyas or Senses. 

The definition of Sense is that which has for 
its material basis the Sdtvikd'hamkdra, The 
Sense is twofold, the Jndn-endriya or Know- 
ledge-sense, and Karm-endriya or Action-sense. 
The Knowledge-sense is that by which know- 
ledge is transmitted. It is sixfold : (i) Manas or 
mind, (2) hearing, (3) seeing, (4) smelling (5) tast- 
ing and (6) touch. The mind is that which 
causes memory {smrti) etc. This resides in the 
region of the heart. It is variously called bj^ 
the terms Buddhi or Intelligence, Ahamkdra 
or the ^I-making’, Citta or Recollection etc. 
And it is the Cause of Bondage {Bandha) and 
Deliverance {Moksha) 

Mams is the organ through which soul’s con- 
sciousness flows to the Senses, and thus performs the 
efferent function, and again is it the Sense Commttne^ 
to which all the afferent sensations gathered by 
the avenues of the Ten Senses, those of Know- 
ledge as well as those of Action, converge, and 
percepts, there formed into concepts, are delivered 
finally to the Soul. In Western Psychology, Mind 
includes soul and is the Principle of conscious- 
ness, whereas in Eastern Psychology, soul alone is 



68 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DlPIKA [Advetlt 


Of the (other) Five : hearing etc,, that which 
has the power of apprehending sound only, is the 
Sense of Hearing, which resides in the cavity of 
the Ear—the Eye in the case of serpents etc. 
That which has the power of apprehending color 
only, is the Sense of Seeing which resides in the 
Eye. That which has the power of apprehending 
Odour only, is the Sense of Smelling which re- 
sides in the nasal extremity— the trunk in the 
elephant etc. That which has the power of 
apprehending Savour only, is the Sense of Tast- 
ing which resides at the tip of the tongue. That 
which has the power of apprehending Touch 
only, is the Sense of Touch which resides all 
over the body. Touch, not (keenly) felt in nails, 
teeth, hair &c., is accounted for by degrees of the 
low vitality of those places. The description of 

the Principle of Consciousness, rather the Abode of 
Consciousness ; and mind is a material sense, internal, 
the external being the other ten senses: seeing etc. 

The Division of this mind into Buddhi etc,, has 
only partial correspondence with the Western Divi- 
sion of Intellect, Will and Feelings. The mind 
residing in the heart has a bearing on the Feelings 
connected with this same organ. 




;v.] OBJECT OF knowledge: matter 69 

the Senses of Hearing etc., as Elemental {Bkau- 
tika) is figurative by virtue of the Elements 
affording them gratification. Of these (senses) 
some function by (mediate) association, and 
some by (immediate) contact with objects. So 
avers old tradition. 

The facility to act — any one out of them 
such as speaking etc ., — characterises generally the 
Karm-endriya or Action-Sense. This (Action- 
Sense) is established in a fivefold manner: 
Speaking, Grasping, Moving, Evacuating and 
Generating. That which enables articulation of 
letters is the Sense of Speaking. This abides in 
eight places, viz., heart, throat, tip of tongue, 
palate, teeth, lip, nose and head. In the case 
of mutes etc., the defect of Destiny (or merit) 
accounts for its absence. That which enables 
manual work is the Sense of Grasping. This 
resides at the finger-tips of the human etc., 
species. That which enables to move is the 
Sense of Moving. This resides in the feet of 
human and other species. In the case of ser- 
pents and birds etc., it resides in the breast, 
wings etc. That which enables evacuation etc.. 



70 YATiNDRA-MATA-DipiKA [Advent 

is the Sense of Evacuation. This resides in 
the several organs [Payu) set apart (for the 
purpose). That which causes a specific joy 
is the Sense of Generation. This resides in 
the organ of generation [Upastha) * etc. These 
Senses are minute These accompany the 
Soul {Jiva) in its migrations to other bodies and 
other worlds etc. In the state of emancipation 
{mukt%)y they cannot accompany to the im- 
material regions ; hence their abidance here till 
the Period of Dissolution ; or they are reappro- 
priated by others who stand in need of them. 
That the Senses of Action perish with the death 
of the body is an opinion contrary to Bhashya 
etc. Hence inadmissible. The opposite schools 
are also controverted, therefore, which maintain 
a male sense, a female sense, a single sense : 
the sense of Touch only etc, 

^ For a Tabulation of these results, consult pp. 
257 & 258 of our Bhagavad-GUa : Commentaries. 

Read V edanta-Sutra : II-4-6. ‘ Anavas ca/ 

L e., Sn-Bhashya or Ramanuja’s Commentary 
on the Vedanta-Sutras, and other works on the 
ViHshtddmiia philosophy. 



IV.] OBJECT OF knowledge: matter 71 

From the Tamasa'hamkara, called Bhutadi 
fostered by Rajasa'hamkdra, spring the five 
Subtle Elements (Tanmatras), Sound etc, and 
the Five Elements {Bhutas), Ether etc. The 
Subtle Elements are the Subtle Substances im- 
mediately connected with the (gross) Elements ; 
and they are the base (of the latter). Elements 
are the Substrata in which the objective Sound 
etc, inhere. The Subtle Elements are five : — 

(i) Sound-Subtle Element, (2) Touch-Subtle 
Element, (3) Colour-Subtle Element, (4) Savour- 
Subtle Element, (5) Odour-Subtle Element. 
The Elements are also five: — (i) Ether, (2) Air, 
(3) Fire, (4) Water, (5) Earth. 

The Sound-Subtle Element is the compound 
substance intervenient to Tdmasd' hamkara and 
Ether {Akasa), like the modification between 
milk and curds. From this (Subtle Element) 
springs Ether. The properties of Ether are 
defined in such terms as : — 

(1) Imperceptible to touch, is the Substrate 
for the quality Sound, 

(2) Affording gratification to the Organ of 
hearing (Ear), 



72 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPiKA [Advent 


(3) Affording room (extension). 

It (Ether) is characterised by Sound only. It 
is perceptible according to the familiar saying; 
‘ Sky is blue ’. It has color and parts by 
reason of the Quintuplicative Process {Panci- 
karana-Prakriya). By this (reasoning), the 
opinion that Ether is non-generate is disproved. 

A distinct (Category such as) Direction 
{Dik) needs no creation, inasmuch as such 
Direction as East etc, is derivable from the 
associations of the motions of the sun with 
the sky (Akdsa). The creation of Direction 
is to be understood like the creation of 
Sky etc. 

From Ether springs the Touch-Subtle Ele- 
ment. This Touch-Subtle Element is the com- 
pound Substance occupying the intermediate 
state between Ether and Air. From it Air 
springs. The properties of Air are defined in 
such terms as: — 

(1) Perceptible everywhere to touch, absent 
of color, 

(2) The Substance perceptible to the Sense 
of Touch as we possess it. 



IV.] OBJECT OF knowledge: matter 73 

(3) Neither warm nor cold to touch, absent 
of color. This Air is diverse. It receives the 
designation of cold, warm, fragrant etc, by vir- 
tue of its (Air’s) contact with water, heat, flower 
etc., (respectively). It is helpful to the Sense of 
Touch by its rendering it gratification. Its 
characteristics are Sound and Touch. And in 
its function of supporting the body, it is called 
Prana or Life (Vital Air). 

This {Prapa or Life) is fivefold : (i) Prana 
(2) Apdna, (3) Vydna, (4) Uddna and (5) 
Samdna. Prana (resides) in the heart, Apdna 
in the anus, Vydna pervades the body, Uddna 
(is) in the throat, and Samdna in the regions of 
the navel. This law holds in the case of the 
Movables {Jangama). In the case of the Im- 
movables {Sthdvara), the Life-association is 
slender. The contention that air is proved by 
Inference is confuted by the fact that it is per- 
ceptible to Touch. 

The Color-Subtle-Element is the compounded 
substance intervenient to Air and Fire. From 

that springs Fire. 

10 



74 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPiKA [Advent 


The definition of Fire is : — 

(1) Warmth to touch, 

(2) Lustrous coloredness. 

It causes outside, maturing rIc., by means of 
Fire and Sun, and inside, as fire in the stomach, 
is designated as Vaisvdnara. Except in the 
case of owls etc., all ocular knowlege is aided by 
means of light. This (Fire-Element) is fourfold : 
(i) Bhaima, (2) Divya, (3) Audarya, (4) Akar- 
aja. That which is in the earthy fuel is Bhauma 
(terrestrial)— the flame etc. That which is of 
water only is Divya (celestial) — the Sun* etc. 
That which is in earth and water combined is 
Audarya (bodily), — the stomach-fire etc. Fuel- 
less fire is Akaraja (mineral) — gold etc. The 
absence of warmth in the touch of gold (etc.,) is 
due to its association with other substances. 

There is also a general classification as 
(i) Effulgence {Prabhd) and the Effulgent 
[Prabhdvdn). Effulgence is a Fire-species 
which is subject to contraction or expansion of 
radiance caused by the presence or absence of 

* Etc,, includes lightning and such other fiery 
Elements potentially abidant in the Water-Element. 



75 


IV.] OBJECT OF knowledge: matter 

environment (respectively). This Effulgence 
is connate with the Effulgent,- and disappears 
with its disappearance. It is of the substance, 
as also of the quality and made up of parts. 
Hence the contention for its purely qualitative 
character, is refuted. Characterised by Efful- 
gence is the Effulgent. That this (Fire-Element) 
is fourfold has already been explained. It 
is possessed of the qualities of Sound, Touch 
and Color. 

The Savour-Subtle-Element is the compound- 
ed Substance intervenient to Fire and Water. 
From that springs Water. Its definition is given 
in such terms as : — 

(1) Coldness to touch, 

(2) Odourless and Savourful. 

Its nature being white, sweet and cold, the 
differences of Color, Savour, and Touch are 
adventitious qualities aisuant on contact with 
extrinsic circumstances. 

This (Water) is manifold as of the ocean, 
the river etc. It is characterised by Sound, 
Touch, Color and Savour. By it, is sprinkling, 
lumping etc., (done). 



y6 YATiNCRA-MATA-DiPiKA [Advent 

The Odour-Subtle-Element is the compound- 
ed Substance which is intervenient to Water 
and Earth. Form it springs Earth. Its defini- 
tion is gix^en in such terms as ; — 

( 1) All-odorous, 

(2) Odorous, and neither warm nor cold to 
touch. 

It is redolent, sweet, dark-coloured, and 
neither warm nor cold to touch. Its modifica- 
tions bring about all kinds of Color, Odour and 
Savour. Its use is displayed by its affording 
gratification to mind and nose. Its modifications 
assume the character of mud, stone, food, herbs 
etc. It is characterised by the qualities : Sound 
Touch, Color, Savour and Odour. It is the 
means of support. Darkness is included in 
Earth, for it is its quality, or a particular state 
of it. Hence the opinion that it is merely the 
absence of light and not a substance etc., is re- 
butted. 

Cbnsequent on the Quintuplicative Process 
{P anci-karam-prakriya), all the qualities 
(Sound etc.,) are to be found in aU the Elements. 
God {Bhagavan) creates the Elements by the 



IV.] OBJECT OF knowledge: MATTER 77 

Quintuplicative Process, divides each Element 
into two portions, and reserving one portion, 
divides the other portion into four parts. He 
distributes these four parts, one for each of the 
other four Elements. When this is done with 
regard to all the (Five) Elements, each Element 
retains its own moiety, the other moiety being 
compounded of the parts of the other Elements. 
By reason of its own component (moiety) being 
greater, and of the other components being 
smaller, it is designated by the terms: Earth 
The teaching of the Triplicatory Process in the 
Vedas means by implication the Quintuplicatory 
Process. Others posit a Septuplicatory Process 
by combining the Elements with (the principles) 
Mahat and Ahamkara. 

Of these (Principles of Matter), twenty four 
in number, the five Elements, Prakrit (Primal 
Matter), Mahat and Ahamkara, organise the 
Body [Sarlra). The Eleven Senses, enumerated 
separately — a set for each Soul {Purushd ) — 
possess each body, like gems set in a jewel. 
One definition of Body is thus-wise givai : — 

It is a Substance in indiscerptible relation 
with the Soul, to which it is bound as the 



78 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIK5 [AdVCllt 

Sustained {Adheya), Ordained {Vidheya) and 
Disposed {^esha). Each of these : ' Sustained/ 
‘Ordained’ and ‘Disposed’ maybe considered 
also as a threefold distinctive definition. A 
neutral (faiastha) definition is that it is a 
Substance distinct from God (Isvara) and His 
knowledge {Jndna). Hence, the definitions 
attempted by others are discarded, such as : — 

(1) The ‘ abode of action ’ is Body, 

(2) The ‘ abode of Senses ’ is Body, 

(2) The ' house of enjoyment ’ is Body, 

( 4 ) The ‘ aggregate of the limbs : head, hands, 
feet etc.,’ is Body ; etc. 

The Body is twofold: Eternal and Non- 
EtemaL The Eternal is the Body of God 
{ISvara) the pure Abode etc., of the Three- 
Pfropertied Substance, Time and Soul ; and 
the natural Body assuming the shapes of the 
kite,’®^ snake etc : of the Eternal-celestials 
{Nitya-Surisy'’^ The Non-Eternal is twofold : 

’°® Ij.Satva-Rajas-and-Tamas-chasa.cie:£is&i matter. 

'“'Garuda, 

Ananta or Adi-Sesha. 

”• Or Archangels. 



79 


IV.] OBJECT OF knowledge: matter 

Non-Kanna‘^®-made and Karma-made {Karma- 
krta). The First constitutes the forms of God 
{I § vara), Mahat etc., and likewise forms assumed 
at will by Ananta, Garuda Etc., (Archangels), 
the Freed {Muktay"" and God. The Karma- 
made (body) is also twofold ; (i) will-prompted 
Karma-made, and (2) exclusively Karma-made 
The former is as in the case of great souls like 
Saubhari.’^® For others, the other. Again there 
is a twofold general classification: (1) Immov- 
able and (2) Movable. The Immovable are 
the rocks, trees, shrubs etc. The Movable is 
fourfold: — (i) Celestial [Deva), (2) Human 
(Manushya), (3) Animal {Tiryak) and (4} Hellish 
{Ndraki). A division also is based upon the 
modes of birth : (i) seed-bom, (2) sweat-bom, 
(3) egg-bom (oviparous) and (4) womb-bom 

Karma is the sum of acts generated by the soul, 
and constitutes the cause for embodied existence; 
and this Karma is spread over many such lives till 
enfranchisement (Moksha) is achieved. 

I, e. the forms of the body of God. 

■” VUe J R A S. pp. 573/- July ^9^°- 

Read Vishnu-Pardna for his story, and Pillai 
Lokacarya’s Tattva-traya. 



So YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [AdvePit 

(viviparous).”* Bodies bom by no mode also 
exist.”' 

Thus the Egg”' is generated by the Quintupli- 
cative Process. The creation prior to that of 
the Egg is the General {Samashti) Creation, 
and after it is the Special (Vyash^i) creation. 
Creation or birth, of Mahat etc., means a change 
of state simply, as may be illustrated by the 
palm-leaf changing into the ear-ring”', or as fis 
evident) in such expression as : army, forest 
etc. The distinctions made in practice between 
Cause and Elfect is consequent on a particular 
relation which holds between an antecedent and 
a postcedent state. Naming as a new category 
[tattva) is contingent on the abandonment of a 

”* jT. (i) Udhhij-ja, (2) Sveda-ja, (3) A^a-ja, 
(4) (i) may perhaps be latinized as grano- 

parous and (2) as thermoparous. 

I. e., Spontaneous generation, like the Aphides. 

”* I. e., the Mundane Egg called the Brahmanda 

or a system containing 14 Worlds or Planes. 

The palm leaf is split, rolled and inserted in a 
hole made in the lobe of the ear by Hindu women. 
Also read Veddntd-Sutra ; III. 2. 2-26 : ‘ Ubhaya &c.’ 

J. e.f army is but a collection of men, and forest 
a collection of trees. 



[IV OBJECT OF knowledge; matter Si 

previous, and assumption of an after, mutation. 
This (process of naming) is continued down to 
(the category) Earth. 

In this manner, the Twenty-four Categorical 
Divisions (of Prakrti) consisting of Primal 
Matter, Mahaty Ahamkara, the Eleven Senses, 
the Five Subtle Elements and the Five (Gross) 
Elements, have been described. Hence those 
outsiders {Bdhyas) and Pdsupafas who 
predicate a greater or a lesser number of 
Categories, are disregarded, as well as those who 
plead for the atomic theory (of the Universe).'^* 
The Primordial Matter etc., constitute the Ob- 
jects {Bhogya), Instruments {Bhog-opakarana) 
and the Habitat {Bhoga-sthdna) of enjoyment 
for both God {Isvara) and Soul {Jiva). The 
Objects are the group of things, of sound etc. 

I. e. those who are beyond the pale of the Vedic 
Authority ; the heretics, so to say. 

I. e. those who predicate Pasu-pati or Siva as 
the Lord of the Universe, which is opposed to the 
School of the Vedanta, vide : Brahma-Sutra II. 2. 35 : 
Patyuf asdmanjas sydt. 

The Vaiseshiha School which posits atoms as 
the basis of the kosmos. 



82 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DipiKA [Advent 


The Instruments are those of the Eye e/c. The 
Habitat consists of the Egg {Brahmd'^a) *, 
composed of the Fourteen Spheres. The Egg 
is likened to a wood-apple, a result of the 
Quintuplicated Elements and of Prarabdha 
(or the sum of the Karmic forces set agoing by 
the countless souls whose destiny is linked with 
this particular Egg or System of world-process). 

(The description of it is) thus : — Bhu is like 
the lotus. The Meru is like the pericarp. To 
the South of Meru are (situate) the Varshas : 
Bharata, Kimpurusha, and Hari. To the North 
are the Varshas: Ramyaka, Hirapyaka and 
Meru. To the East is the Varsha Bhadrasva. 
Tp the West is the Varsha Ketumala. In the 
Centre is the Ilavj-ta. Composed of these Nine 
Varshas is the Jambu-Dvipa, a lac of yojanas'\ 
in extent, enclosed by the Salt-Sea of equal ex- 
tent. This Sea is begirt by the Plaksha-Dvipa 
of double that extent composed of seven Var- 
shas. This is (enclosed) by the Syrup*®“-Sea. 
This Sea by the Salmali-Dvipa. This again by 

* See note (176), page 80. 

t About 9 miles. 

Lit., Sugar-cane-juice (Ikshu). 



IV.] OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE : MATTER 83 

the Liquor-Sea, This by the Ku§a-Dvipa. 
This by the Ghee’®*-Sea. This by the Kraunca- 
Dvipa. This by the Curds-Sea. This again by 
the Saka-Dvipa. This again by the Milk-Sea. 
This is surrounded by the annular Pushkara- 
Dvipa, made up of two Varshas and containing 
the mountain Manasottara. This by Pure- 
Water-Sea. Each following Dvipa is to be 
considered as double (in extent of the preceding). 
The Plaksha etc.^ Dvipas contain Sevai Varshas. 
This of the Seven Varshas is encircled by the 
Land of Gold, double its extent. The Land of 
Gold, by the Mountain Lokaloka. This Moun- 
tain by Tamas (Daitness?). Tamas by Uterine 
Waters’'®. Then the (spherical) Egg-Shell. 
Located below Bku as thus (described), are 
the Seven Lokas or Realms named (i) Atala, 

1. e., Clarified butter. 

Lit,, Island. The conception of this is a Sphere 
having many concentric insular, shells or bands 
of varying depths alternately solid and liquid. The 
Varshas 3se the Divisions in the shells situated in 
various directions, or surfaces of the shell-sphere. The 
aggregate of all these is called Bku (not our single 
Earth as is commonly understood.) 

’®° See page 84 . 



84 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPiKA [Advent 


(2) Vitaia, (3) Sutala, (4) Talatala, (5) Maha- 
tala, ( 6 ) Rasatala, (7} Patala. Below (these) are 
the Hades {Narakas). They are Raurava and 
others, the chief being twenty one, — regions (al- 
lotted) for the sufferings of the sinful. Beyond is 
(again) Uterine waters enclosed by egg-shell. 
A lac of yojanas beyond Bhu is the Sun- 
Sphere. This is Bhuvar-Loka. Beyond, is 
the Moon-Sphere. Beyond, the Star-Sphere. 
Beyond, the Mercuiy-and Venus-Spheres. Be- 
yond, the Mars-, Jupiter-, Saturn-, and the 
Seven-^shi-Spheres. Beyond (cotnes) the 
Dhruva-Loka (North Pole). All this (i. e., from 
the Sun-Sphere up) is the (Svar-loka). Beyond 
fourteen lacs (of yojanas), the Mahar-loka is a 
crore olyojanas in extent. Double that is Jano- 
loka. Qaudruple that is Tapo-loka. Beyond 
is Saiya-loka, ten crores in extent. Beyond 
(again come) Tamos, Uterine’®' Waters and 
the Egg-shell. Thus the extent of Bhu is stated 
to be fifty crores of yojanas, in breadth and 
depth. The assertion that its extent is one- 

Li#., Garih-odaha. The conception is that of 
the Egg as above described floating like the embryo 
in the uterine fluids. 




IV.] OBJECT OF knowledge: matter 85 

hundred crores of yojanas is because of the 
differences in measure-standards. The Egg- 
Shell is a crore of yojanas in extent. Ten 
times this is the environment round the Egg 
(=a System). Eggs of this description without 
number are like water-bubbles, simultaneously 
projected by God {Isvara). God’s creation up 
to the four-faced Brahma is immediate, thence- 
forward mediate. Such is the division. For 
enlargement (of this topic), the Gem of Puraijas 
(i.e. Vishnu-V) may be consulted. Thus Matter 
{Prakrti) has been treated. 


Thus ends Advent IV. 

The Treatment of Matter {Prakrti) 
in the 

“ Light of the School of Ramanuja”. 



ADVENT V.— TIME {Kala). 


Now, the species of the Non-Conscient {Acit), 
viz., Time, will be treated. Time is (an) inert 
(substance) devoid of the triad of gunas.^^ It 
is eternal and infinite. It is triply divisible 
as Past, Future and Present. It is the time 
(element) indicated by such terms as Simul- 
taneous, Immediate, Gradual e/c ; and is that 
which constitutes what is in vogue (as time- 
measures), viz., Nimesha, Kdshiha, Tatpard, 
Vinddi, Kald, Ghatikd, Muhurta,'^'' Day, Half- 
month, Month, Season, Solstice, Year etc. One 
month by human measure is a day for the 
Pitrs, whose midday is the New-Moon day 
The period of a Manu covers seventy one 

I.e., Satva, Rajas and Tamas. See note 162, p. 66, 
and (my) Bhagavad. Gita. p. 67. 

48 minutes = I MuhUria. 

24 minutes = I Ghatika. 

Kala varies from 8 to 60 seconds. 

Kashtha='jaa Kala— sa.y 2 seconds. 

Twinkling of the eye. 

F»bo^»= 24 seconds. 

Used in Jyotisha for 1/30 part of a 

Nimska. 



V.] 


TIME 




Amavasya). One year by human measure is 
a day for the Devas, whose (half } day is the 
North-(summer) solstice? and night the South- 
(winter) solstice. Measured thus by the Devas' 
standard, twelve thousand years is called the 
Four Yugas. Four thousand of these consti- 
tutes Krta-Yuga, when Virtue {D karma) is of 
its full measure. Three thousand of them with 
three parts of Virtue constitutes the Trefa- 
Yuga. Two thousand with two parts of Vir- 
tue constitutes the Dvapara. One thousand 
with one part of Virtue is the Kali-Yuga. Two 
thousand make up the interim periods (between 
the Yugas).’®® The period which makes a day 
of Brahma is a thousand of these Four- ; 
and a night (is) of equal duration. A day of 
Brahma covers (the period of) fourteen Manus, 
likewise of the Indras and the Seven Rshis. 

'®* Distributed thus : — 

Soo years betweeu Krior and Treta. 

600 years between Treta and Dvapara. 

400 years between Dvapaya and KalL 
200 years between Kali, and Kfta next. 

2000 

See note i p. 275, (my) Bhagavad-Gita. 



YATlNDRA-JIATA-DiPIKA 


8S 


[Advent 


Four-Fw^as. Thus, measured by the standard 
of Brahma, one hundred years is his life-length. 
All this is subject to Time. Likewise is subject 
to Time the various Dissolutions [Pralayas ] : 
Nityu (frequent), Naimiftika (occasional), Prd-- 
krfa {material, etcP^ For time as Effect, Time 
itself is the Cause. Infinite time is eternal ; 
finite times are non-etemal. Time so delineat- 
ed constitutes an ingredient for God's (cosmic) 
Sport (i.e. Display). In the LUd-Vibhutii^ 
God {Uvara) works, subject to Time. Although 
Time exists in the NUya-VibhUti,'^' it is so by 
His will Some say that time non-exists, others 

I- Niiya-Pfalaya:=S\ee^ or Death. 

2. NaimUUkaPmlaya = Disintegration at every 
Brahma’s day, 

3. — Disintegration at every 
Brahma’s age. 

4. Atyantika-Pmlaya = Final Deliverance or 

Escape from all material trammel Salva- 

tion = Spiritual Goal Eternal [Rda,dVisk^Pum^a^ 
VI, 3. I and 2 : Sarvfisham etc.] 

Means ; Jonporal Manifested Universe, the 
Sport wheirein consists of the three acts of Creation, 
Sustenance and Destruction. 

*®'This is the Eternal or Spiritual Universe of 
Ineffably Glory ( = VibhuU). 



TIME 


89 


v-I 

aver that Tdtnasa-Mahan (a category of Matter) 
is time. But both these positions are contrary 
to Word {Agama, i.e. Scriptures) and Percep- 
tion {Pratyaksha). The Acaiyas”’ affirm 
that Time is a cognition by the Six Saises (i.e. 
Mind and the Five Senses of Knowledge) ; that 
it is an object of Inference is therefore rejected. 
Thus has Time been treated. 

Thus ends Advent V, 

The Treatment of Time {Kcila) 
in the 

“ Light of the School of Ramanuja ”. 




Spiritual Preceptors, in a generic sense; the 
expositors and exegetists who came into prominence 
in South India, in a specific sense. 

12 



ADVENT VI. 

SPIRITUAL UNIVERSE. 

{Nitya^ Vibhuti), 

Now (the Subject of the) Spiritual Universe 
{Nitya-Vibhfiti) will be propounded. Non- 
inertness [Ajadafva) IS 2i property common to 
(the Principles:} Pure Msilitv {Suddha^-satvay^^ 
the Attributive Consciousness {Dharma'^bhuta- 
Jndna), Soul {Jfoa) and God {Is vara). 
Non-inertness means Self-luminousness {Sva- 
yam-prakdsatva). Self-luminousness cum exte- 
riority [Pardktva),'^^ characterises both Pure 
Matter and Attributive Consciousness. Satvam 
or Lightness means that which, while self- 
luminous, is luminant toothers. Suddha-Satvam 

or Spiritual (Divine) Matter in the Spiritual 
Universe. 

I, e. Consciousness which is the intrinsic or 
inherent quality of the Soul. Read Advent VII, infra. 

Exteriority means the quality of illuminating 
other things, not self-luminous, the term self-lumin- 
ous or Interiority being adopted as the equivalent 
for PratyaUva, 



VL] 


SPIRITUAL UNIVERSE 


91 


or Essential lightness is to be Luminant, while 
distinct from the In-featured Substance,'®^ or 
that specific uniqueness, which prevails in re- 
gions entirely exempt of Nescience {Avidydy^^ 
This (spiritual) Universe is unbounded above 
and bounded below, non-conscient and self- 
luminous. It is called by the name Bliss 
{Ananda)j for it is the medium of bliss. As it 
is indicated by the Pancopanishan-Mantrasy^ 
it is of the nature of the Pancop anishads. 
Constituted as it is of the Five Spiritual (or 
Immaterial) Energies, it is said to be of that 
Five-Energied nature.^®® This Universe becomes 

188 'Phis is the Material of the Material Universe, 
the genesis of which has been described in Advent 
The ^features’ sxe the Gzmas. 

Nescience or Ignorance is the root of all evil. 
* Where this is entirely absent’ is a negative definition 
of the Kingdom of Heaven, i.e, the Spiritual Universe. 

Read the Pancardffas. For the subject-matter 
here alluded to, vide Padma-tantra : XII-36 begin- 
ning YojanMam hotiy urdhve ” &c. Vishnu Himself 
is the Five-Spiritual-Energied Being according 
tO' the verse (loc cit,): Panca-sakfi-mayo Vishm^ 
hoti-yojana’Sammite^ asie Sri-Bhnmi-sahito Vainateyena 
s&vitahy The five are named thus : — (i) Sawa, (yp) 
Nwftiif (3) ViSm, (4) Pumsha and {5) Pdramsht hi. 



92 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [Adveat 


the Objects, Instruments and Places of enjoy- 
ment to God and to the Eternals {Nitya) and 
the Freed (Mukta) (Souls), by God’s will. 
Objects signify Fortune, efc., Instruments: Per- 
fumes, Flowers, Robes, Companions (Vadhu), 
Ornaments, Weapons etc; Places: Terraces, Ram- 
parts, Pavilions, Air-C^rs (Fimana), Parks and 
Lotus-decked Ponds. 

By God’s eternal will (Nity-eccha) are deter- 
mined the (beatific) bodies of God and of the 
Eternals and the Freed (souls). By God’s will 
{Safnkalpa) alone are made the bodies of the 
Freed, the creation ofPitrs etc,, {or them, the 
-assumption of numerous bodies simultaneously 
etc. The bodies of God in His Vyuka,, Vibhava 
and Arca'-vatara manifestations^®® are of the 
immaterial (i.e,, spiritual) nature. In the case 
of the Arcd'vatara, (or Images consecrated in 
Temples) the spiritual body, by God’s grace 
won by propitiation, incarnates (in the Images) 

Those, Archangels or Powers or Hierachies 
who are ever of the Divine or Celestial order, and who 
never fall into Samsara, thereby becoming Baddhas 
or Souls in material bondage. 

Vidi P : 576 ff., JRAS., July, 1910. 



VI.]' 


SPIRITUAL UNIVERSE 


93 


after the vitalising {PrUna-pratishtha) process. 
‘How can happen a junction, between the 
material and the immaterial ? ' need not raise a 
doubt, for the doubt is cleared when it is shown 
that this is illustrated by the (spiritual) bodies of 
Incarnations as of Rama and Krshna, — authorit- 
ative ("ly known to us).""' The assumption of 
bodies by the Freed (Maktas) is solely for the 
service of God, for His pleasure, like the 
mask donned on occasions of festivals like 
the Vasant-ofsavaP‘ The expression: ‘Six- 
Qualitied’ is employed for God's body by 
reason of its manifesting the Six Qualities. 
The glories of the Blessed Divine Figure 
(or Beatific Presence) consist of Resplendence 
{Aujjvalya\ Beauty {Saundarya), Redolence 
{Saugandhya}^ Tenderness {Saukumarya% 
Loveliness {Lav any a), Juvenility (Yauvana), 

Cf. Bhagavad-Gita ; AvajManti Mam mudhafi 
manusMm tanum a^ritam^ pavam hhavam ajdnanto 
Mamabhuta-mah3^mram'‘\ (IX. ii). 

Indian festivities when costumes are worn as 
in a fancy-dress ball. 

ao» Qualities are J%ma^ Sahti, Bala^ 

Ai^vavya, Viyya and Tijas-, (See Ramanujas’ Intro- 
duiction to Bhagavad-Gita^ my English Translation.) 



94 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DipiKA [Advent 


Softness [Mardava) etc., (all) of the nature of 
eternal, faultless and surpassing. Its excellency 
is evident from such works as Gita. 

Texts, which declare that the Freed [Mukta- 
soul) has no body, signify the negation of 
Karma-determined body.'" The senses (in this 
body) being eternal, the law of Cause and Effect 
does not prevail. Hence like the material 
(series), it needs no distinct categorising. The 
school therefore which upholds a bodiless condit- 
ion there (i.e., in the state of Mukti, or Freedom 
Spiritual) is thus rejected. Likewise the faction, 
which contends that it (the Eternal Universe, 
Nitya-^ibhuti) is a portion of Matter, is also 
dismissed as it is in contravention of the 
passage; ' Beyond Darkness ’ '"—that it is dis- 
tinct from (Akds a) is proved by its properties 
of Sound, Touch, Colour, Savour and Odour, 
being of immaterial nature. That it is inert is 

That is : the body of bondage. From this there 
is escape, but the Freed or Saved soul can attire 
itself in any desired form of a celestial body. Karma 
is the sum of accumulated acts which fructify 
necessarily, like seeds sown necessarily sprout. 

‘ Tarnasalj parastal’ {Mun^k-opamhat, 11. a. 6). 



VI.] SPIRITUAL UNIVERSE 95 

disproved by its being of the self-luminous 
nature {jnZnd-'tmakatva). 

The Spiritual, Divine, Blessed Figure of God 
{Bhagavdn) is the repertory of all the contents 
(signified) in the Chapter on Weapons and 
Omaments.““ It is thuswise : — Kattstubha-Gsm 
represents Purusha (Soul) ; Sri-vatsa, Matter ; 
the Club (Gadd), Mahat ; the Conch {Sankha), 
Sdtvika-hamkdra-, the Bow {Sdrnga), Tdmasd- 
hamkdra ; the Sword {Asi= N andaka), Know- 
ledge; its Sheath, A- knowledge; the Discus 
{Cakra), mind ; the Arrows, the Knowledge cum 
Action-Senses : the Garland (Vanamdld — 
Vaijayanti), the Subtle and Gross Elements. 
In this ccamection the following laconic verse is 
worthy of contemplation : 

“ Cetas cakrati cetana-sir amatis tat-samr- 
vrtir, mdlikd bhutdni svagunair ahamkrti~ 
yugam sankhena sdriigdyate, bdnah khdni 
dasd'pi kaustubha-manir jlvah pradhemam 
punas sri-^atsam Kamaldpate tava gaddm 
dhur mahdntam budh&h." ■®’’. 

Read Ch. 22, Atnsa i., Vish^u-PurS^. 

This needs no translation as its very paraphrase 
has just preceded it Venkatacarya in his Vedanta- 
Kafihavali, ascribes this vdrse to Vedanta-Desika. 



g6 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPiKS [Advent 

This Universe (Spiritual) is fourfold: — Amoda, 
Pramoda, Sammoda and VaikunthaP^ Again 
it is infinite-fold. It is designated by several 
cognomens such as : Tripad-Vibhuti, Parama- 
pada, Parama-vyoma, Parama.-”ka§a, Amrta, 
Naka, Aprakpta-Loka, Ananda-Loka, Vaikuntha, 
Ayodhya etc. 

In this Universe is situate the City of Vai- 
kuntha, with Seven Enclosures, and abormding 
in countless cupolas and ramparts. In it is 
the Divine Mansion named Ananda. In it is 
constructed a Hall called Maiii-Map(3apa, sup- 
ported by innumerable pillars made of precious 
stones. In it is (the Seat) Ananta of the 
Thousand Hoods, dazzling, carr 3 dng the Divine 
Throne of the composition: Dharma''®® etc. On 
it is the Eight-Petalled Lotus, served (on either 
side) by (maidens) Vimala etc, holding fans (the 

Amoda = the Realm of Sahkarshaua 
Pramoda = „ „ „ Pradyumna 

Sammoda = „ „ „ Aairuddha 

Vaikuntha = „ „ „ Vasudeva 

Dharma, Jham, Vaifagya and AiMvavya. The 
four legs of the Throne are said to be A-dharma, 
A-jrLSna, A-vairagya and An-aisvarya. 



VI.] 


SPIRITUAL UNIVERSE 


97 


insignia of Royalty) in their hands. Seated on it 
(the Lotus) is Sesha, the Seat of Supreme 
Wisdom and Strength."’® Over (Sesha) is the 
Great Being who is beyond speech. 

Thus (the subject of) Nifya-^Vibhuti or the 
Spiritual Universe has been treated. 


Thus ends Advent VI, 

The Treatment of Nitya-Viblmtiy 
or The Spiritual Universe, 
in the 

Light of the School of Ramanuja 




Read verse 40, Yamuna”carya’s Stotra-Ratna: 
Taya sahd ^'’sinam etc. 

The whole of the 12th Chapter in Bk. I of the 
Pancaratra: Padma^iautra^ may with advantage be 
perused in this connection. 

13 



ADVENT VII. 

ATTRIBUTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS. 
{Dharma-bhuta-jnana). 


Consecutively, (the topic of) Attributive 
Consciousness will now be expounded. The 
nature of it is described thus ; — 

1. While it is self-luminous, non-sentient sub- 
stance, it is ‘objectivated’ {sa-vishayatvam) {i.e., 
some object always constituting its content); 

2. While it is pervasive {Vibhu), it is of the 
nature of substance {Dravya), and attribute 
(Guna) like light ; 

3. It is the illuminant of objects ; 

4. It is Intellect or Intelligence {Buddhi) etc. 

Attributive Consciousness’’* is, to God and 

the Eternals {Nityas), ever eternal and pervasive 
(or diffusive) ; to the Bound {Baddha-muls) it 

I. E., Consciousness which is an attribute of, 
or adjectival to. Soul or God. To translate tmms by 
mind or equate naind with Consciousness are both 
erroneous, see note 221 infra. 



VIL] ATTRIBUTITO CONSCIOUSNESS 99 

is obstructed. To the Freed {Mukfa-^o\i\^)i it 
was before obstructed but now risen. 

But it may be asked how, if Consciousness is 
eternal, the parlance such as : ^ Consciousness 
is (now) bom, Consciousness (now) lost ^ is to be 
accounted for ? The answer is that such is in 
vogue by reason of Consciousness being suscep- 
tible of contraction and expansion. Like water 
issuing out of the hole of a leather-bag, 
Consciousness streams through the avenues of 
the senses, and cpntacts objects. Contraction 
and Expansion are like the serpent and its 
coiling up. All Consciousness is essentially 
self-evident (or self-authoritative), and is self- 
luminous. The hypothetical” Consciousness is 
the means (or instrument) at one’s disposal for 
all functions concerned with it, for such a 
function is made possible by it without seeking 
the aid of another thing sui generis^ like object 
(Artha)j sense (Btdriya), Light [Dtpa), 

Referring to any other School which may admit 
no such thing as Consciousness. Problematical. 

Like light not requiring the aid of another light 
to be seen : one object another object ; and sense, 
another sense. 



100 


YATi.vDR A* MATA'DiPiKA [Advent 


No sameness of genus can be instituted as 
between Sight and Light ; for the differentiation 
between (them) accrues from the variations 
imbedded in the Ahariikaric Taijasa Principles.'*^'® 

By this (delineation given of Consciousness), 
the opinions, that(i) Consciousness is instan- 
taneous, (2) it is endurant for three (successive 
or continuous) instants, (3) its illusory nature 
even in matters-offact [Vyavaharika) transact- 
ions, as it is in matters phantasmal {Prdti- 
bhdsika)* (4) its nature demonstrable by other 
proof (i.e., not self-evident), (5) its being the 
Soul itself, etc,, are discarded. The Conscious- 
ness relating to (say): ^Pillar' (in the first 
instant) is the same one as that relating to 
‘Pillar' (in the succeeding instant), only it is 
continuous."'® 

Repf to .A^dvent IV for the explanation of 
these Principles or Material Categories. 

* L E,, The rope appearing, or illusorily striking 
one, as snake ; or the deceptions or illusions of sense 
producing illusory Consciousness, i.e., knowledge 
hallucinatory ; — or a mental hallucination. 

LU.^ the stream of Consciousness (Dham- 
mhika-jmna). The Consciousness which is appre- 
hensive of any object at one moment, is but its 



VII.] ATTRIBUTRnE CONSCIOUSNESS lOI 

' Granting that on the strength of Scriptures 
(Agama), Consciousness is eternal, how are the 
conditions obtaining in the v/aking, sleeping etc,^ 
states (of Consciousness) to be explained ? 
The answer (to such a query) is : ^ The burning 
qualitj^ of fire placed near a thing to be burnt 
is neutralised by the presence of a gem^'^ etc ; 
in like manner the presence of a certain hinder- 
ing darkness produces sleep and other states. 
Also it is like (the state of) youth etc,, for, 
virility (the state of youth) is latent in (the age 
of) infancy,, but becomes manifest in (the age of) 
youth, 

Consciousness is of the character of attribute 
(Guna), by virtue of the definition that what is 
dependent (on another, in an indiscerptible 

stream when the apprehension in the next moment 
is concerning the same object. Hence they are not 
two distinct Consciousnesses, the antecedept one 
dying, and the consequent one newly bom as it were 
as the Madhyamiha School of the Buddhists holds. 

It is believed there are some gems or stones 
and other substances which paralyse the power of 
fire to bum. 

Consult Ved^ta-Sutras : 11 . 3. 31 ; — *^Pumstvd'*^ 
dtmftvasya &c.” 



102 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DipiKS [Advent 


manner) is its attribute (or quality), like the 
attributes (of substances).* Also by virtue of its 
(Consciousness’s) susceptibility to contraction 
and expansion, it partakes of the character of 
substance [Dravya.) How Consciousness, the 
attribute of the Soul {Atma\ can be of the 
nature of substance, need not provoke doubt, 
for like the light, the same one substance can 
possess both the characteristics (of attribute and 
substance). Hence there is no contradiction.*’® 
Substance {Dravya) is enunciable as that 
which is the abode (or seat) of states (AvasthS). 
Its radiation (or dispersion) outside its abode is 
possible like light (raying out from its centre). 
A syllogism (may be constructed) thus 
Attributive Consciousness is Substance, 

For it possesses the character of diffusion etc., 
Like li^t ; or. 

Consciousness is Substance, 

* like the “ Blue Sky,” where blueness is the 
inseparable adjunct of the sky. 

This contention is perhaps better understood 
if we say that Consciousness is the faculty as well as 
the function of the soul. 



VII.] ATTRIBUTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS IO3 

For, apart from its connection (or source) 
unseen, it is cognisable,'"® 

Like Soul. 

For Consciousness as stated, is conceivable as 
capable of simultaneously coming in contact 
with infinite space, like rays emerging from the 
eye, Sun etc. The terms synonymous with Cons- 
ciousness are Mati, Prajnay Samvit, DhishanHy 
Dhihy Manlshay Semushly Medhuy Buddhij etc. 
It is Consciousness which, affected by environ- 
ment, assumes the forms of joy, grief, desire, 
hate, and will; for there are no means (or proof), 
justifying the assumption of a generating Cause 
of joy efc.y other than Consciousness. Like ‘ I 
remember' indicative of Consciousness, 'I 
desire/ T hate' (etc), indicate but a state of 
Consciousness. But how is the passage, which 
avers: ‘Desire, will, doubt, zeal, indifference, 
courage, timidity, shame, sense (or reason) 
fear and all such, is Manas (mind),”' to be 

Take sun-light for example. The light is seen 
though its source the sun may remain unseen, or 
beyond the range of vision. 

\Bfhadd-'mnyalia Up. L 5... 3]: — “Kamas-, 
saukalpa-, vicikitsa-, sraddha-, (a) sraddha-, dhrtir-, 



104 


YATiNDRA-JiATA-DiPiKA [Advent 


construed as signifying forms (or states) of 
consciousness ? This query is met by the 
answer that inasmuch as the invariable law 
holds, associating mind {Manas) as the instru- 
ment (or internal sense) of Consciousness, the 
use of the term mind to signify Consciousness 
(as in the above passage) is figurative (-ly 
justified). 

Likewise the qualities of the soul, which are 
numerous, are but the states of the attributive 
Consciousness, such (for example) as;— Per- 
ception, Inference, Word, Memory, Doubt, 
Conclusion, Difference, Fancy, Discernment, 
Endeavour, Temptation, Attachment, Hostility, 
Pride, Envy, Craving, Ostentation, Cupidity, 
Anger, Dignity, Stupor, Deceipt, Partiality, 

adhrtir-, hrir-, dhir-, bhir-, etat sarvam mana eva.” 
According to Occidental Philosophy, mind is im- 
material and is a function of , or a spiritual force 
operating on, the brain ; bat in Oriental Philosophy, 
mind is the internal material organ of sense, the Stnse 
CmmuHe, and Consciousness is the attribute of 
soul that streams out to the objective world, by first 
passing through the aperture, so to say, of the mind, 
thence to the external senses and out thence to 
external objects. 



VII.] ATTRIBUTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS 


105 


Sorrow and Wisdom, Folly, Love, Content- 
ment, Discontent, Greatness, Fatigue, Fame, 
Renunciation, Enjoyment, Friendship, Compas- 
sion, Aspiration of Release {mumukshd), Bash- 
fulness, Patience, Discrimination, Wish to 
Conquer, Softness, Forgival, Wish to do. 
Disgust, Imagination, Hypocrisy, Jealousy, Wish 
to kill. Cupidity, Vanity, Predilection, Prejudice, 
Dispute, (God-) Love {bhakti), Surrender (to 
GQd=prap(itti), Lordship (or Power = Bhuti) etc. 

Similarly the innumerable Blessed Attributes 
of God {Bhagavdn) are the amplifications of His 
Consciousness and Power, such as : — Knowledge, 
Power, Strength, Gloiy, Might and Light, Free- 
dom, Love, Gentleness, Rectitude, Friendliness, 
Impartiality, Compassion, Sweetness, Dignity, 
Magnanimity, Tactfulness, Patience, Courage, 
Valour, Bravery etc. Knowledge {jMna) is 
that (quality) which is qf the nature of universal 
understanding. Power [Sakti) is the capability of 
causing existence from non-existence. Strength 
{Bala) is the capacity to endure. Gloiy 
{Aisvarya) is the capacity to rule. Might 
[Vlrya] is imperturbation. Light [Tejas) is the 
14 



io6 YATiNDRA-MATA-DipiKl [Advent 

power to resist. Freedom (Sau-silya) is the 
capacity to mix freely with high and low. 
Love (Fafsalya) is the quality of finding good 
in evil, or the overlooking of fault. Gentleness 
{MUrdava) is the not bearing to be separated 
from one’s dears. Rectitude (Arjava) is to be 
straight in thought, word and deed. Friendli- 
ness [Sauharda] is readiness to help others 
to the neglect of one’s self. Impartiality {Sdmya) 
is to be equally accessible to all irrespective of 
their race, character or conduct. Compassion 
{Kdrimya) is the wish to repair others’ ills 
to one’s own detriment, or the inability to 
see others’ sufferings. Sweetness {Madhurya) 
is to be sweet while nourishing, like milk. 
Dignity {Gdmbhirya) is the power which forbids 
the inquiry for deep motives underlying 
such acts as conferring abundance etc., on 
the devotees. Magnanimity {Audarya) is the 
feeling of dissatisfaction even after bestowing 
plaity. Tactfulness {Cdturya) is the power to 
hide another’s faults. Patience {Sthairyd) is 
to be unruffled. Courage {Dhairyd) is the 
power of permitting no waver, after decision. 



107 


VIL] ATTRIBUTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS 

Valour {Saury a) is the power to rush into the 
midst of the enemy ; Bravery (Pardkrama) is 
gaining victory over him. The others (attributes) 
may be similarly understood. 

The nature of God-love {bkaktif^^ and God- 
surrender {Prapatti) — states of Consciousness 
— will briefly be discussed (now). It is God 
alone who confers Moksha (Final Release from 
material existence), on the (bare) plea (furnished 
by souls) of Love and Surrender. Hence these 
(latter) are considered as the Means to Release. 
The character of Means assigned also to Kar- 
mayoga'''^ and Jnana-yogaP'"^ which in fact 
are inseparable from Love, is by reason of 
(such) predominant characteristics persons may 
severally (happen to) possess."^ 

Bhakti is Love or Welling Emotion to God; 
PfapaUi is Surrender or Dedication to God (Faith). 

Reaching Salvation by means of good 
acts ; Jnana, by means of meditation (thought). See 
the Subject enlarged: Pp. 581 /. JRAS. for July, 19 10. 
Also see infra. 

This means that in some persons, the active 
quality may be more manifest, in others thought or 
intellect more predominant ; and yet the coixsummat- 
ion of them ail are to be found in Love. 



I 08 YATlNDRA"MATA“DiPIKA [AdvCUt 

What is Karma-Yoga or the Path of Works ? 
Through Holy Teaching (got), one acquires true 
knowledge regarding Soul and God; and, accord- 
ing to his best ability performs, without regard 
for fruit, diverse actions of virtue : — Kamya 
or Optional, Nitya or Routine, and Naimittika 
or Casual. The sum of acts so done is Karma- 
Yoga. It branches itself into God-worship, 
Austerities, Resort to Holy Places, Charity, 
Sacrifices etc. Effecting the riddance of stains 
on the soul, it engenders jMna-Yoga or the 
Path of Knowledge, and through it or direct, 
engenders Bkakti-Yoga or the Path of Love.^*^* 

What is Jnana-Yoga or the Path of Know- 
ledge ? By means of Karma-Yoga^ one’s heart 
(or mind, anfah-karana) becomes purified, and 
he then contemplates on the Soul which is dis- 
tinct from matter, and liege to God. This 
(contemplation or Jndna-Yoga) is useful to Love 
{Bhakti) Whether these Ways (or Paths) are 
Independent Means (to Salvation), or ancillary 

Read Pp. 581 /. AHha^Pancaha, JRAS. for 

1910. Also the 'Soteriological TaWe in (my) 
Bhagavad-GiM, Pp. 573-574. 



VII.] ATTRIBUTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS I09 

to Love, depend upon the several authorities 
presenting such views. 

What is Bhakti-Yoga or the Path of Love ? It 
is an unbroken stream of thought (of God) like a 
stream of (poured) oil, preceded by the eight-fold 
auxiliaries : Yama, Niyama (moral and physical 
restraints), Asana (postures), Prana "yama 
(restraint of breath), Praiya "hara (restraint of 
senses), Dhdrana (steadying concentration), 
Dhydna (uninterrupted meditation), Samadhi 
(imperturbable fixture).* 

The seven-fold means known as (i) Viveka, 
(2) Vimoka, (3) Abhydsa, (4) Kriyd, (5) Kal- 
ydna, (6) Anavasada and Anuddharsha, give 
birth to it {Bhakti). Of these, (i) Viveka or 
Discrimination is said to be the purity of body 
effected by abstention from food, impure fixim 
any cause. (2) Vimoka or Dispassion is fireedom 
from desire. (3) Abhydsa or Practice is the 
repeated habit of clinging to the (mental) Sub- 
ject (or Image) (of contemplation). (4) Kriyd 
or Performance is the observance of the Fivefold 

*The last three terms may perhaps be better 
translated by Abstraction, Devotion and Dxaltatian. 



1 10 YATlNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [Advent 

Maha-Y^ajTias or Great Sacrifices,'"® according 
to one’s ability. (5} Kalyana or Virtues are 
Truth, Uprightness, Clemency, Non-cruelty and 
Non-cupidity. (6) Anavasada or Painlessness is 
freedom from dejection (or despair). (7) Anud- 
dharsha or Non-elation is freedom from par- 
oxysmal joy ; for such joy is also a hindrance. 
Fostered thus by this seven-fold Means, Love 
[Bhakti) becomes as vivid as actual perception 
and (this) must last till the (final) dissolution of 
the body occurs. This final (God-) conscious- 
ness may break (on a person) at the fipiis of this 
or some other body. 

Love or Bhakti, variously called Vedana^ 
Dhyana and Updsana^ has three successive 
stages, (i) Para-bhaktiy {2) Par a-jMna and (3) 
Parama’bhaktL'^“^ Love again is twofold: 


Vide ‘ Taittiriya Aranyaka ’ 3 ; — “ Deva-yajnali 
Pitryafno, Bhutayajno, Manushya-yajno, Brahma- 
yc^Ha, iti.” I E. Sacrifices to the Gods, the Manes, 
Creatures, Men and God. 

Read the verse: ^^Darsanam (i) para-hhahiis-sydt, 
Pava-jndnamtu (2) sangamam, punar vislesha-hkirufvam 
Paramd-hhaktif (3) uccyate” (i) Seeing God, (2) Uniting 
with God, and (3) Fear of separation from Him. 



VIL] ATTRIBUTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS III 

Sudhana-bhakti or Laboured Love, and Phcda- 
bhakfi or Ripened Love. Laboured Love is 
what is evoked by (human) exertion. Ripened 
Love is what is gifted by God’s grace, such that 
is found in Parahkusa, Natha^'^’’ etc. The 
employment of the term ^ love ’ for praise, pros- 
tration etc.y alluded to in such verses as : 

' Love of My votaries,’ 
is tropical. 

But a query may arise why, when the 
Vedantas have prescribed Hearing {Sravana) 
and Reflection {Manana) also, love {Bhakfi or 
Nididhyasana) alone is said to be enjoined. It 
is met thus : A person having learnt (the letter 
of) the Vedas with all its adjuncts, finds that 
the import of all . this (learning) must have 
some definite motive ; he necessarily resorts to 
Hearing (i. e. exposition by a Teacher) in order 

Parankusa or St. Nammazhvar typifies all the 
Saints or Azhv^s, and Natha-muni, all the Sages or 
Acaryas. 

Mad-hhahta-jana-vatsatyam, pujdym cd*^numo- 

dmmn hhahtiy ashta-vidhahy esha' etc, [Vishnu- 

dharmottara ; quoted in Course V, Prapanna-Farijata 
also]. 



1 12 YATlNDRA-MATA~DlPIKA [Adveut 

to ascertain for himself what it (the end) may be. 
Hence Hearing as a necessary step is premised. 
Reflection then (on what was taught) is also 
premised inasmuch as it is a (mental) process 
intended to render steady what has been heard.^ 
Hence there is no inconsistency when it is 
averred that the purpose (of the Vedas) is to 
prescribe Love {Bhakti), Love which in other 
words is meditation {Dhydna\ becomes mani- 
fold by the diversity of its Methods {Vidyd). 
These Methods (of Love or Meditation) are sub- 
sumable under two main heads: (i) those that 
have for their fruit (aim) Material Goods, or 
Spiritual End [Miikti). The Udgita-Vidya etc.^ 
belong to the Material Class- Those that belong 
to the Spiritual Class or the Brahma-Vidya, are 
such as the Antar-akshi-Vidya, Antara-'ditya- 
Vidya, Dahara-Vidya, Bhuma-Vidya, Sad-Vidya, 
Madhu-Vidya, Upakosala-Vidya, Saijdilya- 
Vidya, Purusha-Vidya, Pratardana-Vidya, 

* This is with reference to the Text : Aim'd vd 
imskiaiyas* Syoiavyo mantavyafi &c/ [Brhad-Aran: 
Up. II. 4. 5]. And also read: “ Sthdnumymn hhdfa^ 
kdva^ kiWhktif adhtiya Vedam navijav^ii yo^fthMiT 
[Commy ; to III, Sarhhit-opanishad-Brahma^a]. 



VII.] ATTRIBUTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS 


II3 

Vaisvanara-Vidya, Panca-’gni-Vidya etc. 
Nyasa-Vidya^*® is Prapatti or Surrender (to 
God). It is the same as Sarana-gati or Capitu- 
lation (to God) as the Refuge (or harbour), as 
defined in the Verse 

^Prapatti or Saranagati is imploring, with 
abounding love, God alone as the Way for 
consummation of aspirations otherwise unattain- 
able ’ 

This (Way,) which guarantees the Spiritual 
End {Moksha) at the end of the present body, pre- 
cludes the necessity of the state of being (vividly) 
conscious of God at the time of death, ^ requires 
but once to be done, is designated Nyasa 
(lying or leaning on God), Saranagati (He 

Consult the Table of the Vidyas in my Bkaga- 
vad-Gitd, Pp. 129 -130. 

2SO 32 in this Table. 

' Ananya-sadhye svabhishte 
Maha-visvasa-purvakam. 

Tad-ek-opayata yacna, 

Prapattis saranagatih [Akirhdhnya-Samhitd^ 
Pancaratra]. 

^ Read : ^ Asaltam api ca smartum ante purua-krtam 
smaran, svayam eva Param Dhdma svayam nuyati 
MMhavak> [Bharadvaja-Saiiihita, IV* So]* 

15 



1 14 YATiNDRA-MATA-DipiKS [Advent 

the only Refuge). It is thus a unique state of 
consciousness. Further descant on this topic is 
debarred by reason of this work having been 
designed for the enlightenment of the young ; it 
has to be learnt from the properly constituted 
apostolic authorities, out of esoteric treatises 
[Rahasyas) etc. 

As only Love {bhakti) and Surrender {frapatti) 
are admittted as the Means by which to secure 
the Spiritual Consummation {Moksha), Means 
that others promulgate are discarded. Amongst 
those (religionists) who stand outside the pale of 
the Vedas, some do not admit the entity Soul at 
all, as apart from the body ; to them the ver 3 >^ 
subject of Deliverance {Moksha) is futile.'*’ 
Nor is it less abortive to those others who 
believe consciousness to be momentary, which 
to them is itself the Soul.’“ But they ma y 
contend that it (Deliverance) may be predicated 
for the next begotten consciousness. But it 
cannot be that one (lapsed thing) can exert 

The Materialists, Hedonists, CSrvakas or Loka- 

yatihas. 

The Buddhist Madhymnikas, 



VIL] ATTRIBUTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS II5 

for another {for Moksha)''^^ Nor for those 
can the question (of Deliverance) arise, who 
are addicted to the many-faced sapta-bhangi 
profession."*® Nor can there be partisans for 
the school of the Vaiseshikas who assert the 
Spiritual End (or Deliverance) to be petrifact- 
ion {Pashd.na-kalpa). Nor is the subject 
(Deliverance) of any value to the Sankhyas, 
who do not admit God {Isvara)^ and there 
arises a doubt as to whom is Deliverance, 
Soul {Purusha) or to Matter {Prakrti) ? Nor is 
that question invested with interest for those 
schoolmen, the illusionists, to whom the true 

That is, if each Consciousness (which itself is 
Soul), is momentarily anew, it is absurd to speak of 
mohsha for which one prior consciousness prepares 
the way for another as both of them are independent 
and unconnected by continuity. 

The Jainas who hold the System pf the Seven 
Paralogisms: (i)‘may be, it is,’ (2) ‘may be, it is 
^ot,’ (3) ‘may be, it is and is not, (4) ‘ may be, is not 
predicable,’ (5) ‘may be, is and not predicable, (6) 
‘ may be, is not and not predicable (7) ^ may be, is 
and is not and not predicable.’ [Vide^ Sma- days ana- 
samgyaha by Madhavaj. 

^®^The Mdyavadins or Advaitins of the Vedanta 
School. 



Il6 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [Adveilt VII]. 

monic knowledge cannot spring from the avowed 
illusory nature of the (Vedic) texts. The conten- 
tion of (the Schools of) Bhaskara and Y adava for 
a combined Way of Works cum Knowledge, is 
likewise inadmissible. The Saiva system is dis- 
carded by reason of its averring Pasupati as the 
Goal, and the smearing of ashes etc ^ — contrary to 
the spirit of the Vedas, — as the Means.'^’^ 

Thus consciousness has been expounded. 

Thus ends Advent VII, 

The Treatment of Attributive Consciousness 
{Dharma-bhuta-jnana) 
in the 

Light of the School of Ramanuja.” 

See this System refuted by all the Three 
Acaryas, Sankara, Rto^uja and Madhva, in the 
Ved^ta-Sutras : Patyur asamanjas syU [IL 2. 35] 
and elsewhere. That Ramanuja based his Commen- 
taries on Brahma-sutras on Srikantha’s model, as is 
supposed by later Saiva Schools is refuted by Ap- 
paya-Dikshita (a Saiva himself) in his work, Sivdrka- 
mani-Mpiha, Vallabha in his Anu-hhdshya accuses 
Saivicaryas of plagiarism from Ramanuja [Pp ; 48 
and 1403 passim]. 



ADVENT VIII. 
THE SOUL U'^va). 


The (category) Soul or Jiva will now be ex- 
plained. The characteristics common to Soul 
and God are : Interiority (firafyaMva), Cognos- 
citiveness {cetanatva), Spiritness (atmatva), and 
Agency {kartrtva). 

Pratyaktva or Interiority means to be self- 
luminous. Cetanatva or Cognoscitiveness is to 
be the seat (or involucre) of consciousness. 
Atmatva or Spiritness is to be the antithesis to 
body (matter). Kartrtva or Agency is to be 
the seat of consciousness, of the form of Will 
(sankalpa). 

Having thus stated the common characteris- 
tics of Soul, the special (or singular) charac- 
teristics will now be stated. Atomic cum Cog- 
noscitive, Liegent cmw Cognoscitive ; similarly. 
Sustained, Contingent, Agent by delegation. 
Subject, and so forth ; ’may be conceived (as 
qualities distinguidiing the Soul). 



yatIndra-mata-dIpikA [Advent 


ii8 

The Sou] is distinct from body, senses, mind 
(manas), breath, and intellect. Distinct from 
body (Soul is) by reason of the experience : ‘My 
body Distinct from the outer senses by reason 
of the experiences : ' I see with (my) eyes ’, ‘ I 
hear with (my) sense of hearing’, ‘ I speak with 
my tongue ’ and so forth ; Distinct from mind 
(}nanas) as this is known to be a sense ; from 
breath as indicated by the expression: ‘My breath’, 
and from Intellect (buddhi) as borne out by the 
experience : 'I know’. It is atomic (or monadic) 
by reason of the Srnti ( = Scriptures) stating that 
it (Soul) out-goes (from the body at time of 
leaving, and in-comes to the body at time of 
joining), confirmed by (our own) experience. No 
question need arise how, if Soul is atomic, it is 
capable of cognising simultaneously many ob- 
jects, for (its) attributive consciousness has the 
capacity for such diffusion.-’® By this (law), the 

”* ‘ Atomic ’ has a material significance which is 
not meant, as the Soul, is spiritual. What is intend - 
ed to be conveyed is that Soul is a subtle spiri- 
tual centre of consciousness, a focus of the forces of 
consciousness which can ray out anywhere, like the 
central sun diffusing its rays anywhere. ‘A spiritual 



VIIL] THE SOUL 1 19 

assumption of many bodies (simultaneously) by 
such (sages) as Saubhari,"®^ and by the Freed 
{Muktas) becomes possible. This (Soul) is 
Eternal, for it remembers what was experienced 
in the past. But it may be asked : how if Soul is 
eternal, they do speak of its being ^ bom ' and 
^dead ' ? We reply that birth is because of the 
Soul’s bondage with body, and death is, because 
of its severance therefrom. Hence the nature 
of the Soul is Eternal. It is distinct for each 
distinct body. In a similar manner as the 
singular of the expression ^ gold jar ’ is made 
use of for an "aggregate’ of gold jars, all of 
the same dimensions, and "grain’ is used for 
an accumulation of grains, is the (generic) term 
Soul used, as all souls share in common the 
attribute of consciousness. Hence there is no 
identity, as that conflicts with the Authorities.**® 

nucleolus of cognoscitive forces is Soul* would be an 
appropriate definition. 

■®® See Vishnu-Purdm [IV-2] for the story. 

This is with reference to the advaitk (monistic) 
theory that all souls are identical ; whereas Autho- 
rities such as the Vedas mean otherwise, i.e. assert 
plurality or multiplicity of souls. 



120 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [Advent 

It is by nature Blissful (or essentially Joyous) ; 
but, infected by environment {upddhi\ falls into 
migration {samsdra). It is Agent (karfd), 
enjoyer (bhoktd), the Bodied (sarin) and body 
{sarira). It is the bodied with reference to 
matter ; with reference to God (Is vara), it is 
body. 

That it is Self-luminous (svayam-prakdsa) 
is evident from Perception as well as Word 
(Scriptures). A syllogism may be constructed 
as follows : — 

' The Soul is Self-luminous/ 

For it is conscious, (or cognoscitive). 

Like the attributive consciousness/ 

Consciousness-ness (jndnatva) and Stainless- 
ness (or Sinlessness amalatva) etc.^ are qualities 
which determine its (Sours) Essence. 

Thus the thesis of the Bauddhas that as cons- 
ciousness is momentary, Soul is the concatenat- 
ion of (such) moments; — the thesis of the 
Carvakas that Soul is conterminous with the 
body, which is a compound of Four Elements ; 
—the thesis of the Jainas that Soul is commensu- 
rate with the elephant’s body in the elephant. 



VIII.J 


THE SOUL 


121 


and commensurate with the ant’s body in the 
ant ; — the thesis of Yadava that Soul is a frag- 
ment of God {Brahman )-, — the thesis of Bhaskara 
that Soul is a division of the conditioned God 
{Brahman )-, — the thesis that Soul is a fabrication 
(effected) by nescience ; — the thesis that Soul is 
multipled by reason of the limiting (or circum- 
scribing) Inner Organ {Anta^karana) ; all other 
such objectionable theses are disannulled ; and 
likewise the contention for its (Soul’s) infinitive 
nature {vibhutva). 

But if it be asked, how, in case of not admitting 
the infinitive character of Soul, is its fruit in con- 
nection with other realms, determined by the 
'unseen’ (d^t{ny = adrsha), possible, the reply is 
that though Soul has no local (or spatial) relation, 
yet the Unseen (destiny) determines it. What is 
Destiny? It is a species of consciousness attained 
as a consequence of good deeds done for winm'ng 
the pleasure of God {Bhagavan). This conscious- 
ness is none other than Providence (or Will) of 
God, contingent on His infinitive {vibhu) nature.* 

* The purport of this is that it is God’s providence 
that watches our behaviour, and rewards us. See 
Vedanta-Sutras ; ‘ Phalam ata upapaiteli ’ [III, 2. 37.] 
16 



122 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [Advent 

(In) thus (predicating) the reaping of fruit (by 
the Soul), is not beset with difficulties. 

This Sou] is threefold: Bound {Baddha), 
Freed {Mukta), and Free or Eternal {Nitya). Of 
these the Bound are those particular group of 
souls, from Brahma down to the worm, inha- 
biting the fourteen worlds comprising the ‘Oval 
Sphere.' Brahma is sprung from the navel-lotus 
of Sriman-Narayaija ; Rudra from Brahma; 
from Brahma again are sprung the Yogis 
Sanaka etc., the Devarshis Narada etc., the 
Brahmarshis Vasishtha etc., the Nine Prajapatis, 
Pulastya, Marici, Daksha, Kasyapa etc. From 
these sprang the Devas, the Regents of the 
Quarters {Dik-palakas), the Fourteen Indras, 
the Fourteen Manus, the Asuras, Pitrs, Siddhas, 
Gandharvas, Hnnaras, Kimpurushas, Vidya- 
dharas etc., the Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, the 
Asvinis, and the Danavas, Yakshas, Rakshasas 
PisScas, Guhyakas etc. Thus there are many 
varieties of creatures of Deva-Origin. The 
human class also has many varieties such as 
Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, Sudras etc. 
So also is the animal species such as cattle, 
beasts, birds, reptiles, moths, worms etc. The 



VIIL] 


THE SOUL 


123 


Stationary^ class is also diverse such as trees, 
bushes, creepers, shrubs, grasses etc. Trees etc,^ 
possess sufficient consciousness (intelligence), 
necessary to imbibe water etc,^ as evident from 
the text : — 

That (consciousness) is meagre in the lowest 
forms of life 

Thus the Bound {Baddha souls) are of the 
classes: Devas (celestial or superhuman), human, 
animal and stationary. 

These are again (differently) classifiable as 
womb-bom, egg-bom, seed-born and sweat- 
bora. The Devas and man are womb-bom, 
(but) among them Brahma, Rudra etc,, Sanaka 
etc,, Sita, Draupadi, Drshtadyumna etc,, are 
not thus bora [ayonija), so are the Bhutas, Bhe- 
talas etc. The animals etc,, are (some) womb- 
bom, (some) egg-born, and (some) sweat-born. 
The Stationary etc, are seed-bora."^" The 
Bound (souls), thus delineated, are constantly 

241 < vatsu svalpa sa sth^vareshts tato 'dhiPa * 

[Vish^u-Pura^a ; VI, 7. 64J Also Cf. with Mam- 
Smfti 1 . 49 “ Antas-sarhjna hhavanty etc &c 

^ Stationary ^Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms. 

R.o^.A ManihSmHi: 1.,. verses 5 to 50, 



124 


YATlNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [Advent 


whirled in the (material) wheel, fashioned from 
(the elements of) Avidyii (nescience), Karma 
(acts), Vasaiia (predispositions), Ruci (craving) 
and association with matter, meandering like a 
stream with neither b^imiing nor end, or lil^e 
the never-ending process of ‘ seed and plant ’ ; ■*’ 
subject to the chequered conditions (or plights) 
(of life known as) gestation, birth, infancy, youth ; 
waking, dream, sleep, trance, dotage, death; 
heaven (svarga), hell, etc. ; suffering terribly in 
untold ways the three kinds of afflictions and 
forfeiting the estate of God-bliss,— their rightful 
heritage. 

These (souls again) are of two classes ; 
(r) Subject to Sastra, and (2) Non-subject to 
Sastra. Among these, liability to Sastra pertain 
to those Bound (souls) who have the (moral) 
consciousness dependant on the several senses. 
Such is not the case with animals and stationary 
(creatures). The (souls) subject to Sastra are 
of two classes (again): coveters of material 

■*** Bija-vfksha-nyaya ; L e. the never-ending recur- 
rence of plant from seed, and seed from plant. 

“*The UhyUtmka, self-inflicted;- adhibhautiha, 
other-infficted ; ddhidaivila, by divine visitation. 



VI JL] THE SOUL 125 

happiness [bubhukskn) and coveters of spiritual 
happiness {mumukshti\ The former cling to 
the Triad'*^ of life-ambitions. These (again) 
are of two classes : those that cling to Wealth 
and Delights, and those that cling to Duty. 
The former are those who labour under the 
notion that body is soul. The latter are those 
who are launched on Sacrifices {yajna\ Charity 
(dana\ Austerities {fapas\ Pilgrimage {tlrfha- 
yatra) etc.y all falling under the head 'Duty' 
as per the enunciation: — 

' Duty is that which paves the way for happi- 
ness to come {alatikika) ' and, 

' Duty is that which is the Way (or meaiis}^ 
established by (incentive) Injunction.'/^*® 

The four ambitions of life are; (i) Dhmma 
(duty) (2) artha (wealth) (3) hama (delights) and 
(4) mohsha (redemption), (i), (2)and (3) constitute the 
Triad, called Tmivargika^ and (4) is the Apavarga. 

Qaimini-Sutras ; I. i. 2] ; ‘ Codana-lahshanolyck 
^rtho dharmafiP i.e., the injunctions of the Scriptures 
{alaukika) alone provide the incentive to duty, which 
done, does not bring to the man immediate result as 
would accrue to a worldly effort on which an im- 
mediately realisable corresponding fruit is always 
contingent. 



YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA 


126 


[Advent 


These are believers in the Soul as distinct 
from the body, and in that there is the other 
(highest or spiritual) world to come. The par- 
tisans of Duty [dharma) are of two classes 
(again) : those, adherents of other deities ; and 
those, of God {Bhagavdn). The adherents of 
other deities are the worshippers of Brahma, 
Rudra etc. The adherents of God are those 
devotees who come under the text: 

‘The aggrieved, the seeker, the ambitious 

The aggrieved {drta) is he who has lost 
his fortune and is desirous of recovering it. The 
ambitious (arthdrthi) is he who longs to grow 
rich anew. The Seekers (of redemption, Mu- 
mukshu) are of two classes, viz., those who 
wish for Isolation (kaivalya) and those who 
wish for Divinity {moksha), Kaivalya or Iso- 
lation is the meta-physical soul- bliss secured by 
the Path of Knowledge [jndna). This Soul-bliss 
is isolate from God-bliss, and is experienced in a 
Comer of the Spiritual Universe, — in the manner 

jigmsiify afthaHhi, piani, ca Bhamtav- 
s^aMal&c. [Bhagavad^Gita: VIL 16]. 



VIII.] 


THE SOUL 


127 


of the wife who has lost her husband, — after 
travelling along the Way of Light etc. {arcir-adi- 
mtirgay*^ Some opine that as those who 
have travelled along the Path of Light can no 
more return, there is a Corner assigned in the 
Physical Lfniverse itself, where they are absorbed 
in their own Soul-bliss [atma-nubhava). 

The Aspirers for Divinity or God-bliss are of 
two kinds : (i) The God-lovers {bhaktas), and (2) 
the God-leaners (prapannas). The God-lovers 
are those who have learnt the Vedas with all its 
limbs and the Upanishads {siraska), become 
versed in the metaphysics of the Vedas, early 
and later parts thereof, thereby acquiring the 
Knowledge of God {Brahman), as Him who is 
distinct from (the Categories) of Conscients {cit) 
and Non-conscients {acit ), — as Him whose essen- 
tial nature is bliss, exalted and measureless, — as 
Him who is hostile to all evil and full of all 
Holy Graces ; and then resort to the Path of 
Love {bhakti) leading to Him, thereby aspiring 
to reach salvation (moksha). 

Read Bhagavad-Gita : VIII. 24 ^and analogous 
Upanishadic passages. 



128 


YATlNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [Advent 


The fitness for (the Path of) Love abide in the 
V^aic Triad-"'®, as also in the Devas (deities 
or superhuman creatures) ; for in these the atti- 
tude of supplication {arthitva\ and ability to 
perform [bhakti) {samarthya), stibsist.®"'®^. The 
Sudras are not entitled thereto, for reasons 
ai^ed out in the Apa-4udra Section."®*^ 

The Character of (God-) Love has been 
delineated in the Section on Consciousness 
(VII). The (God-)Lovers are of two kinds: 
(i) those who practise love with a Motive 
{sadhana)f and ( 2 ) those who practise the same 
as an End in itself {sadhya), Vyasa etCy belong 
to the former class; Natha (muni) etCy to the 
latter. 

The Surrendered {prapannay or God-Leaner) 
is he who is distinguished by the qualifications of 

■** /. e,y the Three Empowered or Eligible Classes 
,or Castes (Varm)y viz. Brahmana, Kshatriya and 
Vaisya. 

See Vedanta-Sutras : [ 1 . 3. 25] ; ‘ Tad upary api 
Badarayanas sambhavdfJ Also Cp. with Rk-Samhita, 
X. 167-1 ; Tndral tapdh pavitapy djayas^a\ 

Vedanta-Sutras: [ 1 . 3. 33]; Sugasya tad-anUam- 
^sravamf ’ etc. 



VIIL] 


THE SOUL 


129 


Waylessmss and Resortlessness f and reposes 
(solely) on the Lord (JBhdgavan), He (or It) is of 
two sorts: who longs for the Triad of objects,®®^ 
and who longs for emancipation {moksha). The 
aspirer for the Triad is he who longs for the ful- 
filments of duty, for wealth and for joys.^®* The 
aspirer for emancipation (or the Supreme Goal) 
is he who by association with the good (and 
wise) has acquired discrimination of what is 
lasting and what fleeting, what transcendent and 
what insignificant, and thereby loses all relish 
{vairagya) for worldliness {samsara) and pants 
for salvation {moksha). To attain this desired 
end he repairs to a Spiritual Teacher {acdrya), 
who is indued with adequate qualities as per 
te^ 

" The Teacher is the versed in the Vedas etc 

See a Treatise on these two qualifications by 
PiJJai Lokacarya, Englished in the Indian Anfiqmry 
for November, igio* * He * used for Soul is same 
as * It 

I. e. Dhavma, Artha, Kmm (the Tmimfgika.) 
See note 245, p: 125. 

Acaryo V eda-sdmpannaJi Vishnu-lhahto vimaisdmh 
Miantrajho manfm-hhuktas ca soda mantrdsrayas sucik, 
[D vay -opanishat] . 



130 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPiKA [Advent 

and through him seeks Sri the (Saviour), in 
Whom vests the function of mediation {purusha- 
kdra)* and (finally), realising his lack of 
power to pursue the Paths of Love ek., 
and therefore realising his position as one 
who is bereft of all Ways and Means {akin- 
cam-{a)nanya-gatih) t accepts as his sole 
Means of salvation, the Holy Feet of the 
Blessed Lord {Sriman-Ndraymia). Such is 
the God-leaner {prapanna). 

Surrender (prapatti) is the High Path to 
all. The surrendered (God-leaner) is of two 
sorts; the One-pointed {Ekdnti) and the One- 
only-pointed {Param-aikdnti). The One-Point- 
ed is the person who addresses himself to 
God alone for the grant of other (i.e. worldly) 
boons as well as salvation {tnoksha) ; and is 
therefore one to whom other deities (or demi- 
gods) are of no account. The One-only- 
pointed is the person who does not crave for 
any boons even from God Himself except 

♦ See note 3. 

fSee PiJlai Loka’carya’s Rahasya : ‘ The Refugee's 
Rdage’ in the ‘Indian Antiquary,’ Vol. xxxix, 
November, 191a 



VIII.] THE SOUL 131 

Knowledge and Love (of Him).®®* This latter 
is again of two sorts; the Patient and the 
Impatient. The Patiait is he who bows to 
the inevitable suffering-out of the fructescent 
iprarabdha) kaima, according to the text : — 

Hnevitably it must be suffered and 

(patiently) waits for salvation to follow on the 
expiry of (the term of) this body. The Impatient 
is he who feels his presence in worldliness 
unbearable, as if he were placed in the midst 
of raging flames, and pants for deliverance 
(or redemption) immediately on craving God 
therefor. 

The Freed {mukta or the Absolved) is he who 
has accepted the Path, and performs all duties ; 
routine, casual, and all decrees of the Divine, 
primary and secondary, for the sake of duty. 
He avoids all offences against God and the 
Godly ; and at the time of casting off the body, 

Read : ‘ Tat-pada-hhaMi-pianabhyam phalam 
anyat haiacana, na yacet pranato Vishnum yacanaii 
naSyati dhyuvaird 

‘ AvaSyam anubiwktavyam kftam kam:a Subhd- 
’stibham, n& ’bkuktam- kshiyate harma kalpa-koii Safaiy 
api’. [Maha-Bharata ?]. 



132 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKS [AdVCtlt 

bequeaths his merits and demerits to his friends 
and foes (respectively) ; * and rests in peace in 
the Supreme Lord who abideth in the heart, as 
stated in the text : — 

‘ Rest speech in mind etc.' 

(After resting thus a while), It (the Soul) 
enters into the organ (called the) Sushumna, 
the door to the Spiritual State {mukti), and 
thence emerges out of the (head-) Orifice 
(called the) Brahma-randhra. Accompanied 
by the Lord (abiding) in the heart, It thence 
passes along the rays of the Sun to the world of 
Fire {agni-loka), and thence journeys on, adored 
on the Way by the Presiding Deities of the Day, 
the Half-month, the Summer Solstice, the Year 
etc^ and (the Deity) Air. From there It speeds 
through the sphere of the Sun, and through the 
wheel of his chariot and the stars, enters the 
world of the Sun. Thence again It is conduct- 
ed in great ceremony by the Hosts of Guides 

* For the distribution made of merits and demerits, 
see Kaushitakt-Bfakma^opaniskai. 

■ " [IC»thopanisk 9 l III, 13] : ‘ Yacched van manasi 



VIIL] THE SOUL 133 

{utivahika), the Moon, the Lightning (-Lord), 

Varupa, Indra, Prajapati, etc. Passing thus 

through the several realms owned by these. It 
crosses (the River) Viraja, the boundary dividing 
matter from Vaikupfha.* Here It casts off 
the subtle body, and is received by Amanava. 
It (the Soul) is now robed in an immaterial divine 
Form, four-armed, and is decorated Brahman- 
fashion. It (now) enters the City of Vaikuptha,* 
with the permission of the sentinels bearing 
the names Indra and Prajapati.'^®’' Passing 

through a towerd gate flying with banners and 
flanked by stretching ramparts. It feasts its eyes 
■with the nectar-lake the Airammada, and the fictts 
tree the Soma-savana. It is now greeted by five 
hundred damsels, in groups of hundred, as 
stated in the text : — 

‘A hundred (damsels) with garlands in 
hand etc,' and is beautified by Brahma-perfume 

* The Heaven of heavens, cm: that Spiritual State 
■which is delvered of all hindrances or limitations. See 
further, foot-note 2, to page 574, Artha-PcMtaka, 
JRAS, for July, 1910. 

See Kaushitaki~B*S^man-etpaini.shat', as also Chan- 
degya and Bfhad-amnya-Vp ® for all the descriptions 



134 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPiKA [Advent 


eic. It then salutes (the Eternals or Archangels) 
Ananta, 'Garuda, Vishvaksena etc, resident there 
and is equally treated so in return. It then pro- 
ceeds to the Superb-gemmed Pavilion, and rend- 
ers obeisance, at the (blessed) Seat, to Its Spiritual 
Teachers (who are there). Now It (Soul) approa- 
ches nearer the (Divine) Seat, where It finds the 
throne thereon, Dharma («/c).,-niade, the Lotus 
over it, and Ananta over again. On the Sides 
stand Vimala etc, -with fans (waving) in their hands, 
serving God (Bhagavan); Who is installed there 
with His (Queens) Sri, Bhu and Nila;-Who is be- 
decked with the Divine Weapons : Conch, Discus 
etc.r'Who is blazing -with the countless Divine 
Ornaments, the Crown, the Diadem; and, for the 
head, ears, neck, breast, arms, wrists, waist and 
ankles, such (jewels) as Cudavatamsa, Makara- 
kundala, Graiveyaka-hara, Keyura, Kataka, Sri- 
vatsa, Kaustubha, Mukta-damodara-bandhana, 
Pitambara, Kanciguija, Nupura etc ;’*’®-and Who 

here given of the Heavenly Sphere and the Heavenly 
Journey : also Mundak-opanishat. 

Consult PMwamtm works for these details. 
The idea of the Personal God ia here seen emphasis- 



THE SOUL 


135 


VIII.] 

is the boundless Ocean of Graces. God so in- 
stalled, the Soul sees; and approaching, plants Its 
foot on the Seat and is received into the lap of 
the Lord. To the inquiry ' Who art thou’. Soul 
says, ' I am Thy-make and His benign looks are 
dowered on It. From the ineffable bliss en- 
suant on joying with the Lord, Soul is lovingly 
stablished in Service to Him, at all places and for 
all times, in all situations and for all varieties 
(of service). The Octuple Graces^* dawn on the 
Soul, and It is for ever more installed in the joy 
of the Lord {Brahm-anubhava). Such Soul is 
the Absolved {mukta). Its equality with the 
Lord {Brahman) is as respects the bliss alone 
thereof ; for all concern with kosmic functions 

ed to an extent satisfying as well the sage as the boor, 
and covers the whole scale of God’s Being lying 
between the most absolute Ideal and the most 
concrete Symbol. For symbological explanations, see 
(my) Lives of Saints. 

See Ckaniogy-opanishat VIII. i. 5; ‘(i) Apahata- 
paptm, (2) vijaro, (3) vimftyur, (4) viSoko (5) viji- 
ghatso, (6) {aypipasas, ( 7 ) satya-hamas, (8) saiya- 
samkalpak. 

-«'>See Ved^ta-Sutras. IV. 4. 21; ‘ Bhoga-tmtvar 
sS/ntya-lingac ca ; See Mun^k-opamshat : III, i. 3- 



136 YATiNDRA-MATA-DipiKS [Advent 

is precluded by hypothesis.^' It could assume 
any form and visit any part of the Universe (at 
will). But if it be asked how, if the Absolved 
[mukta) returns not, as it is said,'®^ It can be 
free to roam there, we say : Not so, the return 
precluded is that (entailed) by karma ; not ex- 
cursions at Its own (freed) will (and pleasure). 
Hence the Absolved Soul, ever in harmony with 
the Will of the Lord {Bhagavan), freely every- 
where tours. 

The Eternals [Nityas or the Ever-Free), are 
those whose function is never at variance’ with 
the Will of the Lord {Bhagavan), and never 
therefore are they subject to their consciousness 
(ever) becoming dimmed. They are Ananta, 
Garuda, Vishvaksena and others. The functions 
appointed them in perpetuity are determined by 
the Eternal Will of God. Their Incarnations, 
like the Incarnations of God Himself, are deter- 
mined by choice (i. e. not compelled by karma). 

In the manner aforesaid, the (Category of ) 
Soul, comprised of the varieties of bound 

See ibid IV. 4. 17: ' Jagad-vyapara-varjam etc. 

See Ibid - ; [V. 4. 22]; ‘ Anwvrttii sabdSt etc. 



VIII.] 


THE SOUL 


137 


{baddha), freed {mukta), and eternal {nUya\ has 
been depicted."^^ 

Thus ends Advent VIII, 

The Treatment of the Soul {Jiva) 
in the 

* Light of the School of Ramanuja.^ 


Read Avtha-pancaka^ Pp: 572, JRAS, for 
July, 1910. If svafga, the Material paradise be trans- 
lated as heaven, Vmkttntha, the Spiritual Heaven 
becomes the Heaven of heavens. In all religions, 
the portrayal of this blessed state is necessarily made 
in material language. The saints of Christianity are, 
for example, said to be crowned with palms and 
amaranths, and perpetually singing hallelujas to God. 
Metaphorical language is thus unavoidable ; but this 
is certain that whether such language be of the con- 
ventional type germane to the genius of the European 
or of the Asiatic, the idea of the blessed state is never 
of the sensual but of the spiritual, quite a different 
order therefore of existence. For a dissertation on 
this subject, which oft embarasses mankind, see 
Intfoductions. to (my) Lives of Saints^ page xi passim. 

18 ' 



ADVENT IX. 
GOD (Isvara). 


Now (the category of) God {Isvara) will be 
inquired into. The characteristics of God are 
All-Lordship, All-Mastership, All-worshipfulness 
by work, All-fruit-givership, All-Support, All- 
energising, All-Word-indicated, All-knowledge- 
goal, All-bodiedness excepting His own body 
and consciousness.* 

God thus indicated is the Material (or Formal) 
Cause of the Universe by virtue of His aspect as 
the constituted of the Conscients and Non-cons- 
cients {cid-acid-vUishtah) •, is the Efficient (or 
Spiritual) Cause by virtue of His aspect as the 
Wilier ; and is the Instrumental Cause by virtue 
of His immanence in Time etc. The Material 
Cause is that which results as Effect by under- 
going modificat ion. The Efficient Cause is that 

* The epigrammatic style here employed, is, it is 
hoped, sufficiently lucid. It at any rate obviates the 
nesessity for otherwise long-phrasing, detracting 
from the poetry attaching to terseness. 



IX. J GOD 139 

which causes modifications so as to result 
into Effect. The Instrumental Cause is that 
which helps the resulting into Effect. Or this- 
wise: — The Material Cause is that inevitable 
antecedent state adequate to effectuate the 
immediate consequent state; as illustrated by 
the consequent state of being the jar effect- 
ed from the antecedent state of being the 
clod of earth. The Effective Cause is that 
which is required to be different from the 
modification (or the modifying). In this case 
the Instrumental Cause is included in the 
Effective (cause). Whichever be the position 
adopted, the three-foldness or the two-foldness 
of the Cause, the characteristics of Cause is 
evident, and this is found in the (Prime) Cause 
of the Universe, the Blessed All-God {Bhaga- 
van Ndrayana). 

If it be asked how in Narayana rests (or abides) 
the (ultimate) causality, the reply is:— Such con- 
clusion is arrived at after an examination of all 
the Vedanta Texts (bearing on the question), 
rationally argued out. Thus: To b^in with, 
matter cannot be the Cause of the Universe, for 



140 yatindra-mata-dipikA [Advent 

it is devoid of thinking^®* etc. In the Chhandogya 
(-Upanishat) however, that which is indicated by 
the terms : Sat, AkaSa (Ether), Prana, is seen 
to be (stated as) the Cause of the Universe. In 
the Vajasaneyaka (Up° ), the term Brahman is 
discovered (to be so). By the canon known as 
the ‘ resultant import of all the branches (of the 
Veda)’,’**' all the texts which relate to Cause (of 
the Universe) must be interpreted to signify one 
Specific Object. Hence terms of general import 
such as Sat (Being) etc., must ultimately connote 
the specific Brahman, according to the (ana- 
logical) rule of ‘ goat-animal In the manner 

Read \yedanta-Sutyas I. i. 5]; Ikshater na ’Sab- 
dam. Thinking or mind. 

Known as the sarva-Sakhd-pratyaya-nydya. 

*** Known as the Ckdga-paSu-nydya, which means 
that when an animal is mentioned as eligible for 
sacrifice, the question necessarily arises as to what 
animal is particularly meant ‘ Goat’ is the answer, 
which is decisive. Hence general terms such as sad 
etc., find their ultimate decisive significance in a 
definite (specific) term, which is found to be Nara- 
yana, by an examination of the various generic terms 
bearing on the subject and which are scattered in 
various parts erf the Veda, 



IX.] GOD I4I 

aforesaid, the term Brahman is next circumscrib- 
able into the (more specific) term Atman found 
in the Aitareya (-Upanishat). What then is in- 
dicated by this term Atman , — the Vedic celebrity 
Indra ? Or Agni, of similar report ? Or Suiya, 
known as the adorable ? Or Soma, said to be the 
Cause ? Or Kubera, known to be the bestower of 
whatever is desired ? Or Yama ? Or Varuija ? 
When such doubt arises, they (deities or demi- 
gods) may be disposed of as incapable of being 
the Cause of the Universe, by reason of their 
being known to be subject to karma and pos- 
sessed of limited affluaice. 

But in the Svetasvatara (-Upanishat), it is 
apparent that Siva is (stated to be) the Cause 
(of the Universe). Similarly in the Atharva- 
Sikha (-Upanishat), the entity designated Sam- 
bhu is mentioned as the object of adoration 
and as Cause. Likewise in the Atharva-Siras 
(-Upanishat), the entity designated as Rudra 
is stated to be the Soul of all (things). 
And in the Taittiriya, Hirapya-garbha is men- 
tioned as the Cause of the . Universe. In all 
these cases, applying the canon (of interpretation) 



142 yATiNDRA-MATA-DipiKA [Advent 

known as the ‘ Generic- Specific {sdmanya- 
visesha-nydya), the fact of the general terms 
Siva, Sambhu and Rudra finding their speci- 
fic significance in Hirapyagarbha will be clear. 
Again if the radical (or etymological) sense of 
the term Siva be considered, it means well or 
good (or auspicious) as may be seen from the 
usages; ‘ Let it be well with all the Universe’, 
‘Let the deed be good', ‘Let thy path be 
good ’ etc. Similarly Rudra signifies Agni-(fire). 
Hence, judged by the et 5 miological force of 
such common terras as Mahelvara, Sambhu 
etc., they find their particular significance in 
the Fourfaced (entity, Hirapyagarbha). 

But a protest may be entered why the 
terms Siva etc., referred to as the Cause (of the 
Kosmos) should not through their primary signi- 
ficance, (be construed to) indicate Rudra ? This 
cannot be done, inasmuch as the origination of 
Rudra (§iva) is narrated (in the Scriptures) as 
happening from the Four-faced (Demiurge), and 
Rudra is not free from (the taints of) sin ; and 
therefore cannot constitute the Cause, (of the 
Universe). Hence terms such as Siva etc., receive 



143 


IX.] GOD 

their ultimate connotation as the Four-faced, 
severally designated as Hiraiiyagarbha, Praja- 
pati, Svayambhuh 

By a similar ratiocination, the terms Sva- 
yambhulj, Hirapiyagarbha and Prajapati may be 
traced up to (the Ultimate Source) Narayapa, for 
Narayaija, as the Supreme Cause, as the Being 
that all terms connote, as the Saviour {moksha- 
prada), as the Kosmos-bodied etc., is proved in 
the Mahopanishat, Narayap-opanishat, Subal- 
opanishat, Maitrayaijiya (-Upanishat), Purusha- 
sukta, Narayaiia- ’nuvaka, Antaiyami-Brahmatia 
etc. Hence Narayaija alone is the Cause of all 
the Kosmos, and the Knowable of all sciences. 

No doubt need arise that the Science (of God) 
called the Antar-aditya-vidya may relate to 
Rudra, for from a majority of authorities (Script- 
ures), it is proved that it relates to Vishnu. The 
term Bharga is not to be imderstood as (a mas- 
culine-indicating) termination ; A (3T). Nor need 
a doubt arise that in the Science, Dahara-vidyd, 

See Indian Antiquary Vol. xxxix for Nov. 
1910. viz., PiJlai Loki'carya’s Rakasya : ‘ Refugee’s 
Refuge.’ 



144 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPiKA [Advent 


the term Akasa implying Narayapa, has Rudra 
for its In-dwelling (antaryami), for the In-dwell- 
ing there referred to are the auspicious graces or 
perfections inhering in Narayaija. In this same 
way the interpretations of all the Sciences 
[Vidyas) may be conceived.^® 

The inference thus is that He who is possessed 
of all Holy Graces, Perfections, Glories, Who is 
distinct from ras.tte:ciprakrti)axiA. sovl{purusha), 
Who is constituted of these, the Supreme Brah- 
man, vis., Narayana, is the Cause of the Kosmos. 

But it may be alleged that according to the 
monistic {advaita) texts (of the Scriptures), 
Brahman alone is real and undifferentiated 
(= devoid of attributes); what is fancied in it 
(Brahman) as the ‘ being cognizer ’ {subject) and 
as the " being cognized ’ {object) etc., is illusory ; 
Brahman (itself) in consequence of nescience 
{avidya) revolves in material life (samsara) ; the 
monistic knowledge gained from such texts as : 

‘ That thou art ’ 

See (my) Bhagavad-Gita with Ramanuja’s Com- 
mentary, Table of the 32 Vidyas. Pp. 129-130 

'Tat tvam asi Svetahetol &c’ [Chkandogya-Up° 
VL 7f]- 



IX.] GOD 145 

dispels it (i. e. samsara or avidya). When thus, 
views such as these held by other schools, go to 
establish the sense of the Vedanta (texts) to point 
to an undifferentiated Brahman, which is but 
consciousness absolute, how could they connote 
Narayana, and the discourse (hold) that He is 
possessed of all the Holy Graces (or Excellent 
Attributes) ? The reply to this is thus ; — From 
the texts referring to the Cause (of the Universe), 
Narayana has been shown as the Cause; the 
conflict that seems to exist between the dua- 
listic and monistic texts is reconcilable by means 
•of the reconciling (or arbitration, texts; 

the texts that seem to import non-differentia- 
tion (or quality-lessness) are interpretable 
as meaning absence of evil qualities ; as there 
is no authority by which to suppose a nes- 
cience, consequent on which the notions ‘ cog- 
nizer ’ and the ‘ cognizer ’ come to be fancied, 
the Effect (generating) from Brahman is real ; 
if by nescience, Brahman itself rolls into mate- 
rial life as Soul (Jiva), the faults pertaining to 
the Soul necessarily attach to Brahman, and no 
other agent (than Brahman) can be conceived 

19 



146 YATiNDRA-^rATA-DiPiiCA [Advent 

as the banisher (of that material life). As 
therefore the contention of monism cannot be 
sustained, no undifferentiated Brahman, as 
but mere consciousness is established; ergo^ 
Brahman is full of exquisite Graces, and is 
Narayana, Who is the Source of the Kosmos, 
and Bestower of eternal bliss [moksha) etc. 

Brahman, as constituted of the Subtle, Gons- 
cient {cit) and the Non-conscient [acit) alone is 
the Cause of the Kosmos ; and as constituted 
of the Gross Conscient and Non-conscient, alone 
is the Effect. Thus the creed of the Visishta- 
dvaita Vedantins is that no Cause is different 
from its Effect.^^® 

As God {lsvara)is admitted, the views of the 

This is the law of Correlation. Every Effect 
has its own antecedent Cause to which it is correlat- 
ed as gross to subtle. This is also the great 
doctrine of Evolution {pannama^vada) which Rama- 
nuja formulates and emphasizes. What is the 
evolute but its evolvent itself manifested in a 
different mode. No teak tree can be a product of a 
banyan seed. The Vedantic evolution is triform, 
i.e. of the whole Complex Entity: the Visishta- 
Brahman, i.e. God-Soul-Matter, vide Pp; 49 ff of my 
Vade Mecmn of Vedmta. 



IX.] 


GOD 


H7 

Schools of God-less Sankhya, the Mimaitisakas 
etc., are exploded. As Material Causality is pre- 
dicated (by us) of this same (God), the views of 
the Schools of Yoga, PaSupata and Naiya3dka 
are confuted, for their admission of God is con- 
fined to His Efficient Causation only. 

In the same manner as Material as well as 
Efficient causation is ascribable to God, are 
ascribable to Him the faculties of action, stimu- 
lation, governance, illuminance, permission, suc- 
cour, neutrality and so forth. 

In the same manner as the imperfections 
(known as) childhood, youth etc., pertain to the 
body {sarira), not the body-holder (Sariri), the 
soul, so is it in the case of the All-Soul (Para- 
matman), the bodied of Soul (czt) and Non- 
soul (acit). There is thus no conflict with 
the Sruti (Scriptures) which proclaims the un- 
modifiable (character of God). As a rule, 
what is cognised as ‘ body ’ in the world is 
what possesses the properties of being ‘sus- 
tained’ [adheyatva], ‘ controlled ’ {vidheyatva), 
and ‘ subordinated ’ (seshatva) (by Soul) ; the 
Kosmos is the ‘ body ’ of God ; but the 



148 YATiNDRA-MATA-DlPIK 5 [AdvCIlt 

imperfections pertaining to the body do not 
effect Him. 

This God (ISvara) is infinitive ( vibhu). To 
be infinite is to be pervading. This (pervasion) 
is threefold: (i) By essence, (2) By attributive 
consciousness, (3) By representation ( vigraha J. 
He is called boundless (Ananta). Boundless 
means the negation of the three kinds of limi- 
tations. The three kinds of limitations are those 
(i) by space, (2} by time and (3) by thing. 

The qualities of Truth (satyatva), Holiness 
(amalatva), Illimitability {anantafva), betoken 
the essential nature of God ; the qualities of 
Omniscience (jnana), Omnipotence etc., 

describe Him, on such (essential) characteris- 
ation. The qualities of Omniscience, Omni- 
potence etc., are requisite for purposes of Crea- 
tion. The qualities of Love, Meekness, Acces- 
sibility etc., are requisite for suasion (to souls) 
to take shelter. The qualities of Mercy etc., are 
useful for purposes of protection. The import 
of these qualities has been discussed in the Sec- 
tion on Consciousness, and no expatiation here 
is therefore called for. 



IX.] 


GOD 


149 


This God first created the (Mundane) Egg ; and 
then by His immanency in the Four-faced [Catur- 
mukha ), Daksha,. Time efc., continues creation. 
He becomes the Protector by incarnating as 
Vishnu, abiding in Manu, Time eic., and direct- 
ly Himself. He is Destroyer by His indwelling 
in Rudra, Time, the destroyer (Yama) eic. Hence 
He is the Creator, Protector and Destroyer. 

God as thus depicted assumes five aspects : 
( i) Para or the Transcendent, (2) Vyuha or the 
Grouped, (3) Vibhava or the Incarnated, (4) 
Antaryaml or the Immanent, and {$}Archa or 
the Imaged. The Para is Narayana, variously 
called by the names Parabrafama etc., Vasudeva 
etc., Who, four-armed, and beaming with His 
beatific presence, is exalted on the throne poised 

V 

on its eight supports Dharma etc., with Sesha 
over the seat, erected in the gemmed pavilion in 
the Divine Hall, guarded by the sentries ; Canda, 
Pracapda, Bhadra, Subhadra, Jaya, Vijaya, 
Dhatri, Vidhatri etc., in the Vaikunfha-named- 
City of the Thrice-Magnificent Land,*” protected 

*^'Read: “Tyipadasyd ’'mntm [Purusha- 

sukta]. 



150 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [AdveUt 

by such city-keepers as Kumuda, Kamudaksha, 
Punclarika, Vamana, Sankukaroa, Sarpanetra, 
Sumukha, Supratishtha etc.^ all divinely adorn- 
ed and armed, with all the paraphernalia of 
servitors etc Who is supported by Sri, Bhu, 
Nila etc,^ armed with the divine weapons 
Conch, Discus etc.<, decked with the divine 
ornaments Crown efc.j — ^Who is enjoyed by 
the ^Eternals’ : Ananta, Garuda,Vishvaksena efc,y 
ever chanting forth the Hymns of Sama, and 
by other redeemed Souls {mukta)—zn<l Who is 
the Home of all the countless Holy Graces : 
Wisdom, Power Vyuha (the Gregated or 
Grouped) is the fourfold aspect (of God) viz,, 
Vasudeva^ Sahkarsharia, Pradyumna, and Ani- 
ruddha, designed for purposes of worship, 
creation of the worlds etc. Of these, Vasu- 
deva has the full complement of the Six Quali- 
ties ; Sahkarshana has Wisdom and Strength ; 
Pradyumna has Wealth and Power ; and Anirud- 
dha Energy and Lustre; Thus are the (Six) 

See note 263. For all the descriptions here 
given the reader is referred to the oceanic literature 
known as the Pmcavafms, (see JRAS for October 
1911). 



IX.] GOD 15 1 

Qualities distributed. Each one of these four (as- 
pects) hypostatize {avatar ati) into three. They 
(thus) number twelve : Kesava etc ; and they 
are the Presiding Deities of the twelve Suns of 
the twelve months. Their locations by vertical 
markings (on the body of the devotee) are fixed. 
Amongst them (twelve), Kesava is gold-colour- 
ed and wears four Discuses ; Narayai^a, dark- 
coloured, wears four Conches ; Madhava, gem- 
coloured, wears four Clubs ; Govinda, moon- 
coloured, wears four Bows; Vishyu, lotus- 
blossom-coloured, wears four Ploughs;Madhusu- 
dana, lotus-coloured, wears four Maces ; Trivi- 
krama, fire-coloured, wears four S words; Vamana, 
young-Sun-coloured, wears four Vajras ; Srl- 
dhara, lotus-coloured, wears four Shields ; 
Hrshikesa, lightning-coloured, wears four 
Maces; Padmanabha, sun-coloured, wears the 
Five Weapons ; Damodara, tndragopa-coloured 
bears four Cords. 

Vibhava or Incarnate Manifestation (or 
objectification) is the assumption (by God) of 
Forms resembling those of the Order (of Crea- 
tion, in which Pie wills to appear). Ten of them 



152 YATiNDRA-MATA“DiPiKA [Advent 

are reckoned as by far the most renowned. 
They are the unique incarnations ; the Matsya, 
the Kurma etc. Of these the Mafsya Incarna- 
tion was undertaken in order to overcome the 
Daityas who stole the Vedas, and restore them 
(viz., the Authority) to Brahma. The Kurma 
Incarnation was undertaken in order to extract 
ambrosia {amrfa)y (from the Milk Sea), calculated 
to bestow (lasting) health and immortality on 
beings. The Vardha Incarnation was undertaken 
in order to raise His Consort (Earth from the 
ocean) that He may (thus) exemplify his power 
to) lift creatures drowned in the Ocean of 
worldliness [smnsdra\ The Narasimha Incar- 
nation was undertaken with a view to protect 
his protege (Prahlada) and kill the Asura 
(Hiranya-kaSipu),— by springing out of a pillar. 
The Vdmana Incarnation was undertaken in 
order to cleanse the worlds by means of water 
issuing from his lotus-feet (i.e. Gahga), by 
the transfigured (from Vamana) Trivikrama. The 
Parasurdma Incarnation was taken for the 
purpose of exterminating the wicked Kshatriyas. 
The Rama Incarnation was undertaken in order 



IX.] GOD 153 

to establish the Law of Righteousness {Dharmd). 
The Balabhadra and Rama Incarnations were 
assumed in order to overthrow Pralamba etc._ 
The Krshna Incarnation was donned with the 
object of pointing to men the Final Way (to 
blessedness).^''® The Kalki Incarnation is in- 
tended to put an end to the irreligious, and 
establish Righteousness in all its plenitude.®'* 
In this way, each one of these Ten Incarna- 
tions has countless varieties. 

Padmanabha etc., have also thirty-six ramifi- 
cations. Again are there (varieties of manifest- 
ations) such as Dadhibhakta, Hayagriva, Nara- 
Narayana etc. 

Likewise there are such other modal diversities 
as the Primary {Mtikhya), Secondary {Gaima}, 

Consult Bhagavad-Gita, particularly xviii. 66 
and the elaborate commentaries written thereon by 
the Acaryas. This forms the third of the Rahasya- 
traya, which is one of the 18 Rahasyas by Pil|ai 
Lokacarya, Nos. i, 12, 13, and 17 in the list given 
on Page 570. JRAS. for July, 1910. 

Read Vishnu- Put&kh, Rmnayuna, Bliarata, 
ilarivavisa, Bhagmata etc., for detailed accounts of 
all the Avataras (Incarnations). 

20 



154 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPiKA [Advent 

Full [Ptirna], Partial (AmSa), and Obsessing 
(AveSa). Amongst these, the distinction of 
Worshippable and Non-worshippable iSust be 
borne in mind. 

The reason for incarnating, is (God’s own) 
Will, not Karma.* As for the motif (for incar- 
nating), it is to protect the good, by destroying 
the wicked. 

The Immanent phase is that of abidance in 
the regions of the heart of the Soul through all its 
states of experience in heavens, hells etc., as the 
Souls’ (constant) Friend, and realisable by Yogis, 
Though co-dwelling with the Soul (Eastemal 
Partner), He is intact of taints affecting it. 

The Image-Incarnation is the species of Forms 
presented (for worship), in homes, hamlets, cities, 
selected hills etc., devoid of distances interposed 
by space and time; deigning to descend with 
His immaterial (i. e., spiritual) Person into any 
material substance as may lovingly be chosen by 

* I; e„ a necessitation contingent on the perfor- 
mance of an interested deed, but no such interested- 
ness of a selfish character can abide in the Deity. 
Hence His Incarnations emanate from a perfectly 
Free WUl. 



IX.] GOD 155 

the votary ; lending Himself to the sweet will of 
His worshipper in all details (of worship such 
as) bath, food, place and rest ; All-forgiving; the 
All-sufficient God t Four varieties of this (aspect) 
exist viz., Self-manifest (Svayam-Vyakta), 
Superhuman or Celestial ( Daiva ), Saint-made 
( Saiddha ) and Man-made ( Mdnusha J.”'® 

In all the Quintuple Hjrpostases aforesaid, 
God is ever present with Sri (or Grace, His 
Consort). So Sruti and other Authorities dec- 
lare. And therefore the view of those one- 
sided partisans who contend for Sri-lessness, 
is exploded. (The Category of) God has thus 
been propounded. 


Thus ends Advent IX, 

The treatment of God [Isvara) 
in the 

“ Light of the School of Ramanuja.” 


=”See the Quinary Group, I. Para-sva.r»pa, 
576-7. Artha-Patcaha, io JRAS, for July, 1910. 



ADVENT X. 

THE NON-SUBSTANCE {Adravya}. 


After the treatment thus given to (the Cate- 
gory) Substance (Dravya), that of non-substance 
will now be taken up. 

Non-substance is divisible into ten classes only 
viz. (i, 2, 3), the pure, motile or motive and 
dark (qualities inherent in matter), (4, 5, 6, 7, 8), 
Sound, Touch, Colour, Savour, Odour, (9) con- 
junction {Samyoga), and (10) Force (Sakti). 

Satva or Pureness is the non-Substance (or 
Quality) which is the root-cause of brightness, 
happiness, buoyancy etc., non-sensible, and other 
than force etc. It is of two kinds : Absolute 
Pureness (Suddha-satva) and mixed or Alloyed 
Pureness (Misra-satva). Absolute Pureness 
is the Pureness inherent in Substance, devoid 
from restlessnessness (Rajas) and dark- 
ness (Tamas). This (exists) in the Eternal 
Expanse (i. e. Spiritual Regions). Metaphori- 
cally (or secondarily) it is ascribed to God 



X." 


THE NON'SHRSTAKrE 



{!svara% its Initiator. The Mixed Puroiessis 
so called by reason of the association of pure- 
ness with restlessnessness and darkness. This 
pervades the Triune (== matter ? and is tropically 
(or secondarily) attributed to the soul (Jiva) 
consorting with it (matter]. 

Rajas or restlessness is the non-Substance 
(or Quality), which is the root-cause of passion, 
desire, greed, activity etc.-^ non-sensible and 
other than force eic. 

Tamos, darkness (or Dross) is the non-Sub- 
stance (or Quality), which is the root-cause of 
infatuation, inattention, listlessness etc,, non- 
sensible and other than force etc. 

These three (qualities) permeate matter con- 
terminously; adhere to the soul (which is) in bond- 
age with matter ; non-etemal; constantly fluxing; 
equipoised in the state of Dissolution {pralaya); 
agitated in the state of Creation (srshti) ; use- 
ful for the processes of Creation, Continuance 
and Dissolution; and ai"e the cause of the 
mutual contrarieties existing (in the Universe) 
detarmined by the dispensations or bent of God's 
Will. These (properties) are common (to this 



IS8 YATlNDRA-MATA-DiPiiCA [Advent 

Triad). (The differsntice are): — The Satva 
Quality is the cause of blessedness born of lucid 
knowledge etc., and productive of Redemption 
{moksha). The Rajas Quality is the cause of 
pain etc., bom of attachment &c., begot by 
karma,* and the means of bringing the supra- 
mundane (fruits) such as Svarga, Naraka, etc. 
The Tamas Quality is the cause of ignorance, 
lethargy etc., and productive of Damnation 
{naraka). Hence Satva etc., are Qualities ; and 
not possessed of the characteristics of Sub- 
stance. 

Sound which abides in all the Five Elements 
is that w’hich we cognize by the sense of hearing. 
It is of two descriptions: articulate aad non- 
articulate. The Fifty Letters (of the alphabet), 
A, K, C, T, T, P, Y, etc., comprise the articulate 
(sound), and this is utterable by means of the 
palate etc., by gods, men etc. The non-articulate 
(sound) is such as that emanating from a drum 

* The Law of Action and Re-action. On the 
moral plane it is the Nemesis or the Law of Retri- 
bution. When this Law is transcended, the state is 
that of Redemption {Mohsha). 



X.] 


THE NON-SUBSTANCE 


159 


etc- By the ear is sound, so described, apprehen- 
sible. Either by the sense (of hearing) emanant, 
or the excitative air vibrant, is sound perceived. 
But Scriptures speak of sound as Substance; 
how then can it be non-substance (i. e. quality) ? 
The escape (from this objection) consists in 
showing that the composition oiPranava [Aum) 
by its components A (^) etc.^ is made through 
what is signified (by A etc.^ viz ; Akdsa)A'^ 

. Touch is that Quality which we perceive by 
the sense of touch (in skin), other and separate 
(than those of the other senses). This is of 
three kinds: cold, warm and equable (tem- 

Though as a constituent part in a compound, 
and as cause to an effect, the constituent may bear 
the semblance of a substance, yet the fact that the 
constituent is so by means of its origin from, or 
dependency on, a medium makes it partake the 
characteristic of a non-substance, as for example, 
the sound A, though a material (or substantial) 
cause to produce Aum the effect, it is a quality by 
reason of its origination from, or dependency on, the 
substance Akasa or Ether. The significant {vacaha) 
is A, the signified (vahya) by that significant is 
Ether, of which the significant in the present case is 
as quality or attribute to substance. 



i6o YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPiKA [Advent 

peratnre). The cold touch is (perceivable) in 
water, the warm in fire, the equable in earth 
and air. Also it (touch) is divisible into what is 
modified, or effected (a ^pakaja) and 

what is unmodified or uneffected (causal or 
elementary a-pakaja). The former is in earth ; 
the latter is in the other three (viz., ether, fire 
and water). The touch pertaining in a special 
manner, to (such things as) nectar, poison, pearl, 
silk, stone, cow, Brahmana, Canda]a“^^ etc,^ is 
classifiable under the head ‘ effected.’ 

Physically, any combination or integration 
brought about by natural agencies, chiefly by fire, is 
a product. The quality of touch undergoes change 
by these processes. These maturatory physical pro- 
cesses, carry with them moral or spiritual conse- 
quences pari-passu. Thus a Canda]a is a low-caste 
personage. He becomes the ‘untouchable’ because 
he has so become by all the modifications produced 
by conditions such as natal, sacramental, social and 
moral; and the environments comprised of loathsome 
habits in food, drink, and marriage. If according 
to Matthew ix, 20, 21, a woman touching the hem 
Jesus is sanctified, there is meaning in the doc- 
trine that touching unclean objects contacts pollution. 
There is physical as well as moml contagion accord- 
ing to Brahmanic doctrines. 



X.] THE NON-SUBSTANCE l6l 

Colour is that Quality which is perceived by 
our sense of sight (eye) alone, other and sepa- 
rate (than the other qualities). It is of four 
kinds : white, red, yellow and dark. White of 
varieties is the colour found in silver, conch, 
shell, moon etc. Red of varieties is found in 
fire, rose, pomegranate, bandhit-jiva, corah 
ruby etc. Yellow of varieties is the colour found 
in gold, saffron, turmeric etc. Dark of varie- 
ties is the colour found in sapphire, bee, cloud, 
night (or darkness), tamala{^^ grass etc. Some, 
following the Sruti hold the view that yellow 
is a species of red. As an alternative (classific- 
ation), colour is twofold: radiant and non-radiant. 
Radiant is (what is found) in (self-) luminous 
(objects); the non-radiant is (what is found) in 

< Pentapetes PhcB7iicea, a plant with a red flo-wer 
which opens at midday and withers away the next 
morning at sunrise/ [Monier Williams* Saifiskrt- 
English’ Dictionary] . 

Xanthoehyinus Picforius, 

1. e., according to the passage in the Chh%|o- 
gya-Upanishat, vi. 4 . i; 'Yad ague fohitam fupmn 
tejasas tad mpam tacchuMam tad apdm yat hfshnmn 
fad, annasyat 
21 



i 62 YATlNDRA-MATA-DiPiKA [Advent 

such (things) as the eye, water, etc. Thus four- 
fold is colour, and therefore the view some main- 
tain that there is a fifth colour the variegated, is 
rejected. For reasons similar, the idea that 
there is a variegated odour, touch and savour, is 
debarred. 

Savour is the Quality perceptible to our sense 
of taste (tongue), other and of different species 
(than the rest of the qualities). It is of six kinds; 
sweet, sour, saline, bitter, pungent, and astrin- 
gent. The sweet varieties are of (such articles 
as) sugar-cane, milk, sugar etc. The sour 
varieties are of the mango, tamarind, myro- 
balan-fruit etc. The saline varieties are of salt, 
saline products etc. The bitter varieties are of 
margosa etc. The pungent varieties 
are of ginger, pepper, mustard etc. The astringent 
varieties are of the yellow myrobalan (gallnut) 
vibhitaki, mango-sprout etc. 

Odour is the Quality apprehensible by our 
sense of smell (nose), other and of a different 
order (than the other qualities). It is of two 

TnckosmtJm Palmata, alsoCucumisColooynthus. 

Teminalia Belcriea. 



X.J THE NON-SUBSTANCE 163 

kinds: odour and nnal-odour. The varieties of 
odour (or fragrance) are of sandal, musk, saffron, 
campaka etc. The mal-odours are what 
may be found in others than these. Odour is 
specifically of the earth, and varieties spring out 
of its modifications. The perception of odour 
in air, water etc., is by reason of its impregnation 
with earth and is tropically so (used) like the 
expression ‘ iron bums.’ Though all quali- 
ties may abide in all the elements in virtue of 
their (elements’) quintuplicity, (the assignment of) 
particular qualities (to particular elements) is by 
reason of (their) predominancy. There is thus no 
contradiction. The change of quality, consequent 
on maturation, (or modification a substance 
may undergo) occurs in its own sub-stratum (i.e. 
in the same substance). When this (change) is 
explicable by the non-disappearance of its own 
substratum, the tenet that the atoms (them- 
selves) undergo change is untenable.”®' 

®*® Michelia Champaka, 

“®* It is the fire that burns, but tropically (dir 
metaphorically) the burning is imputed to iron. 

^®' The VaiSesMlia School thinks that heat acts on 
the atoms composing a jar, atoms change, and hence 



164 


YATiNDRA-MATA-pipiKS [Advent 


Conjunction {Sathyogd) is the (Quality which 
is the) cause of the cognition of the conjunct 
(objects). This quality is universal to the Six 
Substances.’*®® 

The contradiction of its non-existence as well 
as existence in the substratum, is accountable by 
the fact of the substratum having diverse parts.®®’’ 
Conjunction (a Quality) is both of the non- 
etemal and of the eternal character. The former 
(subsists) in limited (objects) by the impulse 
of both the ‘ conjunct ’ (objects) as two goats or 
two duellists (rushing towards each other for 
combat), or by the impulse of one, as of a hawk 
perching on a post.®®’ Some talk of a Conjunction 

quaMes change ; whereas the Na3Trayika School 
thinks that it is otherwise. The former are 
known as the Pilu-paha-vaMns, the latter Pithara- 
paha-vaiins. [See Tafha-Samgmha-Dipiha,!]. 

■*® Consult Advent IV. The Six Substances are, 
(i) Matter, (2) Time, (3) Pure Matter, (4) Attributive 
Consciousness, (5) Soul, (6) God. Cohesion, Adhe- 
sion, Molecular, Magnetic, Chemical etc., attraction 
may all be grouped under this Quality. 

For example, if a bird is perched on the top of 
fl steeple, the conjunction of the bird with the steeple 
exists at the top which is a part of the steeple 



X.] THE NON-SUBSTANCE 165 

originating from a Conjunction, for example the 
conjunction of a book with the body, arising 
from its (book’s) conjunction with the hand; 
but we say no, inasmuch as one conjunction — 
hand with book — implies the other, and no two 
successive conjunctions, therefore, one springing 
from the other (need predication). For similar 
reasoning, the origination of a Disjunction from 
another Disjunction is also discarded. Disjunct- 
ion (Vibhaga or Viyoga) is none other than 
the negation of Conjunction of bodies ; hence 
it is not a distinct Quality. The Eternal 
(kind of) Conjunction is between infinite 
(vibhu ) substances. Conjimction of eternal {lit. 
non-originated = aja) substances, is admitted 
by Sruti (Vedas) ; by Inference also the Con- 
junction of eternal substances is establishable 
thus : — 

‘An infinite substance has conjunctkm with an 
infinite substance, 

For it is substance. 

Like the jar’; (or), 

and not ejdsts at its bottom, which is its (steeple’s) 
another part. 



1 66 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPiKA [Advent 

‘An infinite substance is conjoined with God 
{Isvara), 

For it is substance, 

Like the jar ' ; (or), 

‘God (Jsvara) is conjoined with Time etc.y 
For He is substance, 

Like the jar/ 

By such (ratiocinations), the Conjunction of 
infinite substances is stablished.*®® 

Now, Force is that particular non-Substance 
(i e. Quality) which stands as the reason of all 
causation. This is made evident both by Infer- 

An objection is raised ; how can two or more 
infinites be conjoined, inasmuch as conjunction 
implies partition ; but when there is partition or 
division, the substance cannot be infinite? This 
objection is met by saying that infinites are eternally 
conjoined and never brought about in time, and 
hence possible; and this is supported by the Reve- 
lations (§ruti). The conjunction therefore is of the 
metaphysical, ideal, or spiritual description, and there- 
fore bears no analogy to physical or spatial conjunc- 
tions, except the mere fact of conjunction. What is 
meant is the co-substantiality of infinites ; that is, 
two or more infinites can co-exist, their infinitiveness 
remaining unaffected. 



X.] 


THE NON-SUBSTANCE 


167 


ence as well as Scriptures {Agama). That 
Force (or Power) which is not palpable to the 
senses, is that by which fire ceases to bum when 
obstructed by the presence of such things as 
gems, charms etc., though there is no paucity of 
substance to help its nature (i. e., help fire to 
bum). The existence of such (power) is evident 
in the magnet. This power abides in (all) the 
Six Substances.’®® The abidance (of Force) in 
God {Bhagavan). is stablished by the ‘Gem- 
Puraija’ ( = Vishni* Puratta) etc. Hence the 
Quality known as Force (or Power) is dis- 
coverable universally. 

But if it be asked how when Qualities have 
been enumerated as Twenty-four,’” only Ten 

(i) Matter, (2) Time, (3) Pure Matter, 

(4) Attributive Consciousness, {5) Soul, (6) GoA [See 
Advent IV]. 

The Sixteen according to 'lav’korSaihgraha 
are:— (i) Colour, (2) Savour, (3) Odour, (4) Touch, 

(5) Number, (6) Extension, (7) Severalty, (8) Con- 
junction, (9) Disjunction, (10) Priority, (ii) Poster- 
iority, (12) Gravity, (13) Fluidity, (14) Viscidity, 
(15) Sound, (16) Thought, (17) Pleasure, (18) Pain, 
(19) Desire, (20) Aversion, {21) Will, (22) Virtue, 
(23) Vice, (24) Faculty. 



1 68 YATlNDRA-MATA-DiPIKA [Advcnt 

have been recognised, the reply is : that as al- 
ready shown, the Six (Qualities) Thought, Plea- 
sure, Pain, Desire, Aversion and Will (or 
Effort) are but states of Consciousness — qualities 
or attributes of the Soul {Jiva-'tma). Virtue and 
Vice, contingent (respectively) on the Grace 
and Wrath of God, are resolvable into 
the Consciousness of God; The Power of 
Imagination is resolvable into a state of Cons- 
ciousness, the Power of Momentum is account- 
able from the cause of Momentum (Energy), and 
the Power of Elasticity is accounted for by- 
means of Conjunction. The Five (Qualities), 
Sound, Touch, Colour, Savour, and Odour are 
admitted as evident to the senses. Disjunction 
and Severalty are resolvable into the Negation 
of Conjunction. Priority and Posteriority are 
accountable by particularities of Space and 
Time. Number, Extension, Fluidity and Viscid- 
ity are accountable by the very nature of the 
substances to which they pertain. Gravity is 
properly resolvable into Force. Hence (the 
analysis of Non-Substance into) Ten, accords 
with reason. 



X.] 


THE NON-SUBSTANCE 


169 


Amongst these, Pureness, Restlessness and 
Darkness, — the Qualities of Matter, — are also 
(by attribution) Qualities of the Soul. But ex- 
pressions like: ‘Knowledge of the ptire sort 
{satva-rupam jMnam), ‘Pure is the time’ 
{satvikah-kdlafi) etc., are, on account of accident 
(upadhi), of a metaphorical description. 

The Five — Sound etc., pertaining to matter, 
are well known as the Qualities of the Five 
Elements. The Absolutely Pure Matter of 
course (as shown in Advent VI) exists in the 
Eternal Expanse (= Spiritual Universe), and in 
God who is its Actuator (Will). 

Conjunction and Force are xmiversal (or 
common) to the Six Substances {note 286). 
Such is the distribution. 

Non-Substance has thus been demonstrated. 


Thus ends Advent X, 

The Treatment of Non-Substance {A-dravya). 
in the 

‘ Light of the School of Ramanuja ’. 


22 



CONCLUSION. 


In the aforesaid manner, have Principles 
(arthas) been expounded in this exegetic treatise 
on the Sariraka* based on the works, composed 
by the ancient Acaryas for the enlightenment of 
novices (in the science), Le., these (works), viz; — 

1. Dramida-Bhashya (by Dramida-carya). 

2. Nyaya-Siddhi (by Natha-muni if it is samp 

as Nyaya-Tattva ?) 

3. Siddhi-Traya (by Yamuna-’caiya) 

4. Sri-Bhashya (by ^ Ramanuja) 

5. (Vedanta-) Dipa (by do. ) 

6 . (Vedanta-) Sara (by do. ) 

5- (Vedartha-) Saiiigraha (by do. ) 

8. Bhashya-Vivaraxia (by Engal-azhvan or 

Vishou-citta) 

9. Saftgati-Mala (by do. do. ) 

10. Sha^artha-Saihkshepa (by Soma§iy-a^dan 

=Somayaji-andan or RamamiSra) 

11. Sruta-prakasika (by Sudar§aia-”caiya) 


* See notes 10 and 153. 



CONCLUSION 


12. Tattva-Ratnakara (by Kuratt-^zhvan or 

Kuranatha) 

13. Prajna-Paritraija (by Varada-Narayana 

Bhaftaraka) 

14. Prameya-Saiiigraha (by do do. ) 

15. Nyaya-Kulisa (by Vadihamsa-’mbuvaha 

or Kidambi Ramanuja-p- 
pillan) • 

16. Nyaya-Sudar§ana (by do. ) 

f Dar§ana-Yathatmya- 

17. Nirjjaya or Mana- Varada 
LYathatmya-Ninjaya. J ^^shnu-Migra) 

18. Tattva-Dipa (by Vadikesari Saumyaja- 

matri-Muni) 

19. Tattva-Nirnaya (by do. ) 

20. Sarvartha-Siddhi (by Vedanta-”carya) 

21. Nyaya-Pari§uddhi (by do. ) 

22. Nyaya-Siddhanjana (by do. ) 

23. Paramata-Bhaiiga (by do. ) 

24. Tattva-traya-Culaka (by do. ) 

25. Tattva-Nirapapa (by Vadikesari Saumyar 

jamatr-Muni) 


* AppUlar, vide ‘ Pazha-na 4 ai Vilakkam ’ by Aypa 

Appa^^. 



172 YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKS 

26. Tattva-traya+(its) Vyakhyana (by Pillai 

Lokacarya+Yatindra-pravaija) 

27. Canda-Maruta (by Sri Maha-”carya* of 

^ojingipura.) 

28. Vedanta-Vijaya (by do. ) 

29. Parasarya-Vijaya (by do. ) etc. 
The Science of Spirit is concerned with the 

treatment of Tattva or (Final) Truth, Hita 
or Means, and Purushartha or Goal. In this 
Summary of that Science, an investigation has 
been made, in the Sections on ‘Matter’, 
‘ Soul ’ and ' God ’ of the Truth', f in the Section 
on ‘Consciousness,’ of the Means', in the 
Section on ‘Eternal Universe’ of the Goal. 
Hence it is clear that all the (Three) : ‘Truth,’ 
‘ Means ’ and ‘ Goal ’ have been dealt with. 
(Some) sages aver that there is One Truth (Veri- 
ty or Category). The ^his (Prophets) assert 
it as Two,— of the divisions Soul and Non-soul. 
The Acaryas (Teachers) predicate Three, in 
pursuance of the Sruti (Scriptures) viz., the 
Enjoyed (matter), the Enjoyer (soul) and Ruler 

* See Preface p. iii ff. 

t The Three Primary Data (see Preface p. xix.) 



CONCLUSION 


173 


(God), Some Acaiyas prefer to think a four- 
fold division, viz., (i) The Base or Evil {Hey a), 
(2) its Remedy, (3) the Worthy {Upadeya\ (4) 
its Means 7 ®^ Other Leaders predicate it as Five- 
fold : viz., the Goal, the Seeker, the Means, the 
Fruit, the Bar.“®^ Other Guides add Relation 
and delineate it ( 7 a^^;a) as Six-fold. Diversity 
of discussion does not point to diversity in the 

/. F. the (i) Sense-kingdom, (2) How to over- 
come it, the (3) Spirit-kingdom, (4) How to win it 

See Artha-Pancaka, or The Five Truths, JRAS 
for July, 1910. 

F, the disqmsition into the nature of the 
relations subsisting between Matter, Soul and Spirit 
Consult work No 10 mpfa. The relation is parti- 
cularly that intimate, inalienable and indis- 
cerptible one subsisting between the Kosmos as the 
body {^arim) and N^ayapa as the Bodied (Sarin), 
the very connotation of this term being the Spirit 
(Sariri) enlivening or informing that body (Sarira). 
All the other relations amongst Godhood, Soulhood 
etc., are contingent thereon. The relations between 
God (Spirit) and Soul are grouped under Nine Heads, 
see PiJJai Loka-”carya’s Rahasya No. ii: Nava- 
vidha-sambaniha [P. 570, Artha-Pancaka, JRAS, 
July 1910]. §n-Ramayana is an exegesis on these 
relations. 



174 


YATiNDRA-MATA-DiPIKS 


subject-matter, forasmuch as it is due to such 
view being determined by ditFerentias in the 
characterisation. Hence the whole (subject) is 
clear. 

Quintessentially, the purport of the Vedantas 
is that there is but one Secondless Truth (God) 
constitutive of the Conscient (Soul) and the 
Non-Conscient (Matter) — the Brahman. Hence 
cognising this Conscient-and-Non-Conscient- 
adjectivated Brahman as the One Unity, the 
Blessed Badarayatja (i. e. Krshija-Dvaipayana- 
Vyasa) started the inquiry: 

‘Now, then, the investigation into Brahman,’ 
and closed it by showing Its (the Unit Brah- 
man’s) qualified (or predicated) nature. 

Therefore, Narayana is the Predicated of the 
Conscient and the Non-Conscient, — designated 
Brahman,— named Vishtju, — the Supreme Vasu- 
deva. 

What the Tenets (or System) of the School 
of the ViSishta-’dvaitins are, is thus evident. 

*** AtM-to Brahma-jijMso, [Vedanta-Sutras, I-i‘i]. 

“•* The conception of God according to the 
Visishti-’dvaita School as evident from this closing 



CONCLUSION 


175 


Thus ends the Conclusion 
of the ‘ Light of the School of Ramanuja ’ 
Composed by 

^rinivasa-’’carya, the First Disciple of 
Sriman-Maha-”carya 
of the Holy Line of the Vadhulas. 


Iti vividha vicitram mana-meya-praka§am 
Ghana-guruvara-dasen’-oktam adaya lastrat, 
Yatipati-mata-dipam Veda- V edanta- saram 
Sa bhavati matiman yas sat-kajaksh-aika* 

lakshyab- 

Glory to RamSnuja. 


sentence is that of a living, loving, personal God 
in the closest intimacy with His Creation consisting 
of both Conscient (cif) as well as Non-Consdent 
(acit) elements. 





Ac^emy of Sanskrit Research 

MELKOTE- 571 431 

cc. No. M ^ 1 ^ 

,yk ■^£12- 

Plese return this publication on or before th€ 
ist DUE DATE stamped below to avoid incurring 
ver-due charges. 


Due Date 

Return Date 

Due Date 

Return Dati 









